Writing Guide
with Handbook

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

MICHELLE BACHELOR ROBINSON, SPELMAN COLLEGE
MARIA JERSKEY, CITY UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK
FEATURING TOBY FULWILER
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2021 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include https://openstax.org/details/books/
    writing-guide in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-711494-85-2
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-711494-86-9
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13     978-1-951693-47-3
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR   2021
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 RS 21
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research
university with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking
research, unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this
mission by cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the
spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                       Get started at openstax.org/details/books/writing-guide-with-handbook

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
CONTENTS

Preface 1

UNIT 1 THE THINGS WE CARRY: EXPERIENCE, CULTURE, AND
LANGUAGE

Unit 1 Introduction 8

CHAPTER 1

The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to
Respond Critically 9

Introduction 9
1.1 "Reading" to Understand and Respond 10
1.2 Social Media Trailblazer: Selena Gomez 12
1.3 Glance at Critical Response: Rhetoric and Critical Thinking 13
1.4 Annotated Student Sample: Social Media Post and Responses on Voter Suppression 17
1.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text" 20
1.6 Evaluation: Intention vs. Execution 30
1.7 Spotlight on ... Academia 32
1.8 Portfolio: Tracing Writing Development 33
Further Reading 36
Works Cited 36

CHAPTER 2

Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

      37
Introduction 37
2.1 Seeds of Self 39
2.2 Identity Trailblazer: Cathy Park Hong 41
2.3 Glance at the Issues: Oppression and Reclamation 42
2.4 Annotated Sample Reading from The Souls of Black Folk by W. E. B. Du Bois 45
2.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically about How Identity Is Constructed Through Writing 48
2.6 Evaluation: Antiracism and Inclusivity 53
2.7 Spotlight on ... Variations of English 55
2.8 Portfolio: Decolonizing Self 58
Further Reading 60
Works Cited 60

CHAPTER 3

Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps 63

Introduction 63
3.1 Identity and Expression 64
3.2 Literacy Narrative Trailblazer: Tara Westover 67
3.3 Glance at Genre: The Literacy Narrative 69
3.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass 71
3.5 Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 76
3.6 Editing Focus: Sentence Structure 92
3.7 Evaluation: Self-Evaluating 95
3.8 Spotlight on ... The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN) 97
3.9 Portfolio: A Literacy Artifact 98
Further Reading 99
Works Cited 99
Works Consulted 99

UNIT 2 BRIDGING THE DIVIDE BETWEEN PERSONAL IDENTITY
AND ACADEMIA

Unit 2 Introduction 102

CHAPTER 4

Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the
Personal 103

Introduction 103
4.1 Exploring the Past to Understand the Present 104
4.2 Memoir Trailblazer: Ta-Nehisi Coates 105
4.3 Glance at Genre: Conflict, Detail, and Revelation 108
4.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Life on the Mississippi by Mark Twain 111
4.5 Writing Process: Making the Personal Public 115
4.6 Editing Focus: More on Characterization and Point of View 123
4.7 Evaluation: Structure and Organization 125
4.8 Spotlight on ... Multilingual Writers 127
4.9 Portfolio: Filtered Memories 128
Further Reading 130
Works Cited 130

CHAPTER 5

Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story 131

Introduction 131
5.1 Profiles as Inspiration 132
5.2 Profile Trailblazer: Veronica Chambers 134
5.3 Glance at Genre: Subject, Angle, Background, and Description 136
5.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Remembering John Lewis" by Carla D. Hayden 137
5.5 Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 140
5.6 Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency 157
5.7 Evaluation: Text as Personal Introduction 159
5.8 Spotlight on ... Profiling a Cultural Artifact 161
5.9 Portfolio: Subject as a Reflection of Self 164
Works Cited 166

CHAPTER 6                                                                     167
                                                                            174
Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

Introduction 167
6.1 Proposing Change: Thinking Critically About Problems and Solutions 168
6.2 Proposal Trailblazer: Atul Gawande 170
6.3 Glance at Genre: Features of Proposals 172
6.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn Krukowski
6.5 Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 182
6.6 Editing Focus: Subject-Verb Agreement 196

Access for free at openstax.org.
6.7 Evaluation: Conventions, Clarity, and Coherence 198
6.8 Spotlight on ... Technical Writing as a Career 200
6.9 Portfolio: Reflecting on Problems and Solutions 202
Further Reading 203
Works Cited 203

CHAPTER 7                                                                          205
                                                                                 211
Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

Introduction 205
7.1 Thumbs Up or Down? 206
7.2 Review Trailblazer: Michiko Kakutani 207
7.3 Glance at Genre: Criteria, Evidence, Evaluation 208
7.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Black Representation in Film" by Caelia Marshall
7.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment 216
7.6 Editing Focus: Quotations 224
7.7 Evaluation: Effect on Audience 226
7.8 Spotlight on ... Language and Culture 229
7.9 Portfolio: What the Arts Say About You 231
Further Reading 232
Works Cited 232

CHAPTER 8

Analytical Report: Writing from Facts 233

Introduction 233
8.1 Information and Critical Thinking 234
8.2 Analytical Report Trailblazer: Barbara Ehrenreich 236
8.3 Glance at Genre: Informal and Formal Analytical Reports 238
8.4 Annotated Student Sample: "U.S. Response to COVID-19" by Trevor Garcia 241
8.5 Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 246
8.6 Editing Focus: Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information 259
8.7 Evaluation: Reviewing the Final Draft 260
8.8 Spotlight on ... Discipline-Specific and Technical Language 263
8.9 Portfolio: Evidence and Objectivity 265
Further Reading 266
Works Cited 266

CHAPTER 9

Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric 267

Introduction 267
9.1 Breaking the Whole into Its Parts 268
9.2 Rhetorical Analysis Trailblazer: Jamil Smith 270
9.3 Glance at Genre: Rhetorical Strategies 272
9.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Rhetorical Analysis: Evicted by Matthew Desmond" by Eliana Evans 277
9.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric 281
9.6 Editing Focus: Mixed Sentence Constructions 289
9.7 Evaluation: Rhetorical Analysis 291
9.8 Spotlight on ... Business and Law 293
9.9 Portfolio: How Thinking Critically about Rhetoric Affects Intellectual Growth 301
Further Reading 302
Works Cited 302
CHAPTER 10

Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric 303

Introduction 303
10.1 Making a Case: Defining a Position Argument 304
10.2 Position Argument Trailblazer: Charles Blow 306
10.3 Glance at Genre: Thesis, Reasoning, and Evidence 307
10.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Remarks at the University of Michigan" by Lyndon B. Johnson 310
10.5 Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 316
10.6 Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions 330
10.7 Evaluation: Varied Appeals 332
10.8 Spotlight on ... Citation 334
10.9 Portfolio: Growth in the Development of Argument 336
Further Reading 337
Works Cited 337

CHAPTER 11

Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking 339

Introduction 339
11.1 Developing Your Sense of Logic 340
11.2 Reasoning Trailblazer: Paul D. N. Hebert 344
11.3 Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 347
11.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Book VII of The Republic by Plato 358
11.5 Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 363
Further Reading 375
Works Cited 375

CHAPTER 12

Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with
Evidence 377

Introduction 377
12.1 Introducing Research and Research Evidence 378
12.2 Argumentative Research Trailblazer: Samin Nosrat 380
12.3 Glance at Genre: Introducing Research as Evidence 382
12.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran

      383
12.5 Writing Process: Integrating Research 390
12.6 Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations 399
12.7 Evaluation: Effectiveness of Research Paper 402
12.8 Spotlight on ... Bias in Language and Research 405
12.9 Portfolio: Why Facts Matter in Research Argumentation 407
Further Reading 409
Works Cited 409

CHAPTER 13

Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information 411

Introduction 411
13.1 The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources 412
13.2 The Research Process: How to Create Sources 420
13.3 Glance at the Research Process: Key Skills 425
13.4 Annotated Student Sample: Research Log 426

Access for free at openstax.org.
13.5 Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log 428
13.6 Spotlight on ... Ethical Research 433
Further Reading 435
Works Cited 435

CHAPTER 14

Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting
Sources 437

Introduction 437
14.1 Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 438
14.2 Glance at Form: Citation Style, Purpose, and Formatting 450
14.3 Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran

      453
14.4 Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing 456
Further Reading 465
Works Cited 465

CHAPTER 15

Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All 467

Introduction 467
15.1 Tracing a Broad Issue in the Individual 468
15.2 Case Study Trailblazer: Vilayanur S. Ramachandran 469
15.3 Glance at Genre: Observation, Description, and Analysis 472
15.4 Annotated Sample Reading: Case Study on Louis Victor "Tan" Leborgne 473
15.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 477
15.6 Editing Focus: Words Often Confused 490
15.7 Evaluation: Presentation and Analysis of Case Study 493
15.8 Spotlight on ... Applied Linguistics 496
15.9 Portfolio: Your Own Uses of Language 498
Further Reading 499
Works Cited 499

UNIT 3 NAVIGATING RHETORIC IN REAL LIFE

Unit 3 Introduction 500

CHAPTER 16

Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read 501

Introduction 501
16.1 An Author's Choices: What Text Says and How It Says It 502
16.2 Textual Analysis Trailblazer: bell hooks 503
16.3 Glance at Genre: Print or Textual Analysis 505
16.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison 507
16.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 515
16.6 Editing Focus: Literary Works Live in the Present 529
16.7 Evaluation: Self-Directed Assessment 530
16.8 Spotlight on ... Humanities 532
16.9 Portfolio: The Academic and the Personal 534
Further Reading 535
Works Cited 535
CHAPTER 17

Image Analysis: What You See 537

Introduction 537
17.1 "Reading" Images 538
17.2 Image Trailblazer: Sara Ludy 548
17.3 Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric 550
17.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Hints of the Homoerotic" by Leo Davis 553
17.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images 557
17.6 Editing Focus: Descriptive Diction 566
17.7 Evaluation: Relationship Between Analysis and Image 567
17.8 Spotlight on ... Video and Film 569
17.9 Portfolio: Interplay Between Text and Image 572
Further Reading 574
Works Cited 574

CHAPTER 18

Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text
and Image 577

Introduction 577
18.1 Mixing Genres and Modes 579
18.2 Multimodal Trailblazer: Torika Bolatagici 582
18.3 Glance at Genre: Genre, Audience, Purpose, Organization 583
18.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Celebrating a Win-Win" by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn 589
18.5 Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 591
18.6 Evaluation: Transitions 606
18.7 Spotlight on . . . Technology 610
18.8 Portfolio: Multimodalism 614
Further Reading 616
Works Cited 616

CHAPTER 19

Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak 617

Introduction 617
19.1 Writing, Speaking, and Activism 618
19.2 Podcast Trailblazer: Alice Wong 623
19.3 Glance at Genre: Language Performance and Visuals 625
19.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Are New DOT Regulations Discriminatory?" by Zain A. Kumar 626
19.5 Writing Process: Writing to Speak 630
19.6 Evaluation: Bridging Writing and Speaking 641
19.7 Spotlight on ... Delivery/Public Speaking 643
19.8 Portfolio: Everyday Rhetoric, Rhetoric Every Day 646
Further Reading 648
Works Cited 648

CHAPTER 20

Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer 651

Introduction 651
20.1 Thinking Critically about Your Semester 652
20.2 Reflection Trailblazer: Sandra Cisneros 652
20.3 Glance at Genre: Purpose and Structure 654

Access for free at openstax.org.
20.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Don't Expect Congrats" by Dale Trumbore 656
20.5 Writing Process: Looking Back, Looking Forward 661
20.6 Editing Focus: Pronouns 666
20.7 Evaluation: Evaluating Self-Reflection 670
20.8 Spotlight on ... Pronouns in Context 672
Further Reading 674
Works Cited 674

Handbook 675
Index 735
Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Preface 1

Preface

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational
initiative, it's our mission to transform learning so that education works for every student. Through our
partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource companies,
we're breaking down the most common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can
have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization

Writing Guide with Handbook is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY)
license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide
attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or select only the sections that are
most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain
chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your
syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version
can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit the
Instructor Resources section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art Attribution

In Writing Guide with Handbook, art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and
license within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide
the same attribution to its original source.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook,
errors sometimes occur. Writing style guides and other contextual frameworks also change frequently. Since
our books are web-based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically necessary. If you
have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject matter
experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so
you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Writing Guide with Handbook

Writing Guide with Handbook bridges the gap between everyday rhetoric and academic discourse by revealing
to students that they are already engaged in rhetorical work within the familiar contexts of personal
interaction and social media. The text seeks to extend these existing skills by showing students how to
construct a variety of compelling compositions within self-defined contexts. Writing Guide with Handbook
breaks down barriers in the field of composition by offering an inviting and inclusive approach to students of
all intersectional identities. To meet this goal, the text creates a reciprocal relationship between daily
conversation and the evolving world of academia, which must allow itself to be shaped by students as much as
it seeks to shape them.

Writing Guide with Handbook was conceived in 2020--the year that brought everything into question for
2 Preface

    students and instructors alike. Would we avert the climate crisis? Would we survive a global pandemic? Would
    we achieve gender equality? Would we finally acknowledge that Black lives and Black linguistics matter?
    Would we show acceptance toward refugees and Dreamers? Would we embrace multilingualism? How would
    we navigate our way through one existential crisis after another? Put simply, the answer for some of us has
    become that we write . . . we write for our lives. We write calls to action on social media. We write protest signs
    to carry in the streets. We write proposed legislation to create change. We write our stories . . . and we write the
    stories of those who cannot write their own.

    In a world with so many questions and seemingly so few answers, the writing classroom as supported by
    Writing Guide with Handbook becomes an essential space for navigating hard conversations about what is
    right versus what is easy. The text invites students and instructors to practice invitational, rather than
    confrontational, verbal and written conversations. These classroom communities will learn to communicate
    about culture in its broadest sense without divisiveness. Instructors will be empowered to emphasize meaning
    and voice over outdated writing traditions and to teach empathy as a rhetorical strategy. Students will be
    empowered to negotiate their identities and their cultures through language as they, too, join us in writing for
    their lives.

   Pedagogical Foundation

    The OpenStax Writing Guide with Handbook is organized according to relevant writing genres, with the writing
    process, effective writing practices or strategies--including graphic organizers, writing frames, and word
    banks to support visual learning--and conventions of usage and style contextually embedded. The text
    includes an editing and documentation handbook, which is linked to the Editing Focus feature located in each
    genre chapter. This organizational approach allows instructors and students to focus on the importance of
    argumentation and research. In addition, the text allows for nimble customization based on inclusive
    assignments that welcome all voices and experiences to the academic forum as appropriate to the teaching
    styles of individual instructors and writing programs.

    Highlights

      · Cultural awareness is a defined outcome of the text. As a standalone aspect of the rhetorical situation,
          this outcome supports a culturally integrated pedagogical approach. As such, it is evident throughout the
          text. In addition, multiculturalism is supported by a repeating chapter-level feature on diverse trailblazers
          who are working innovatively within each genre. Annotated writing samples in each chapter cross time,
          space, and culture to emphasize the contributions of many to the genre. There is also a chapter titled
          "Language, Identity, and Culture," which focuses on contemporary cultural issues and invites students to
          participate in the ongoing dialogue over the power of language to define and shape both identity and
          culture. Students of all identities are invited to write about and reflect on their personal experiences with
          rhetoric in public or private settings. Writing assignments are inclusive so as to invite a wide range of
          subjects, voices, and viewpoints into the classroom, reinforcing the idea that all are welcome and
          respected. Writing assignments also include suggestions for differing cultural or linguistic approaches. In
          addition, writing practices and graphic organizers are marked by targeted icons with regard to culture,
          linguistics, and learning styles to help instructors and students scaffold assignments.

          understanding content through the broad lens of language

          understanding content through the broad lens of culture

          seeing to create meaning

          voice to text

     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Preface 3

      listening to create meaning

      movement to create meaning

      where ideas come from and how to capture them

  · Critical language awareness is an important part of the goal of cultural awareness. The text invites and
      encourages instructors and students to openly and regularly challenge and question accepted conventions
      and practices with regard to language use with the understanding that language both results from and
      transmits social, political, and ideological beliefs and practices. In so doing, language is a force of both
      liberation and oppression. Critical language awareness is a journey, not an end destination. As language
      grows and evolves, so too must our willingness to engage with it in culturally inclusive ways.

      With this awareness in mind, OpenStax has not censored the racial slur that appears in the excerpt from
      Frederick Douglass's autobiography in Chapter 3. Because the issues regarding the usage of the word are
      complex and evolving, instructors may choose to discuss with students the usage of the word in the text
      and how that might differ from the practice of reading it aloud in the class, for example. For support, the
      introduction to the text provides a research-based discussion of the term and its usage.

  · Process orientation is supported by two different chapter structures that move students through the
      writing process in elongated and abbreviated ways. Five genre assignments guide students through a
      complete experience with the writing process, including formatting that is relevant to the genre. Other
      optional writing assignments feature an abbreviated process so that instructors and students are afforded
      the time to build out their courses in customized ways. Complex genres such as position argument and
      argumentative research are covered through a multiple-chapter approach so that students are supported
      throughout the writing process. Each of the genre chapters includes modeling through an annotated
      sample, a Quick Launch guide that includes a graphic organizer to get students started writing, and an
      evaluation rubric that informs the drafting process. Finally, students are encouraged in the ongoing
      construction and self-evaluation of a writing portfolio through a concluding feature in each chapter and a
      final chapter titled "Portfolio Reflection."

  · Editing in context is supported through a chapter-level Editing Focus feature that calls out a particular
      editing issue related to the genre. The feature instructs students in recognizing and editing the error. Each
      Editing Focus feature is linked to the appropriate section of the Handbook, as these editing focuses are
      based on the 10 most important editing topics as suggested by instructors of writing. Given that the
     Modern Language Association Handbook, 9th edition, was published in 2021, simultaneous to the
     developmental process of this text, OpenStax has relied on the Modern Language Association Handbook,
      8th edition, for citation information. Any discrepancies will be addressed in a future reprint of this text.

  · Information and media literacy is supported through specific chapters, such as "Multimodal and Online
      Writing" and "Image Analysis." In addition, the Genre Trailblazer feature includes those who work in
      genres such as newspapers, visual arts, and film.

  · Media assets are featured in 14 chapters. These assets invite students to consider and practice the
      application of varying genre characteristics as well as steps in the writing process, such as peer review and
      revision. The media assets may be completed by students individually in class or at home; by groups in
      class; or by the class as a whole with the instructor leading. For support, these assets are discussed at
      point of use in the Instructor's Manual.

Key Features

  · Learning Outcomes begin each numbered section. These sets of clear and concise outcomes have been
      thoroughly revised to be both measurable and closely aligned with current teaching practice. These
      outcomes are designed to help the instructor decide what content to include or assign and to guide student
4 Preface

          expectations of learning. After completing each chapter and writing assignment, students should be able
          to demonstrate mastery of the learning outcomes.
      · Genre Trailblazer introduces and grounds each chapter by presenting one of a diverse group of
          contemporary artists who are doing innovative work within the genre. Discussion questions invite
          students to consider the ways in which each trailblazer is working within or challenging the conventions of
          a genre.
      · Glance at Genre introduces students to each genre through key characteristics and important
          terminology.
      · Annotated Sample Readings or Student Samples provide alternating annotated readings by professional
          authors and student writers. The annotations point out characteristics of each genre. Discussion questions
          invite students to consider the ways in which authors meet or challenge these characteristics.
      · Writing Process steps present students with a writing assignment in each chapter genre and then lead
          them through a recursive drafting process. This section provides students with Quick Launch strategies,
          graphic organizers, samples and models, and invitations to develop their assignments in varying ways.
      · Editing Focus presents students with an editing focus and then invites them to practice and apply the
          focus in a number of ways. This feature, as well as other activities, will also be addressed in the instructor's
          manual and the student toolkit so that instructors can use it flexibly.
      · Evaluation is approached through a sample rubric, which is provided for every assignment.
      · Spotlight on . . . provides students with additional information on topics related to the genres.
      · Portfolio Reflections help students incorporate each assignment into ongoing portfolios. Students are
          encouraged throughout the text to keep course portfolios in print or digital format.
      · Further Reading helps students further explore the chapter genre through references and links to other
          information sources.

   About the Authors

    Senior Contributing Authors

    Michelle Bachelor Robinson, Spelman College

    Dr. Michelle Bachelor Robinson directs the Comprehensive Writing Program and is an assistant professor of
    writing and rhetoric at Spelman College. For five weeks each summer, she also serves as faculty for the
    Middlebury College Bread Loaf School of English, a summer residential graduate program for secondary
    educators. Her research and teaching focus on community engagement, historiography, African American
    rhetoric and literacy, composition pedagogy and theory, and student and program assessment. She is the
    coeditor of the Routledge Reader of African American Rhetoric and has published articles in WPA: Writing
    Program Administration, Peitho: Journal of the Coalition of Feminist Scholars in the History of Rhetoric and
    Composition, the Alabama Humanities Review, and the Journal of Social Work Education. Her early career was
    spent as a secondary educator, teaching high school students in the subjects of writing, literature, reading,
    debate, and drama. Dr. Robinson currently serves as the higher-education cochair of the College Board test
    development committee for the Advanced Placement (AP) English Language Exam, as well as a member of the
    test development committee for the College Level Examination Program (CLEP) for College Composition. Dr.
    Robinson also served on the executive committee for the Conference on College Composition and
    Communication (CCCC) from 2017 to 2020 and is still actively involved in that national work.

    Maria Jerskey, City University of New York

    Dr. Maria Jerskey is a professor of education and language acquisition at the City University of New York
    (CUNY), where she teaches courses in ESL, linguistics, bilingualism, and French to community college
    students and academic writing to graduate students. She is the founder and director of the Literacy Brokers
    Program, which supports and promotes the publishing practices of multilingual scholars. Dr. Jerskey has
    published widely and been involved in national professional committees and organizations that focus on
    bringing current research and scholarship to bear on institutionalized practices that disenfranchise

     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Preface 5

multilingual writers in order to design and implement equitable teaching and learning practices and
professional development. She has authored college writing handbooks, including Globalization: A Reader for
Writers and, with Ann Raimes, Keys for Writers, 6th edition. In her teaching and professional committee work,
Dr. Jerskey problematizes and challenges the value and status of Standard Written English by applying critical
research and scholarship in the fields of education, linguistics, and composition. Her current research and
activism focus on identifying institutional barriers to linguistic justice and cultivating sustainable practices
that recognize, encourage, and value the use of each person's full linguistic repertoire.
featuring Toby Fulwiler, Emeritus, University of Vermont
Dr. Toby Fulwiler is an emeritus professor in the Department of English at the University of Vermont. The
author of numerous professional texts, student textbooks, chapters, and articles, Dr. Fulwiler graciously
provided The Working Writer as inspiration for Writing Guide with Handbook.
Contributing Authors
Michelle Baker, Principal, Conservation Writing Pro
Mark Bernheim, Emeritus, Miami University
Sheila Carter-Tod, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Bryan Flynn, Midlands Technical College
Victoria Friedrich, Writer and Curriculum Designer
William Gary, Henderson Community College
Carol Hollar-Zwick, Writer and Curriculum Designer
Craig A. Meyer, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
Cynthia Mwenja, University of Montevallo
Susie Thurman, retired from Henderson Community College
Reviewers
Rebecca Babcock, University of Texas Permian Basin
Mark Bernheim, Emeritus, Miami University
Michelle Burchard, Oakland Community College
Alison Cope, Stephen F. Austin State University
Roxanna Dewey, Glendale Community College
Bryan Flynn, Midlands Technical College
Darius Frasure, University of North Texas at Dallas
Paul Hauptmann, Palm Beach Atlantic University
Carol Hollar-Zwick, Writer and Curriculum Designer
Olivia Hulsey, Christian Brothers University
Lori Johnson, Rappahannock Community College
Craig A. Meyer, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
Jeremy Meyer, Arizona State University
Cynthia Mwenja, University of Montevallo
6 Preface

    Muhammed Saadiq, College of DuPage
    Amanda Smothers, Elgin Community College
    Sarah Snyder, Arizona Western College
    Susie Thurman, retired from Henderson Community College
    Patricia Webb-Boyd, Arizona State University

   Additional Resources

    Student and Instructor Resources
    We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including an instructor's manual,
    lecture slides, and a student-facing toolkit. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, for
    which you can apply when you log in or create your account on OpenStax.org. Take advantage of these
    resources to supplement Writing Guide with Handbook.
    Instructor's Manual
    Designed to provide guidance for delivering the textbook content in dynamic and interesting ways, the
    instructor's manual includes chapter-by-chapter teaching tips, classroom activities, answers to the discussion
    questions, and suggestions for integrating the chapter content and the toolkit (see below). In addition, the
    manual offers sample syllabi, tips for creating assignments, advice for classroom management and
    responding to student writing, suggestions for using culturally responsive and anti-racist teaching practices,
    an overview of the handbook in the textbook, and a glossary of terms. Authored by Carol Hollar-Zwick, writer
    and curriculum designer.
    Lecture Slides
    The PowerPoint slides provide outlines, images, and an overview of chapter topics as a starting place for
    instructors to build their lectures. Authored by Michael Hartwell, composition instructor and English-language
    tutor.
    Toolkit
    The student-facing toolkit provides practice and instruction to accompany each chapter's assignment. With
    frames for writing at the sentence, paragraph, and assignment levels, the toolkit allows instructors to provide
    scaffolded support. Authored by Victoria Friedrich, writer and curriculum designer.
    Community Hubs
    OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
    Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
    support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
    materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
    material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
    most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
    other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.
    Technology Partners
    As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
    tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
    page on OpenStax.org.

     Access for free at openstax.org.
Preface 7
Unit 1

The Things We Carry:
Experience, Culture, and
Language

Introduction

Unit 1 is about you--who you are and what you bring to the writing classroom.
In his short story "The Things They Carried" (1990), American author and
Vietnam War (1954-1975) veteran Tim O'Brien (b. 1946) suggests that the
identities of soldiers may be explored through an examination of the items they
choose to carry in their packs. Of course, in their new roles as soldiers, they
carry items related to survival--weapons and rations--but they also carry other
items. Some carry photographs of loved ones, others carry good luck charms or
religious icons, and still others carry paper and pen for writing home. Like these
soldiers, you carry experiences into the writing classroom that will inform your
participation. Your prior experiences with language, culture, and literacy define
the unique viewpoint that you will offer during classroom discussions and
writings. During this journey, your classmates will learn from you, as you will
learn from them. In this way, a new element of your identity will evolve--that of a
college student.
The Digital World: Building on What

You Already Know to Respond          1

Critically

FIGURE 1.1 Whether these students realize it or not, they are engaging in rhetoric by consuming and posting
information on social media. (credit: "Together and Alone" by Garry Knight/flickr, CC-BY)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

1.1 "Reading" to Understand and Respond
1.2 Social Media Trailblazer: Selena Gomez
1.3 Glance at Critical Response: Rhetoric and Critical Thinking
1.4 Annotated Student Sample: Social Media Post and Responses on Voter Suppression
1.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text"
1.6 Evaluation: Intention vs. Execution
1.7 Spotlight on ... Academia
1.8 Portfolio: Tracing Writing Development

INTRODUCTION Your past experiences with computers, cell phones, and other electronic devices represent
your conscious choice to connect with a global community. For example, you may post on social media sites
where you receive instant feedback from around the world in the form of reposts or likes. Through these
interactions, you are empowered to influence people more than at any other point in history. In fact, you may
be on the road to becoming the next big social media influencer--a person with established credentials in a
certain field with access to a large audience and who, because of popularity, can influence others' actions. With
applications that instantly translate into many languages, even language has become less of a barrier to your
potential audience and thus to your potential influence. However, even though the world may be more
10 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

      connected now than ever before and communication may be faster, easier, more powerful, and more widely
      accessible, the basics of communication have not changed.

      The essential element of all communication, past and present, including your social media posts and related
      comments, is the rhetorical situation: the conditions, or circumstances, of the communication and the
      agents, or people involved, in that communication. Notice that the term comes from the word rhetoric.
      Originally, rhetoric referred to the art of persuasive speaking or writing. Now it is used more inclusively to
      mean the "techniques and theories of communication." And notice, too, that like the people in Figure 1.1, you
      are already using rhetoric every day as you find yourself in different rhetorical situations on social media. In
      this chapter, you will learn more about the use of rhetoric within rhetorical situations as you begin the journey
      of constructing bridges among the communication taking place on social media, in the world of academia, and
      in the world at large.

    1.1 "Reading" to Understand and Respond

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Identify genre elements and determine how conventions are shaped by audience, purpose, language, culture,
            and expectation.

        · Articulate the importance of inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in varying rhetorical and
            cultural contexts.

        · Identify relationships between ideas, patterns of organization, and interplay between verbal and nonverbal
            elements in a diverse range of texts.

      To read and write well means to read and write critically. What are you saying that's new, different, insightful,
      or edgy? In fact, a major goal of most college curricula is to train students to be critical readers, writers, and
      thinkers so that they carry those habits into the real and virtual worlds beyond campus borders. What, you
      may ask, does it mean to be critical? How does being a critical reader, writer, and thinker differ from being an
      ordinary reader, writer, and thinker? Being critical in reading means knowing how to analyze distinctions,
      interpretations, and conclusions. Being critical in writing means making distinctions, developing
      interpretations, and drawing conclusions that stand up to thoughtful scrutiny by others. Becoming a critical
      thinker, then, means learning to exercise reason and judgment whenever you encounter the language of
      others or generate language yourself. Beginning with social media and then moving into the world of
      academia, this chapter explores strategies for helping you become a more accomplished critical reader and
      emphasizes the close thinking relationship between critical reading and critical writing.

     Rhetoric and the Rhetorical Situation

      To begin to read, write, and think critically, it is helpful to look at something familiar such as social media and
      the way it is used. Interactions on social media, as in all types of conversation, present rhetorical situations
      that form the basis of communication. In the most basic terms, a rhetorical situation has two elements: agents
      and conditions. Agents are the originators (initiators) and the audience of the communication. The originator
      may have a real audience or an anticipated audience. A real audience is made up of people the originator may
      know personally or know of. For example, if you are the originator, your real audience could be a group of your
      peers to whom you present your ideas in class. Or it could be a person to whom you send a text message. You
      know the members of the class and know something about them. Similarly, you know the person to whom you
      send the text. An anticipated audience is one you hope to reach or one you expect will engage with your
      communication. When you post on social media platforms, for instance, your audience is probably
      anticipated. While you might have followers, you may not know them personally, but you anticipate who they
      are and how they might react.

      The conditions of a rhetorical situation refer to the genre, purpose, stance, context, and culture. The genre, or
      medium, is the mode in which you communicate. You may speak persuasively in class, or you may send a text

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                              1.1 · "Reading" to Understand and Respond 11

message; both are genres. The purpose is your reason or reasons for the communication. For example, if you
are presenting to your class, your purpose might be to do well and get a good grade, but it also might be to
inform or to persuade your classmates. Likewise, you might want to gain attention by posting something on
social media that connects to other people's thoughts and feelings. The third condition is the stance, which is
your take, or viewpoint, as presented in the communication. Your stance may be that college loans should be
forgiven, or it may be that college loans should be repaid in full. The context is the setting of the rhetorical
situation. Some examples might be a communication taking place during a global pandemic or during a Black
Lives Matter protest. The context affects the ways in which a particular social, political, or economic situation
influences the process of communication. The final element is culture, which refers to groups of people who
share commonalities. When communicating, you make assumptions about the cultural traits of your audience,
perhaps expecting that they will agree with you regarding certain values or beliefs. For example, if you are
communicating with an American audience, you may assume a positive value for democracy or a dislike of
foreign interference. Conversely, you also may communicate with people whose cultural views are at odds or
in conflict with your own: for example, a man who publicly advocates outdated gender views might have
trouble communicating culturally with a younger female audience. The ways in which you choose to
communicate to those within and those outside of your culture are likely to differ as you craft a stance within a
given context for a particular purpose and audience.

As you work through a deeper understanding of rhetoric within a rhetorical situation, remember a few key
points. When you read, write, and think critically or rhetorically, you try to figure out why a message is being
communicated in a certain way. Reading language rhetorically means figuring out why and how it works or
fails to work in achieving its communicative purpose. Writing rhetorically means being conscious of the ways
in which you construct a message within a clearly defined rhetorical situation. Thinking rhetorically means
considering the possibilities of meaning as conveyed through language and image. By putting these concepts
together, you will come to understand how these elements work in concert with each other and affect your
interactions with the world.

Social Media Savvy

Social media is an important part of modern life, and many people maintain multiple social media accounts.
These applications can educate and help you connect to others. However, every post you make on any social
media platform leaves a digital footprint--the sum of your online behavior. These footprints might reflect on
you positively or negatively. On one hand, if you repost a baby goat jumping around a barnyard, you and others
may laugh and no harm is done. On the other hand, if you are upset or angry and post something nasty about
someone, the target can be harmed through cyberbullying and your online reputation tarnished. It is
important to understand that the footprint you leave may never go away and may cause trouble for you down
the road.

Negative footprints could hurt your credibility regarding future admissions to programs or future
employment. Comedian Kevin Hart (b. 1979), for example, lost a job hosting the Academy Awards when some
of his negative posts resurfaced, even after he rescinded them and acknowledged the problem. Right or wrong,
social media leaves a trail for others to find. In other words, what are you showing others about your talents
and skills through your social media presence? The point is that with its wonder and power, social media
should be treated responsibly and with an awareness of its longevity. One way to better judge what you might
post would be to consider the rhetorical situation so that you can anticipate an audience reaction based on
genre, purpose, stance, context, and cultural awareness.
12 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

    1.2 Trailblazer

    Social Media Trailblazer: Selena Gomez

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in various rhetorical contexts.
        · Identify the elements of successful social media use.

                                              "Our actions and
                                           words have an impact
                                          on others--whether on
                                           social media or in real

                                                      life."

          FIGURE 1.2 Selena Gomez (credit: "Selena Gomez"
          by jenniferlinneaphotogaphy/flickr, CC BY 2.0))

     Authenticity as Rhetoric

      By any standard, singer, actor, and philanthropist Selena Gomez (b. 1992) is an influencer. By 2021, Gomez
      had amassed around 65 million Twitter (https://openstax.org/r/selenagomeztwitter) followers and over 260
      million Instagram (https://openstax.org/r/selenagomezinsta) followers, placing her among celebrities with top
      follower counts. Gomez was born in Grand Prairie, Texas, but raised outside of Dallas. She is named after the
      popular Tejano singer Selena Quintanilla-Perez (1971-1995), who was murdered by her fan club president but
      still maintains an avid following. Gomez entered show business as a child, inspired by the single mother, an
      amateur actress, who raised her. After roles on Barney and Friends (https://openstax.org/r/barneyandfriends)
      (from 2002-2004) and Spy Kids 3-D: Game Over (2003), Gomez auditioned for the world of Disney. Appearing
      first on The Suite Life of Zack and Cody (2005-2008), Gomez landed a lead role as Alex Russo on Disney's
      Wizards of Waverly Place (2007-2012), for which she also sang the theme song (https://openstax.org/r/
      themesong). By 2012, Gomez was ready to depart from such family-friendly roles, taking parts in films such as
      Spring Breakers (2012), The Dead Don't Die (2019), and A Rainy Day in New York (2019). Gomez's music career
      paralleled that of her acting career; she began as a member of the band Selena Gomez and the Scene (2009)
      and launched her solo career in 2012. Gomez has released the solo albums Stars Dance (2013), Revival (2015),
      and Rare (https://openstax.org/r/rare) (2020).

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                  1.3 · Glance at Critical Response: Rhetoric and Critical Thinking 13

Despite Gomez's success as a public figure, her relationship with social media has been rocky. Gomez
describes her social media strategy as "intentional . . . I don't take a lot of pointless pictures." Gomez
recognizes the power of her social media platform, and she has used it to champion the causes that she cares
about. As a person diagnosed with both lupus (2015) and bipolar disorder (2018), Gomez has used social
media to advocate for mental and physical health causes. (Lupus is an inflammatory disease caused by the
immune system attacking its own tissue; bipolar disorder is characterized by extreme mood swings.) Gomez
says, "Everything that I'm attached to has a charity aspect." She continues, "If something good isn't coming out
of it, I'm not going to do it." This "intentional," open approach to her personal difficulties and her emphasis on
building positivity out of struggle generates an intimacy with fans that has served to increase her following.

However, the most radical action that Gomez may have committed with regard to social media was her
decision to quit it. Suffering from publicity overload, cyberbullying, and a negatively changing sense of self,
Gomez handed over her Instagram account to her assistant in 2017. She has also handed her Instagram
account over to people such as Georgia voting rights advocate Stacey Abrams (https://openstax.org/r/
staceyabrams) (b. 1973) as part of the #ShareTheMicNow (https://openstax.org/r/sharethemicnow) campaign,
which amplifies the voices of Black women. Gomez deleted social media apps from her smartphone and gave
up knowledge of her passwords. She claims that the move has been liberating: "I suddenly had to learn how to
be with myself." She reflects that there were 150 million people on her phone, and "I just put it down. . . . That
was such a relief."

Despite the shift in approach, Gomez's relationship with social media remains strong. She actively cultivates a
"deliberate . . . vulnerability" through her unwillingness to shy away from tough or important issues.
Regardless of which of Gomez's assistants hits the "post" button, Gomez's focus on giving of herself to improve
society resonates with her fans.

Discussion Questions

1. Have you heard of Selena Gomez? What did you know about her before reading this feature?

2. If you consider her background, what skills do you think have helped Gomez establish her savvy rhetorical
    presence on social media? Which skills do you relate to, and how might you use them?

3. In what ways has Gomez used her struggles with mental and physical health to amplify her platform? How
    might this context affect the rhetorical situation?

4. Explain how authenticity helps Gomez communicate. What influence does one's experience have on the
    rhetorical situation?

5. In what ways does Gomez rely on emotional appeals to her audience? In what ways does she incorporate
    ethics, logic, or timeliness?

1.3 Glance at Critical Response: Rhetoric and Critical Thinking

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Use words, images, and specific rhetorical terminology to understand, discuss, and analyze a variety of texts.
  · Determine how genre conventions are shaped by audience, purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
  · Distinguish among different types of rhetorical situations and communicate effectively within them.

Every day you find yourself in rhetorical situations and use rhetoric to communicate with and to persuade
others, even though you might not realize you are doing it. For example, when you voice your opinion or
respond to another's opinion, you are thinking rhetorically. Your purpose is often to convince others that you
have a valid opinion, and maybe even issue a call to action. Obviously, you use words to communicate and
present your position. But you may communicate effectively through images as well.
14 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

     Words and Images

      Both words and images convey information, but each does so in significantly different ways. In English, words
      are written sequentially, from left to right. A look at a daily newspaper or web page reveals textual information
      further augmented by headlines, titles, subtitles, boldface, italics, white space, and images. By the time readers
      get to college, they have internalized predictive strategies to help them critically understand a variety of
      written texts and the images that accompany them. For example, you might be able to predict the words in a
      sentence as you are reading it. You also know the purpose of headers and other markers that guide you
      through the reading.
      To be a critical reader, though, you need to be more than a good predictor. In addition to following the thread of
      communication, you need to evaluate its logic. To do that, you need to ask questions such as these as you
     consider the argument: Is it fair (i.e., unbiased)? Does it provide credible evidence? Does it make sense, or is it
     reasonably plausible? Then, based on what you have decided, you can accept or reject its conclusions. You may
      also consider alternative possibilities so that you can learn more. In this way, you read actively, searching for
      information and ideas that you understand and can use to further your own thinking, writing, and speaking. To
      move from understanding to critical awareness, plan to read a text more than once and in more than one way.
      One good strategy is to ask questions of a text rather than to accept the author's ideas as fact. Another strategy
      is to take notes about your understanding of the passage. And another is to make connections between
      concepts in different parts of a reading. Maybe an idea on page 4 is reiterated on page 18. To be an active,
      engaged reader, you will need to build bridges that illustrate how concepts become part of a larger argument.
      Part of being a good reader is the act of building information bridges within a text and across all the related
      information you encounter, including your experiences.
      With this goal in mind, beware of passive reading. If you ever have been reading and completed a page or
      paragraph and realized you have little idea of what you've just read, you have been reading passively or just
      moving your eyes across the page. Although you might be able to claim you "read" the material, you have not
      engaged with the text to learn from it, which is the point of reading. You haven't built bridges that connect to
      other material. Remember, words help you make sense of the world, communicate in the world, and create a
      record to reflect on so that you can build bridges across the information you encounter.
      Images, however, present a different set of problems for critical readers. Sometimes having little or no
      accompanying text, images require a different skill set. For example, in looking at a photograph or drawing,
      you find different information presented simultaneously. This presentation allows you to scan or stop
      anywhere in the image--at least theoretically. Because visual information is presented simultaneously, its
      general meaning may be apparent at a glance, while more nuanced or complicated meanings may take a long
      time to figure out. And even then, odds are these meanings will vary from one viewer to another.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                  1.3 · Glance at Critical Response: Rhetoric and Critical Thinking 15

FIGURE 1.3 Young woman looking away from the viewer or old woman in profile? (credit: "My wife and my mother-
in-law" by W. E. (William Ely) Hill/Public Domain)
In the well-known image shown in Figure 1.3, do you see an old woman or a young woman? Although the
image remains static, your interpretation of it may change depending on any number of factors, including your
experience, culture, and education. Once you become aware of the two perspectives of this image, you can see
the "other" easily. But if you are not told about the two ways to "see" it, you might defend a perspective without
realizing that you are missing another one. Most visuals, however, are not optical illusions; less noticeable
perspectives may require more analysis and may be more influenced by your cultural identity and the ways in
which you are accustomed to interpreting. In any case, this image is a reminder to have an open mind and be
willing to challenge your perspectives against your interpretations. As such, like written communication,
images require analysis before they can be understood thoroughly and evaluation before they can be judged
on a wider scale.
If you have experience with social media, you may be familiar with the way users respond to images or words
by introducing another image: the meme. A meme is a photograph containing text that presents one viewer's
response. The term meme originates from the Greek root mim, meaning "mime" or "mimic," and the English
suffix -eme. In the 1970s, British evolutionary biologist and author Richard Dawkins (b. 1941) created the term
for use as "a unit of cultural transmission," and he understood it to be "the cultural equivalent of a gene."
Today, according to the dictionary definition, memes are "amusing or interesting items that spread widely
through the Internet." For example, maybe you have seen a meme of an upset cat or of a friend turning around
to look at something else while another friend is relating something important. The text that accompanies
these pictures provides some expression on the part of the originator that the audience usually finds
humorous, relatable, or capable of arousing any range of emotion or thought. For example, in the photograph
shown in Figure 1.4 of a critter standing at attention, the author of the text conveys anxiousness. The use of the
word like has been popularized in the meme genre to mean "to give an example."
16 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

                 FIGURE 1.4 Example of a meme (credit: "Waiting for you like . . ." by Marco Verch/flickr/CC BY 2.0)
      While these playful aspects of images are important, you also should recognize how images fit into the
      rhetorical situation. Consider the same elements, such as context and genre, when viewing images. You may
     find multiple perspectives to consider. In addition, where images show up in a text or for an audience might be
      important. These are all aspects of understanding the situation and thinking critically. Engaged readers try to
      connect and build bridges to information across text and images.
      As you consider your reading and viewing experiences on social media and elsewhere, note that your
      responses involve some basic critical thinking strategies. Some of these include summary, paraphrase,
      analysis, and evaluation, which are defined in the next section. The remaining parts of this chapter will focus
      on written communication. While this chapter touches only briefly on visual discourse, Image Analysis: What
      You See presents an extensive discussion on visual communication.

     Relation to Academics

      As with all disciplines, rhetoric has its own vocabulary. What follows are key terms, definitions, and elements
      of rhetoric. Become familiar with them as you discuss and write responses to the various texts and images you
      will encounter.

        · Analysis: detailed breakdown or other explanation of some aspect or aspects of a text. Analysis helps
            readers understand the meaning of a text.

        · Authority: credibility; background that reflects experience, knowledge, or understanding of a situation. An
            authoritative voice is clear, direct, factual, and specific, leaving an impression of confidence.

        · Context: setting--time and place--of the rhetorical situation. The context affects the ways in which a
            particular social, political, or economic situation influences the process of communication. Depending on
            context, you may need to adapt your text to audience background and knowledge by supplying (or
            omitting) information, clarifying terminology, or using language that best reaches your readers.

        · Culture: group of people who share common beliefs and lived experiences. Each person belongs to
            various cultures, such as a workplace, school, sports team fan, or community.

        · Evaluation: systematic assessment and judgment based on specific and articulated criteria, with a goal to
            improve understanding.

        · Evidence: support or proof for a fact, opinion, or statement. Evidence can be presented as statistics,
            examples, expert opinions, analogies, case studies, text quotations, research in the field, videos,
            interviews, and other sources of credible information.

        · Media literacy: ability to create, understand, and evaluate various types of media; more specifically, the
            ability to apply critical thinking skills to them.

        · Meme: image (usually) with accompanying text that calls for a response or elicits a reaction.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                               1.4 · Annotated Student Sample: Social Media Post and Responses on Voter Suppression 17

  · Paraphrase: rewording of original text to make it clearer for readers. When they are part of your text,
      paraphrases require a citation of the original source.

  · Rhetoric: use of effective communication in written, visual, or other forms and understanding of its
      impact on audiences as well as of its organization and structure.

  · Rhetorical situation: instance of communication; the conditions of a communication and the agents of
      that communication.

  · Social media: all digital tools that allow individuals or groups to create, post, share, or otherwise express
      themselves in a public forum. Social media platforms publish instantly and can reach a wide audience.

  · Summary: condensed account of a text or other form of communication, noting its main points.
      Summaries are written in one's own words and require appropriate attribution when used as part of a
      paper.

  · Tone: an author's projected or perceived attitude toward the subject matter and audience. Word choice,
      vocal inflection, pacing, and other stylistic choices may make the author sound angry, sarcastic,
      apologetic, resigned, uncertain, authoritative, and so on.

As you read through these terms, you likely recognize most of them and realize you are adept in some
rhetorical situations. For example, when you talk with friends about your trip to the local mall, you provide
details they will understand. You might refer to previous trips or tell them what is on sale or that you expect to
see someone from school there. In other words, you understand the components of the rhetorical situation.
However, if you tell your grandparents about the same trip, the rhetorical situation will be different, and you
will approach the interaction differently. Because the audience is different, you likely will explain the event
with more detail to address the fact that they don't go to the mall often, or you will omit specific details that
your grandparents will not understand or find interesting. For instance, instead of telling them about the video
game store, you might tell them about the pretzel café.

As part of your understanding of the rhetorical situation, you might summarize specific elements, again
depending on the intended audience. You might speak briefly about the pretzel café to your friends but spend
more time detailing the various toppings for your grandparents. If, by chance, you have previously stopped to
have a pretzel, you might provide your analysis and evaluation of the service and the food. Once again, you are
engaged in rhetoric by showing an understanding of and the ability to develop a strategy for approaching a
particular rhetorical situation. The point is to recognize that rhetorical situations differ, depending, in this
case, on the audience. Awareness of the rhetorical situation applies to academic writing as well. You change
your presentation, tone, style, and other elements to fit the conditions of the situation.

1.4 Annotated Student Sample: Social Media Post and Responses on Voter
Suppression

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Determine how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectations.
  · Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Distinguish relationships between genre conventions, ideas, patterns of organization, and interplay between

      various elements and how they influence the rhetorical situation.
18 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

     Introduction

public domain t  end publeicnednodpmupbauilbniclitcdodmomaianint t
                 end peunbdlipcudbolimc adionmt ain t

FIGURE 1.5 In Ohio, legal voter Larry Harmon was purged from the voter rolls because he had not voted since
2008. (credit: "Kaptur stands up for Ohio voters at Supreme Court" by Congresswoman Marcy Kaptur/Wikimedia
Commons, CC BY 2.0)

In the social media thread that follows, Proud Immigrant Citizen @primmcit posts about immigration and
voter suppression. Others add their comments regarding voter suppression. Consider the ways in which each
person responds to this initial post.

        LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS                                                                                              end annotat

Social Media Thread

      Proud Immigrant Citizen @primmcit

      POTUS and DOJ have created a section dedicated to denaturalization. Strips citizenship and disenfranchises
      immigrant citizens, mainly persons of color, on trumped-up charges. Not-so-subtle way to control who can and
      cannot vote! This is a nightmare!

Tanhnisootaptening post sets up a rhetorical situation. The genre is social media in which the platform limits the number of
characters. The author's purpose is to inform others about a policy. It may also be to collect "likes" or reposts to
spread the information, regardless of its accuracy. The audience is a collection of social media users--some known,
some unknown. The author's stance is against the denaturalization policy. The context is a POTUS/DOJ action
against immigrants. The culture shows a conflict between immigrants and the current administration (and its
supporters).

      History Buff @historyfuture

      This is not new. Immigration Act of 1924 limited number of new immigrants to 2% of current U.S. citizens of
      that nationality. Largest groups (e.g., White people from northwest Europe) kept getting bigger. Effective way to
      concentrate political power.

Tanhnisorteastponse provides further information about the rhetorical situation by offering historical context, which, again,
may or may not be accurate.end annotat

      Proud Immigrant Citizen @primmcit It may not be new, but it's still wrong!

Tanhneootraigt inal poster reiterates their stance.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
                             1.4 · Annotated Student Sample: Social Media Post and Responses on Voter Suppression 19

American and Proud @IPledge

Are you for real saying that the government shouldn't control immigration? I don't want all these criminals
voting, and I've had it up to here with everyone's stupid complaining!

public domainTanhtenisnoerdtenaepsdtnpuedpobnunlpdibcseupelenbidnucdlpodibdcrmploopiduecavmuobniidbdnmdlaoilecitmanpcsdiundtaaobointmnlmiictnaadianiconctmtuaraintet summary of the original post. The tone shows aenengndedprpuaeubnnbldidlciucedpnndouwdombimllplaiicuaninbdignltonictmesdasointmotain t
                 engage in meaningfuelnddispcuubslsiciodnoomr ateoinldet aprunbmlicodreomabaoinuttetnhde pisusbuleic. Tdhoims paeinrston's mind is made up, so it would be
                 hard to convince them to take a new or refined position.end annotat

Peter @BetweenTheLines

No, Proud Immigrant is saying that denaturalization is being used as a means of voter suppression.

Tanhnisorteastponse corrects the previous responder with an accurate paraphrase of the original poster's stance and hints
at the factual nature of the original post.end annotat

Karen @ConservativeGirl

What are the trumped-up charges? Can you direct me to some evidence? Sounds like a lot of liberal garbage.

Tanhnisorteastponder, although clearly against the original poster's stance, properly asks for evidence--something that                                                                                                                                                                                     end annotat
may be provided through a link to keep the character count within the confines of the genre. Based on the handle
and the end of the post, this person may or may not be open to a new perspective or factual information about the
issue.

Miguel @BothSides

Liberal or conservative, voter suppression is one of the most dangerous threats to our democracy.

Tanhnisorteastponder offers an evaluation, regardless of stance. The tone indicates a reasonable attitude. However, by
stating "liberal or conservative," this post may limit the audience since other cultures, such as moderate or
progressive, may be following the thread.end annotat

Sarah @IWatch

When the news talks about low voter turnout in an election, it's hard to know why people didn't show up.

Tanhnisorteastponder begins an analysis of the original post by providing a questioning tone. However, this post does not
seem to further the discussion; it makes a statement and does not follow up with new information or ideas.end annotat

Mario @MyVote

Exactly, did they stay home by choice, or were they "encouraged" to stay home by government red tape?

Tanhnisorteastponder clarifies the analytical question and tries to reengage previous responders. The question also opens
up the potential for new evidence from others.end annotat

Maria @HomeGirl

It's not just immigrants. After Obama was elected, more than 20 states passed measures to limit voting in
Black and Brown neighborhoods.

Tanhnisorteastponder offers possible evidence to support the ongoing problem of voter suppression. While unverified, it                                                                                                                                                                                     end annotat
provides a strong starting point for further inquiry and discussion so that evidence can be brought into the
discussion.

Malik @BlackPanther

This kind of racism isn't new. History Buff @historyfuture is right. Closing polling locations in Black and Brown
neighborhoods is the new poll tax or literacy test.
20 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

Tanhnisorteastponder makes a connection between the past and present--an element of analysis.end annotat

Cho @HistoryRepeats Yes, the party seeking power wants their voters to turn out, not all voters.

Tanhnisorteastponder makes an inference based on the accumulation of evidence. While the conclusion may be sound, it

public domainretmains uennedclnepedaunrpbd.eulipnbcudldibcaoliednmcnnoaddomiotnpaamutitnabitlnictdomain t  end puebnldicpduobmlicaidnotmain t

Megan @FightThePower It's easier to suppress the votes of non-supporters than to try to win them over.

Tanhnisorteastponder makes another inference based on the accumulation of evidence and alludes to previous instances
of voter suppression along with potential rationale.end annotat

Marco @DontMessWithMe That's why we need to #StayInLine

Tanhnisorteastponder presents a potential call to action--something people can do to fight voter suppression. This call to
action assumes the audience within the given culture understands or can find out what #StayInLine means and how
to become involved.end annotat

Conclusion

You are likely familiar with this type of social media thread--users from different cultures and with differing
views coming together to comment on a post. What you may not have realized is that these users and others
like them are engaging in rhetoric by responding to a text through summary, paraphrase, analysis, evaluation,
calls for evidence, or proposals of action. Again, they demonstrate an understanding of the rhetorical situation
and how to navigate within it.

Discussion Questions

1. How might you have responded to the initial post, and why?

2. How do the usernames or handles affect your reading of the posts?

3. What might you have posted to begin a discussion about the voter suppression? How might each of these
    responders have interacted with your post?

4. What did you learn from the posts, and how might you confirm (or deny) the information provided? What
    specific items should you research to better engage with and further the discussion?

5. What conventions of social media do you notice (or do you recognize as missing)?

1.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text"

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop and implement flexible strategies for reading and rereading.
  · Articulate how organizational features function for different audiences, creating cultural awareness within

      rhetorical situations.
  · Determine how genre conventions for structure, paragraphs, tone, and mechanics vary.
  · Identify common formats and design features for different kinds of text.
  · Read and write critically within social media platforms.

Thinking critically is crucial to success both in and after school. Indeed, this skill may be the foundation of all
education. Most of Writing Guide with Handbook explores strategies for helping you become an accomplished
critical writer, but as you have already learned, a close relationship exists between critical writing and critical
reading. Reading and writing, like producing and consuming, are two sides of the same coin. When you study
one, you inevitably learn more about the other at the same time. The more you attend to the language of
published writers, the more you will learn about your own language. The more you attend to your own written
language, the more you will learn about the texts you read.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                             1.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text" 21

Summary of Assignment: Critical Response

Select a short "text" for response. The "text" may be written, visual, or a combination of both. Keeping in mind
the example of Selena Gomez or other social media activists (such as Swedish environmentalist Greta
Thunberg [b. 2003] or conservative speaker and entrepreneur Wayne Dupree [b. 1968]), focus on a text,
perhaps a meme or social media post, that addresses an aspect of social activism. First, read it completely for
understanding. Summarize or paraphrase the main ideas of the text to check for comprehension. Second, read
it critically to determine its purpose, to analyze its use of language (or another element), and to evaluate it.
Finally, write a short (1-2 pages) critical response to the text, perhaps recommending or not recommending it
to other readers, explaining its significance in a particular area of life or field of study, or even commenting on
the diction or style of the communication and its potential impact on readers.
Another Lens. When you consider another perspective, you often learn information you have not considered
before. Look at Figure 1.6:

     FIGURE 1.6 What X, Y, and Z see (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
If you have the perspective of the X, all you see is the "back" of the L. You might not even know it's an L. You
might think it is an I, but it also could be the side of an M, or an N, or even a P. From the perspective of X, you
have only limited information about the structure, letter, or whatever is in front of you. If you take the
perspective of Y, you have a different information, which contrasts with what you learned from X.
Furthermore, neither X nor Y has the perspective of Z. As you can see, combining the perspectives gives you a
more comprehensive picture. Although it is unlikely you will ever get a complete and accurate picture of any
given situation, by considering other perspectives, you begin to think critically to understand an issue,
problem, or condition.
As a class or in small groups, agree on a short text to read and respond to, as described. Share your responses
in small groups, paying particular attention to the evaluation, analysis, and evidence that each person
presents. Revise your initial response based on these new, shared perspectives from your classmates about the
same text. The goal is to learn from others' perspectives. In so doing, consider how your classmates'
perspectives enhance your comprehension and broaden your ability to understand the interpretations of the
text. As you revise, incorporate this new knowledge, and consider how the various cultures and interpretations
based on culture can lead to understanding and even misunderstanding. Finally, pay attention to how you
might consider these multiple perspectives to clarify the text's purpose or meaning for an audience.

      Quick Launch: Mapping the Rhetorical Situation

When you first sit down to write, you can use any of several methods to get going. The blank page can be
intimidating, and facing a blank page is one of the reasons writing can be challenging at first. Figure out which
"launch" methods work best for you and your style(s) of thinking and writing. Sometimes this stage is called
prewriting or planning. Taking the time to prewrite helps you decide how to proceed to the actual writing and
builds your confidence in the process. Some people make concept maps, others make checklists, and still
22 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

      others create formal outlines. Some do research on a topic before they start, whereas others just sit down and
      write whatever comes to mind, a process called freewrite. There is no perfect or correct way to begin writing.
      The important thing is to discover which strategies work for you for a particular writing task, and then to use
      them.
      For this writing task, create a concept map with six radiating circles (or use six index cards that you can
      physically move around on a tabletop). Label the map as noted in Figure 1.7. In each radiating circle, fill in the
      information regarding the rhetorical situation (that is, the agents and the five conditions: genre, purpose,
      stance, context, and culture) in relation to your chosen text. As you assess the rhetorical situation, you will
      further your understanding of the text, and you may begin to find areas for analysis or evaluation.

                FIGURE 1.7 Concept map (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

          Drafting: Restating, Analyzing, and Evaluating

      To restate and then respond to a text, you need to both reread and "resee" it, reconsidering its rhetorical
      situation and your reaction to it. Be sure that you grasp the main ideas within the text but move beyond that to
      a critical understanding of the text as a cultural artifact. In responding, you start a conversation with the text
      so that you enter into the framework and context of the communication. In general, when responding to a text,
      you have to

        · understand what it means within its rhetorical situation;
        · analyze its meaning;
        · evaluate its significance; and
        · determine how to incorporate it into your own thinking and writing.
      Responding to Understand: Summary
      A summary is a condensed version of a longer text that reviews its main ideas. Shorter than the original text, a
      summary is written in your own words. To prepare a summary, you may outline or annotate the text to
      highlight relationships between ideas or conclusions. Reread sections of the text such as abstracts, first and
      last paragraphs, and sections titled "Summary," "Observations," or "Conclusion(s)." Also consider headings,

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                             1.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text" 23

subheadings, and visuals, all of which often name main ideas. Remember, you want to provide a summary in
your own words of the source's work, not your interpretation or opinion of it. Review this video on
summarizing (https://openstax.org/r/summarizing) for more information.

Responding to Clarify: Paraphrase

A paraphrase is a restatement of a text or part of a text, written in your own words, to clarify its meaning for
your readers. A paraphrase is usually about the same length as the original text, although it can be either
longer or shorter. Your goal in paraphrasing is to provide readers with clarity about a complex idea while still
maintaining the perspective of the source. Paraphrasing can be difficult and requires practice, so be sure to
review (https://openstax.org/r/review).

Responding to Analyze

Responding to analyze means moving beyond a basic understanding and appreciation of what the text says
and examining it to see how it was put together in order to deepen your comprehension. From thorough
analysis, you can arrive at your own theory regarding what the text means. Thus, analysis leads to
interpretation and to evaluation, or judgment of its merits.

In responding to analyze, consider the following questions: How has the author constructed this text? What is
the author's subject, tone, and message or theme? For what reason or purpose has the author constructed this
text in this way at this time? An analysis provides an understanding of the ways in which the parts of the text
form a whole within a rhetorical situation. Any such response points to important ideas and makes
connections to provide textual evidence to support the analysis.

To read a text analytically, mark it for

  · points of agreement and disagreement with claims or assertions;
  · convincing examples that support claims or assertions;
  · implications or consequences of believing the author;
  · personal associations with text material;
  · connections to other "texts" you have read;
  · recurring images, symbols, diction, phrases, ideas, and so on; and
  · conclusions.

Consider developing a coding system for cross-referencing to show that one annotation, passage, or idea is
related to another. Some students write comments on different features of the text in different colors, such as
green for nature imagery, blue for key terms, red for interesting anecdotes, and so on. Other students use
numbers, such as 1 for plot, 2 for character, and so on.

Visit Walden University (https://openstax.org/r/WaldenUniversity) for more detail on including analysis in your
writing. You can also refer to Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric for more on rhetorical
analysis and Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read for more on print or textual analysis.

Responding to Evaluate

Responding to evaluate means deciding whether you think the text accomplishes its purposes effectively. In
other words, does the text do what it claims to do? You can also determine the significance of the text and its
implications. Of course, different genres of texts should be judged using different criteria. To evaluate a text,
you need to understand and analyze it in order to support your judgments.

In an argument, a writer (or speaker) advances claims and supports them with logical reasoning and
evidence. A claim is a statement that something is true (or valid) or that some action should be taken. Every
claim in an argument should be supported by logical reasoning (e.g., cause and effect, comparison and
contrast, or problem and solution) and by reliable and sufficient evidence (e.g., facts, statistics, anecdotes,
examples, or quotations). When responding to an argument, ask the following questions: Is the claim based on
24 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

      presented facts--information that can be verified? Is the claim based on credible inferences--connections
      between textual evidence and personal knowledge or experience? Is the claim based on unsubstantiated
      opinions--personal belief? All three elements--facts, inferences, and opinions--have their places in
      argumentative texts. However, the strongest arguments are those based on verifiable facts and reasonably
      drawn inferences. Look out for opinions masquerading as facts and for inferences stemming from insufficient
      facts. Refer to the social media exchange in the Annotated Student Sample and recognize how those posts
      present information to help you see these connections.
      An informational text presents facts and draws conclusions based on those facts. When responding to an
      informational text, ensure that the facts are accurate, that the inferences rely on facts, and that opinions
      presented as evidence are based on expertise, not emotion. Decide whether the author presents enough
      reliable facts to justify the conclusions. In addition, consider whether the author is reliable and reasonable.
     Also, ask questions, such as Is the tone objective? Has all the relevant information been presented? Is the
     author an expert in the field? What necessary or useful information seems missing? Are other perspectives
     missing?
      To understand an informational text, you need some context for the new ideas you encounter, some knowledge
      of the terms and ideas, and knowledge of the rules that govern the genre. If would be difficult to read the
      Emancipation Proclamation with no knowledge of the Civil War (1861-1865) or the practice of enslavement. It
      would also be difficult to read a biology textbook chapter about photosynthesis but know nothing of plants, cell
      structure, or chemical reactions. The more you know, the more you learn; the more you learn, the more critical
      your reading, writing, and thinking will be. As you gain knowledge, you will naturally ask more questions and
      make more connections or bridges between information sources, thereby enhancing your reading, writing,
      and critical thinking skills.
      Many college instructors will ask you to read about subjects that are new to you. First, of course, it's important
      to understand what you read. Comprehension means being proactive as a reader: looking up words you do not
      know, taking meaningful notes, asking questions, understanding the rhetorical situation of the text, and so on.
      Second, you want to improve your skills to analyze or evaluate texts critically and write about this
     understanding. However, how do you develop context, learn background, and find the rules to help you read
     unfamiliar texts on unfamiliar subjects? What strategies or shortcuts can speed up the learning process?
      As an experiment, read the following statement issued by President Harry S. Truman (1884-1972), take notes,
      and practice being a proactive reader who focuses on comprehension, the rhetorical situation, and critical
      analysis of the passage:

       Access for free at openstax.org.
public domain t  1.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text" 25

                                              end public domain t

FIGURE 1.8 Harry S. Truman (credit: "Portrait of President Harry S. Truman" by National Archives and Records
Administration/Public Domain)

      Sixteen hours ago an American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, and destroyed its usefulness
      to the enemy. That bomb had more power than 20,000 tons of T.N.T. It had more than two thousand times the
      blast power of the British Grand Slam, which is the largest bomb ever yet used in the history of warfare.

How did you do? Did your reasoning go something like this?

  · Noting the setting--Hiroshima, Japan. Prior historical knowledge suggests that Hiroshima is one of the
      cities on which the United States dropped an atomic bomb near the end of World War II (1939-1945).

  · Staying with the first sentence, Truman focuses on Hiroshima as something useful to the enemy that has
      been destroyed. There is no mention of human casualties.

  · The second sentence focuses on the destructive power of the bomb, suggesting the force of the United
      States's arsenal.

  · Out of curiosity, you might have looked up the British Grand Slam to learn it was a powerful bomb type
      developed by engineer and inventor Sir Barnes Wallis (1887-1979) and used during World War II. Here,
      too, Truman suggests that the United States is even more powerful than its ally Great Britain.

  · The tone of the text is prideful, as if using the largest bomb in the history of warfare is a grand
      accomplishment.

Whether reading new texts, learning new information, or witnessing unfamiliar events, you usually draw
meaning by following a process something like this one--trying to identify what you see, hear, or read;
questioning what you do not understand; making and testing predictions; and consulting authorities for
confirmation or credible information. In this way, comprehension leads to critical analysis, understanding,
and evaluation.

You will encounter different text types, too. Authors of literary texts such as short stories, poems, and plays
may strive to make their work believable, enjoyable, and effective in conveying their themes. To locate a
theme, look for recurring language, ideas, or images. Consider how the characters change between the
beginning and the end of the story. Then, consider whether the author's choices effectively convey the theme.
26 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

      The strongest responses to literature or other art forms are based on textual evidence, as in most academic
      writing. Visit Colorado State University (https://openstax.org/r/Colorado_State_University) for more insight into
      evaluation.

      You also can refer to Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It? for more on evaluation or review and
      Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read for more direction in approaching narrative texts.

      Responding to Write

      Once you understand a text, examine it more slowly to analyze and evaluate its cultural assumptions, its
      arguments, its evidence, its logic, and its conclusions. The best way to do this is to respond, or "talk back," to
      the text in writing. Again, pay attention to the rhetorical situation: the agents and conditions. Talking back can
      take various forms, from actually saying words to yourself or aloud, to making margin notes, to composing a
      critical response. Respond to passages that cause you to pause for a moment to reflect, to question, to read
      again, or to say "Ah!" or "Aha!" Your reactions may suggest something important, maybe a revelation or an
      insight. Whichever it may be, take note of it because you may not have that reaction on another reading.

      If the text is informational, try to capture the statements that are repeated or that pull together or summarize
      ideas. These are often critical elements to understand and possibly evaluate later. If the text is argumentative,
      examine the claim, reasoning, and each piece of supporting evidence. You can always go back to examine
      evidence or look up sources the author used when you want to gain a better understanding of the text's
      purpose and position in a larger conversation. If the text is literary, pay extra attention to language features,
      such as images, metaphors, and crisp dialogue. Often, authors use these elements to help create a character,
      such as a character that always says "ya know" after every sentence, thus making a character more individual
      and realistic.

      Basically, you want to note what's happening to you as you read. Ask about the text's effect on you. How are you
      reacting? What are you thinking or feeling? What do you like? What do you dislike? What do you trust or
      distrust? Why? These responses are useful especially if the information is new or unexpected. By noting them,
      you will be able to build your understanding and convey that to readers. Part of the goal as a writer is to take
      the connections and bridges you have made and provide them for your readers to help them follow the logic of
      those connections.

      Responding to a text in writing also means locating specific evidence to quote, paraphrase, or summarize in
      support of your analysis or evaluation. When you quote, you use the exact language of the text; when you
      summarize, you reduce the text to a brief statement of its main ideas in your own words; when you paraphrase,
      you restate the text in your own words. In all these cases--quotation, summary, or paraphrase--you will need to
      cite or reference the original source. Proper and consistent citation is important for several reasons. It helps
      establish your authority, thus building your credibility with readers. It also allows readers to go to your sources
      for more details or specifics so that they, too, can take part in the conversation. And it shows you are crediting
      your sources, thus avoiding plagiarism. To learn more about source citation, consult MLA Documentation and
      Format or APA Documentation and Format.

      Use this media interactive to practice identifying the different ways in which readers respond to texts. Then,
      examine the annotated professional critical response model below.

      Critical Response: An Annotated Model

      The Case of Jean Gianini

      In 1914, in the village of Poland, New York, sixteen-year-old Jean Gianini murdered his former teacher Lydia
      Beecher. During the commission of this brutal murder, Gianini provided evidence that tied him to the murder
      through a lost a button at the crime scene. Upon arrest, Gianini confessed to the crime. At the trial, Gianni's
      defense lawyers claimed that Gianini was legally insane during the commission of his crime. Psychologist Dr.
      Henry Herbert Goddard was called to testify as an expert witness.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                       1.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text" 27

Here, as the author, Henry Herbert Goddard (1866-1957), analyzes "The Case of Jean Gianini" (1915). The
selection that follows demonstrates a framework and an example of a critical response to a text. It has been
excerpted for clarity and space.

Introduction

public domain t                                                   end public domain t           end public domain t

In               the  introduction  to  his  critical  response,  Goddard  includes the title   of the work and a summary    of  the
                                                                                    end public  domain tend public domain t

rhetorical situation. He ends the introduction with a statement of evaluation.

                 "We find the defendant in this case not guilty as charged . . ."
                             end public domain t

                 Such was the verdict by the jury of the Supreme Court of Herkimer County, New York, on May 28th, 1914, in the
                                                                    end public domain t

                 case of the people vs. Jean Gianini, indicted for the murder of Lida Beecher, his former teacher.

Hanenreo,tatht e author cites the title of the text--a court case--and provides some early context.end annotat

                 The prosecution and, at first at least, the majority of the citizens of the community held that this had been a
                 carefully planned, premeditated, cold-blooded murder of the most atrocious character, committed with a
                 fiendishness seldom seen among human beings. It was, on the other hand, claimed by the defense that the boy
                 . . . had only the intelligence of a ten-year-old child, that he did not know the nature and quality of his act, and
                 that he did not have any true realization of the enormity of his crime. For some reason unaccountable to a great
                 many people, the jury accepted the view of the defense.

Hanenreo,tatht e author provides elements of the rhetorical situation: culture, context, and stance. Shared cultural
assumptions are that the guilty will be punished. Contextual details of the trial include a summary of the defense
and the jury's reaction. The phrase "unaccountable to a great many people" may suggest that the author does not
agree with the jury's "not guilty" verdict.end annotat

                 Not infrequently have verdicts in murder trials been unacceptable to the populace. In that respect this verdict is
                 not an exceptional one, but from other standpoints it is remarkable. Probably no verdict in modern times has
                 marked so great a step forward in society's treatment of the wrongdoer. For the first time in history
                 psychological tests of intelligence have been admitted into court and the mentality of the accused established
                 on the basis of these facts.

                 The value of this verdict cannot be overestimated. It establishes a new standard in criminal procedure.

Hanenreo,tatht e author offers commentary about the larger meaning of this case, historically. In addition, the author
concludes with a statement of evaluation--the importance of the verdict to the administration of justice.end annotat

Body

The next several body paragraphs provide Goddard with the opportunity to offer the reasons behind his
evaluation. Each paragraph should have a topic sentence to maintain focus and organization. For each reason
offered, explanation of its importance and supporting evidence from the text through quotations, summaries,
or paraphrases should follow. See MLA Documentation and Format or APA Documentation and Format for
guidance on citation.

                 One of the unique features, so far as court procedure is concerned, was the introduction into the case, of
                 examinations by means of the Binet-Simon Measuring Scale of Intelligence.

Iannnthoitsapt assage, the author gives one reason to support both his and the jury's assessment of Jean's intelligence--an
intelligence test. Moreover, it is presented as a new scientific tool, which it was in 1915, to help establish the case.end annotat
28 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

public domain t  The writer's examination of Jean consisted largely of the use of these tests, and as a result he estimated his
                 mentality at approximately ten years of age. It was somewhat difficult to estimate his mentality with the usual
                 exactness since others had already used the tests, and it was impossible to say how much Jean had learned
                 from his previous examinations. As a matter of fact, in some cases at least, he had not profited by the
                 experiences which should have helped him greatly [. . .] For example, one of the tests is to draw from memory a
                 diagram which he has been allowed to study for ten seconds. It is clear that if one were given this test two or
                 three times, at the last trial he should have a pretty good idea of it and be able to draw it ecnodrrepcutblyli.cAdltohmouaignhtthe
                 ewnrditepru'sbluicsedoomf tahiins ttest was in the last of the series of those who tested him, yet he did not succeed in drawing
                 it. This is usually drawn by a child of ten years. When asked to repeat a certain sentence, he replied, "Oh, I have
                 been asked that a hundred times." But in spite of the fact that he had heard it several times he failed to
                 remember it, and yet this sentence is generally remembered by a child of twelve.

Hanenreo,tatht e author introduces evidence from the test through summary. Yet, he employs some faulty cause-and-effect
reasoning. Based on Jean's response to repeating a sentence, is it possible that he refuses to participate in the tests
rather than that he is unable to produce the desired responses? By not considering alternative conclusions (or
perspectives), the author shows a bias against Jean and favoritism teonwdaprdubthliec tdeosmt aanindtthe conclusion he draws
from it.end annotat

Conclusion

To conclude, Goddard shares with readers his final thoughts about the text and leaves the readers with
something to think about.

                 Our general studies have not yet gone far enough, and certainly our study of this particular family is far from
                 sufficient, to enable us to decide whether this is a matter of heredity or whether we shall say that Jean's
                 condition as well as that of the first child is traceable directly to the mother's insanity or to her alcoholism.

                 For the present purpose, of course, it does not matter. We see in these facts, whether we regard them as causes
                 or merely as symptoms of a deeper lying cause, sufficient reason for Jean's [intellectual condition. [. . .] The
                 next important question that arises is a legal one of whether [. . .] he knew the nature and quality of his act and
                 that it was wrong.

Faninnaolltya,tthe author introduces subsequent (and maybe distracting) information. Additionally, the author concedes to
the popular assessment of Jean's mental condition, but he raises a legal question that prompts readers to continue
thinking: Does one's intellectual capacity excuse one from criminal culpability?end annotat

Now, it is your turn to put this knowledge to work. Use a graphic organizer like Table 1.1 to get started drafting
your ideas in response to your chosen text.

                 Structure of Response     Content of Response                                              Your Response

                 Introduction              Author
                                           Title of Work
                                           Summary of rhetorical situation
                                           Statement of analysis or evaluation

                 Body 1                    Point 1 of analysis or evaluation
                                           Evidence from text in form of quotation, summary, or paraphrase

                 TABLE 1.1 Drafting frame

Access for free at openstax.org.
                          1.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About a "Text" 29

Structure of Response     Content of Response                                              Your Response

Body 2                    Point 2 of analysis or evaluation
                          Evidence from text in form of quotation, summary, or paraphrase

Body 3                    Point 3 of analysis or evaluation
                          Evidence from text in form of quotation, summary, or paraphrase

Body 4 (if needed)        Point 4 of analysis or evaluation
                          Evidence from text in form of quotation, summary, or paraphrase

Body 5 (if needed)        Point 5 of analysis or evaluation
                          Evidence from text in form of quotation, summary, or paraphrase

Conclusion                Final conclusions regarding analysis or evaluation
                          Leave readers thinking or suggest action

TABLE 1.1 Drafting frame

In addition, use these sentence starters as needed during drafting:
Summary:
[Name of author] explains ________.
After discussing ________, the author claims ________.
[Author's name]'s main point is ________.
Paraphrase:
In other words, the author is saying that ________.
To paraphrase, the author claims that ________.
To simplify this idea, think about it in this way: ________.
Analysis:
[Name of author] develops ________ to show ________.
The author's use of ________ supports ________.
The author employs ________ to create ________.
Evaluation:
The most important aspect of this text is ________ because ________.
[Name of author] fails to address ________ and ________, which makes me think about the impact on
________.
I think [name of author] is wrong [or correct] because ________.
Evidence:
30 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

As an example, the author says, "________." (Be sure to provide accurate citation!)

The sentence "________" suggests that ________.

The use of the word "________" creates the impression that ________.

As often as possible, use the author's name rather than a pronoun. The first time you mention it, write the full
name as it is listed on the source you are using. Then, use the last name only, and be certain to cite properly.
Finally, edit and revise your work to catch any oversights.

1.6 Evaluation: Intention vs. Execution

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish variations in genre conventions.
  · Differentiate between intention and execution with regard to intended meaning.
  · Articulate how rubrics provide insight into the final outcomes of an assignment.

When you write, you try to convert what is in your mind into words on paper or on a screen. Because you are
writing for others, your thoughts must be understandable to them. Have you ever said, "I know what I mean; I
just don't know how to say it"? Your intention is what you mean, and your execution is how you say it.
Sometimes, however, intention and execution don't convey the same thing. When this gap occurs, your
intention needs some focus so that you can execute.

Rubrics help you direct your prewriting and drafting to fulfill the criteria of an assignment. In basic terms, a
rubric provides a guide for drafting and evaluating a paper (or other project). More important, it helps you
understand your intention and process it into execution. At times, having an idea of how a work will be
evaluated is useful so that you can address the elements of the rubric as you draft and revise. Nevertheless, you
should understand that any rubric will not cover every aspect of a given assignment. You also will need to
consider other factors while drafting. In addition, rubrics may be based on conventions already discussed in
class or a previous reading. For example, part of the following rubric is "analyzing and evaluating the text." If
you do not know what these terms mean or how to analyze or evaluate the text, having such criteria is useless.
In other words, to be able to analyze and evaluate a text, you need to know how to analyze and evaluate a text.
This observation brings you back to the rhetorical situation and the other important elements of this chapter.
So be sure to review, take meaningful notes, and understand what you will need to do. Once you are ready, use
this rubric to evaluate the chapter's assigned writing task.

Rubric

Score      Critical Language Awareness              Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices

5          The text always adheres to the task as   The written work consistently    Each aspect of the
Skillful   discussed in Section 1.5: summarizing,   features clear and coherent      rhetorical situation is
           paraphrasing, explaining, analyzing,     language that allows readers     clearly identifiable,
           and evaluating a reading selection. The  to move seamlessly from          presented clearly,
           text also shows ample evidence of the    section to section with clearly  and understood. The
           writer's intent to consciously meet or   linked concepts and              language is perfectly
           challenge conventional expectations in   transitions. The writing is      suited to the writer's
           rhetorically effective ways.             consistently focused on the      purpose and
                                                    topic.                           audience.

TABLE 1.2

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                        1.6 · Evaluation: Intention vs. Execution 31

Score         Critical Language Awareness               Clarity and Coherence              Rhetorical Choices

4             The text usually adheres to the task as   The writing usually provides      Most aspects of the
Accomplished  discussed in Section 1.5: summarizing,    clear and coherent language       rhetorical situation
              paraphrasing, explaining, analyzing,      that allows readers to move       are identifiable,
              and evaluating a reading selection. The   easily from section to section    presented clearly,
              text also shows some evidence of the      with linked concepts and          and understood.
              writer's intent to consciously meet or    transitions. The writing is       Language is generally
              challenge conventional expectations in    mostly focused on the topic.      suited to the writer's
              rhetorically effective ways.                                                purpose and
                                                                                          audience.

3             The text generally adheres to the task    The writing provides general      Some aspects of the
Capable       as discussed in Section 1.5:              awareness of clear and            rhetorical situation
              summarizing, paraphrasing, explaining,    coherent language and             are identifiable,
              analyzing, and evaluating a reading       sometimes allows readers to       presented, and partly
              selection. The text also shows limited    move from section to section      understood.
              evidence of the writer's intent to        with basic linking of concepts    Language is
              consciously meet or challenge             and meaningful transitions.       sometimes unsuited
              conventional expectations in              The writing may show a lack of    to the writer's
              rhetorically effective ways.              focus on the topic.               purpose and
                                                                                          audience.

2             The text occasionally adheres to the      The writing provides minimal      One aspect of the
Developing    task as discussed in Section 1.5:         attention to clear and coherent   rhetorical situation is
              summarizing, paraphrasing, explaining,    language and does not             identifiable and
              analyzing, and evaluating a reading       adequately allow readers to       presented and is
              selection. The text also shows            move from section to section      partially or minimally
              emerging evidence of the writer's         through the use of linked         understood.
              intent to consciously meet or challenge   concepts or transitions. The      Language is mostly
              conventional expectations in              writing is often unfocused.       unsuited to the
              rhetorically effective ways.                                                writer's purpose and
                                                                                          audience.

1             The text does not adhere to the task as   The writing reflects minimal or   No aspect of the
Beginning     discussed in Section 1.5: summarizing,    no attention to clear and         rhetorical situation is
              paraphrasing, explaining, analyzing,      coherent language and may         identifiable,
              and evaluating a reading selection. The   hinder readers in moving from     presented, or
              text also shows little to no evidence of  section to section. Transitions   understood.
              the writer's intent to consciously meet   are either missing or incorrect.  Language is unsuited
              or challenge conventional expectations    The writing is unfocused.         to the writer's
              in rhetorically effective ways.                                             purpose and
                                                                                          audience.

TABLE 1.2
32 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

    1.7 Spotlight on ... Academia

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Determine how various mediums address, affect, and interact with a range of audiences.
        · Examine the importance of your college experience and larger impact on society.
        · Write and post texts in different environments and in varying rhetorical situations.

     The Role of the Classroom in This Brave New World

      The term academia refers to "the life, community, or environment of teachers, schools, and education." With
      the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, the world of academia was challenged. There were logistical
      challenges, of course: How would students and teachers attend classes and remain safe? In what ways could
      digital learning replace classroom learning effectively? But there were deeper philosophical challenges: What
      is the real value of a traditional college education in a world that is seemingly on the brink of one crisis after
      another? Would the classroom become something of value, leading the way in this brave new world, or would it
      become obsolete? While some students chose not to return to their classrooms in the fall of 2020, others either
      returned or logged on virtually. Whichever way students decided to engage, the larger purpose of college was
      challenged.

      FIGURE 1.9 Students in a virtual classroom during the 2020 pandemic (credit: "Chaps Work From Home 31" by
      COD Newsroom/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
      At its best, the college experience is one of personal transformation. The student embarks on a journey of
      empowerment, learning to understand the world around them, then to participate in it, and finally to influence
      it. It is a journey from understanding to analysis and from evaluation to problem-solving. The final awarding of
     a degree calls a student to action. What will you do with the newly gained knowledge and practiced skill sets?
     How will you make an impact the world in positive ways? Will you develop the vaccine for the next health
     threat? Will you address centuries of racial injustice in ways never before attempted? What unique
     contribution can only you make at this time and in this place? The question is not really whether the college
      classroom has a role to play in this world, but whether it will rise above outdated traditions to the level of

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                              1.8 · Portfolio: Tracing Writing Development 33

impactful engagement. One thing is certain, however; the answer starts with you and the publication of your
ideas.

Authentic Publication

To practice your knowledge and use some of the tools in your growing skill set, do this short activity. If you
have a social media account, use it to bridge social media and academia by publishing a version of your critical
response that meets the characteristics of the platform, likely by reducing the character count or posting a
video. First, summarize or paraphrase your main points. Research a link you might include to provide readers
with background information and a larger context of your rhetorical situation. Next, create a post that asks an
honest, analytical, or evaluative question about the topic. In determining your phrasing, assess the rhetorical
situation. If you can, tag a few of your followers to encourage them to respond. You might even mention that
this is part of a school project or add a hashtag--a word or phrase preceded by # that categorizes the
accompanying text. If you are on multiple platforms, try different versions or approaches to see which one
generates the most attention and discussion.
As a result, you might learn something compelling or find your interest piqued by engaging with others. Maybe
you can even incorporate what you learn into your portfolio reflection, which is covered at the end of this
chapter. Remember, part of the goal of writing is learning. Writing helps you solidify what you are thinking,
what it might mean, why it matters, how to say it, and how to communicate it to others. Using various media to
convey information will continue to be an essential element of your education and your life, so be sure to
practice it.

1.8 Portfolio: Tracing Writing Development

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Reflect on the development of composing processes.
  · Reflect on how those composing processes affect your work.

          FIGURE 1.10 (credit: "Carbon fiber keyboard" by H. Sterling Cross/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

The Portfolio: And So It Begins . . .

In simplest terms, a writing portfolio is a collection of your writing contained within a single binder or folder.
This writing may have been done over a number of weeks, months, or even years. It may be organized
chronologically, thematically, or according to quality. A private writing portfolio may contain writing that you
wish to keep only for yourself. In this case, you decide what is in it and what it looks like. However, a writing
portfolio assigned for a class will contain writing to be shared with an audience to demonstrate the growth of
34 1 · The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically

      your writing and reasoning abilities. One kind of writing portfolio, accumulated during a college course,
      presents a record of your work over a semester, and your instructor may be use it to assign a grade. Another
      type of portfolio presents a condensed, edited story of your semester's progress in a more narrative form.

      The most common type of portfolio assigned in a writing course combines the cumulative work collected over
      the semester, plus a cover letter in which you explain the nature and value of these papers. Sometimes you will
      be asked to assign yourself a grade on the basis of your own assessment. The following suggestions may help
      you prepare a course portfolio:

        · Make your portfolio speak for you. If your course portfolio is clean, complete, and carefully organized,
            that is how it will be judged. If it is unique, colorful, creative, and imaginative, that, too, is how it will be
            judged. Similarly, your folder will be judged more critically if it is messy, incomplete, and haphazardly put
            together. Before giving your portfolio to somebody else for evaluation, consider whether it reflects how you
            want to be presented.

        · Include exactly what is asked for. If an instructor wants three finished papers and a dozen sample
            journal entries, that is the minimum your course portfolio should contain. Sometimes you can include
            more than what is asked for, but never include less.

        · Add supplemental material judiciously. Course portfolios are among the most flexible means of
            presenting yourself. If you believe that supplemental writing will show you in a better light, include that
            too, but only after the required material. If you include extra material, attach a memo to explain why it is
            there and what you think it adds to your portfolio. Supplemental writing might include journals, letters,
            sketches, or diagrams that suggest other useful dimensions of your thinking.

       · Include perfect final drafts. At least make them as close to perfect as you can. Show that your own
            standard for finished work is high. Check spelling, grammar, citation, formatting, and font sizes and types.
            You should go over your work carefully and be able to find the smallest errors. In addition, if you are asked
            for a hard copy of your portfolio, final drafts should be double-spaced and printed on only one side of high-
            quality paper, unless another format is requested. And, of course, your work should be carefully proofread
            and should follow the language and genre conventions appropriate to the task.

        · Demonstrate growth. This is a tall order, but course portfolios, unlike most other assessment
            instruments, can show positive change. The primary value of portfolios in writing classes is that they allow
            you to demonstrate how a finished paper came into being. Consequently, instructors frequently ask for
            early drafts to be attached to final drafts of each paper, the most recent on top, so they can see how you
            followed revision suggestions, how much effort you invested, how many drafts you wrote, and how often
            you took risks and tried to improve. To build such a record of your work, make sure the date of every draft
            is clearly marked on each one, and keep it in a safe place (and backed up electronically).

        · Demonstrate work in progress. Course portfolios allow writers to present partially finished work that
            suggests future directions and intentions. Both instructors and potential employers may find such
            preliminary drafts or outlines as valuable as some of your finished work. When you include a tentative
            draft, be sure to attach a memo or note explaining why you still believe it has merit and in which direction
            you plan to take your next revisions.

        · Attach a table of contents. For portfolios containing more than three papers, attach a separate table of
            contents. For those containing only a few papers, embed your table of contents in the cover letter.

        · Organize your work using clear logic. Three methods of organization are particularly appealing:
            Chronological order: Writing is arranged in order, beginning with the first week of class and ending
                with the last week, with all drafts, papers, journal entries, letters, and such fitting in place according to
                the date written. Only the cover letter is out of chronological order, appearing at the beginning and
                serving as an introduction to what follows. This method allows you to show the evolution of growth most
                clearly, with your latest writing (presumably the best) presented at the end.
            Reverse chronological order: The most recent writing is up front, and the earliest writing at the back.
                In this instance, the most recent written document--the cover letter--is in place at the beginning of the
                portfolio. This method features your latest (presumably the best) work up front and allows readers to

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                              1.8 · Portfolio: Tracing Writing Development 35

          trace the history of how it got there.
      Best-first order: You place your strongest writing up front and your weakest in back. Organizing a

         portfolio this way suggests that the work you consider strongest should count most heavily in evaluating
          the semester's work.

With each completed chapter in this textbook, you will add to this portfolio. As you work through the chapters
and complete the assignments, save each one on your computer or in the cloud, unless your instructor asks
you to print your work and arrange it in a binder. Each assignment becomes an artifact that will form a piece of
your portfolio. Depending on your preference or your instructor's approach, you may write a little about each
assignment as you add to the portfolio. As you compile your portfolio, take some time to read the
assignments--drafts and finished products--carefully. Undoubtedly, you will see improvement in your writing
over a short amount of time. Be sure to make note of this improvement because it will prove useful moving
forward.

Reflective Task: The Freedom of Freewriting

As you begin your portfolio with the addition of your critical response, compose an accompanying freewrite,
sometimes called a quick write. In this case, you will be responding to your own text--a powerful tool in your
intellectual development. To begin, write quickly and without stopping about the process of composing your
critical response and the finished product. See where your thoughts go, a process that often helps you clarify
your own thoughts about the subject--your own text and its creation. When you freewrite, write to yourself in
your own natural style, without worrying about sentence structure, grammar, spelling, or punctuation. The
purpose is to help you tie together the ideas from your writing process, your assignment, and other thoughts
and experiences in your mind. One future value of freewriting is that the process tends to generate questions
at random, capture them, and leave the answering for a later task or assignment. Another bonus of freewriting
is that you will build confidence with writing and become more disciplined when you have to write. In other
words, the more you write, the more confidence you will have in your voice and your writing.

By now you may have realized that writing, whether on social media platforms or in the classroom, is a
conversation. The conversation may take place with yourself (freewriting), with your instructor and classmates
(assignment), or with the world (social media). You have learned how people like Selena Gomez and others use
simple and effective strategies, such as vulnerability, understanding, analysis, and evaluation, to engage in
such conversations. Now adopt these same processes--try them on for size, practice them, and learn to master
them. As you move through the remainder of this course and text, compose with intention by keeping in mind
the limits and freedoms of a particular defined rhetorical situation.
36 1 · Further Reading

Further Reading

It's a good idea to familiarize yourself with texts of evaluation and analysis. Below, you will find a few titles with
    which to start.

Boyd, Danah. "Wikipedia as a Source of Knowledge Production." It's Complicated: The Social Lives of
   Networked Teens, Yale UP, 2014, pp. 765-770.

Bradford, Clare. "`Where Happily Ever After Happens Every Day': The Medievalisms of Disney's Princesses."
   The Disney Middle Ages, Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, pp. 171-188, doi:10.1057/9781137066923_10.

Miller, Matthew. "Runner-Up: Frost's Broken Roads." W. W. Norton, wwnorton.com/norton-writers-prize/
    2017-winners/runner-up:-frosts-broken-roads.

Thorne, William. "Movie Review: 'The Circle.'" Daily Bruin, 28 Apr. 2017, dailybruin.com/2017/04/28/movie-
    review-the-circle.

Ulrich, Laurel Thatcher. Well-Behaved Women Seldom Make History. Alfred A. Knopf, 2008.
Wise, Sean. "5 Social Media Moves That Prove Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Is the Queen of Digital Emotional

   Intelligence." Inc., 20 Feb. 2019, https://www.inc.com/sean-wise/5-social-media-moves-that-prove-
    alexandria-ocasio-cortez-is-queen-of-digital-emotional-intelligence.html.

Works Cited

Goddard, Henry Herbert. The Criminal Imbecile. 1915. Project Gutenberg, 2013, http://www.gutenberg.org/
    files/43064/43064-h/43064-h.htm.

Okwodu, Janelle. "Selena Gomez Wants Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter to Do Better." Vogue, 7 Jan. 2021,
    www.vogue.com/article/selena-gomez-social-media-leaders.

Park, Sabrina. "Selena Gomez Reveals Why She Sacrificed Social Media for the Sake of Her Mental Health."
   Harper's Bazaar, 19 Aug. 2021, www.harpersbazaar.com/celebrity/latest/a37348873/selena-gomez-mental-
    health-giving-up-instagram/.

Cunningham, John M. "Selena Gomez." Encyclopædia Britannica, updated 30 Aug. 2021, www.britannica.com/
    biography/Selena-Gomez.

The Manhattan Engineer District, United States Army. The Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
    1946. Project Gutenberg, 2008, www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/685/pg685.html.

Walansky, A. "Selena Gomez Opens Up About the Dangers (and Value) of Social Media." Goalcast, 18 Nov. 2019,
    www.goalcast.com/selena-gomez-reflects-on-the-danger-and-value-of-social-media/amp/.

Access for free at openstax.org.
Exploring, Employing, Embracing Language, Identity, and Culture: 2

FIGURE 2.1 In a 19th-century lithograph, Cherokee leader Sequoyah, unable to read or write, is shown with a table
depicting the writing system he created for his native Cherokee language. His invention of the Cherokee syllabary, a
collection of symbols representing the syllables of the spoken language, would provide a divided Cherokee nation
with a way to communicate and thus create a sense of identity and unity. (credit: "Sequoyah" by Lehman and Duval/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

2.1 Seeds of Self
2.2 Identity Trailblazer: Cathy Park Hong
2.3 Glance at the Issues: Oppression and Reclamation
2.4 Annotated Sample Reading from The Souls of Black Folk by W. E. B. Du Bois
2.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically about How Identity Is Constructed Through Writing
2.6 Evaluation: Antiracism and Inclusivity
2.7 Spotlight on ... Variations of English
2.8 Portfolio: Decolonizing Self
INTRODUCTION Based on his dealings with white people who could read and write, Sequoyah (c. 1775-1843),
a Cherokee leader, believed that power resulted from the ability to share knowledge. A written language
comprehensible and accessible to the Cherokee people could be far more effective in preserving their culture
than relying on memory or oral tradition. Hoping to unite and strengthen the Cherokee politically after they
were forced from their lands by the U.S. government, Sequoyah spent 10 years developing a method for his
38 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

      people to communicate in writing. His language system, based on written symbols representing syllables
      spoken in the Cherokee language, was treated skeptically at first but was later adopted and used in Cherokee
      newspapers, official documents, and descriptions of rituals and medicines.

      Although the use of the Cherokee language eventually gave way to English, Sequoyah remained true to all
      aspects of Cherokee culture. He spoke only Cherokee, wore the clothing of his people, and followed Cherokee
      religious customs, refusing to assimilate in any way. As evidenced by Sequoyah's ideas about communication,
      language, writing, and culture are clearly linked. Although Sequoyah had political purposes in mind, a
      common language is an important element of shared culture and goes further in developing a sense of cultural
      identity than what Sequoyah may have envisioned at the time.

      While all humans have the same basic needs--food, water, shelter, affection, and a sense of belonging--cultural
      identity is shaped by family, upbringing, language, and geographical location. You may have grown up in a
      small town, in a large city, or in the suburbs; you may have been raised with siblings and may have attended
      church; you may speak more than one language. You may be single, married, or dating; you may drive a car,
      SUV, or truck. All your lived experiences have shaped who you are today. Identity is the word that
      encompasses all the parts of yourself that make you who you are. For example, if you were to respond to all of
      the scenarios presented in the sentences above, your answers would collectively make up at least some of your
      identity.

      Having a variety of identities might result in both advantages and disadvantages associated with your lived
      experiences. Those advantages are called privileges, and the disadvantages discrimination. When you
      consider that people have multiple identities, also consider that these multiple identities lead to various points
      of intersection among lived experiences. The idea of intersectionality, then, helps you consider systems of
      privilege or discrimination projected onto people as a consequence of their identities.

      Considering your own identity and position in the world, as well as the identities and positions of others, gives
      critical meaning to your personal and academic writing. Experiences make people who they are, teaching
      them how to move through the world and consider the effects their actions and words have on others.
     In this chapter, you will explore the concept of cultural identity. What kind of lived experiences have you had?
      How have those experiences shaped and molded you? What experiences have others had, and how have those
      experiences shaped them?

      Whenever you consider lived experiences, think about the contexts in which they occur, and the systems of
      communication used in those contexts. The word culture includes the expressions, customs, practices, and
      experiences that connect a person to other people in their present, past, and future. Who you are is closely
      connected to the cultures you inhabit and the ways in which you communicate. Among the more noticeable
      markers of your identities are the languages you speak. In this chapter, language is defined as a system of
      words used to communicate. Just as you likely have multiple identities, you likely speak varieties of languages
      as part of each of those identities.

      The goal of this chapter in particular, and this text in general, is to help you think critically about language,
      culture, and identity in ways that make room for everyone's lived experiences. In this chapter, you will learn
      how authors use language to communicate their sense of cultural identity. You will read about Cathy Park Hong
      and W. E. B. Du Bois, activists who have used writing to explore identity and culture. You will examine your own
      culture as well as your personal, unconscious bias, reflecting on both of these aspects of identity to increase
      your understanding of the world.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                   2.1 · Seeds of Self 39

2.1 Seeds of Self

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the importance of communication in various cultural, language-related, and rhetorical situations.
  · Articulate how language use can promote social justice and equality.
Between 1870 and 1900, nearly 12 million immigrants arrived in the United States, many through Ellis Island.
Many sought relief from religious and political persecution; others were skilled workers in search of jobs. Once
in the United States, many immigrants faced difficulties adjusting to the demands of life in a new country,
including the challenges of learning a new language and new customs. They moved into neighborhoods where
others from the same country already resided. There, they lived among those who knew their language and
customs, ate familiar food, and participated in cultural practices handed down by their ancestors. Living in
immigrant communities reminded people of their home countries and kept their cultures alive.

Understanding Culture

Culture includes observable aspects, such as the religion and language of a group of people, as well as
intangible aspects, such as shared preferences, attitudes, and behaviors. For example, in Black women's
natural hair culture, wash day practices might be prescribed and may involve assistance from other members
of the group, whether family or friends. This community has a shared vocabulary of hair types labeled from 1
to 4 for curl type and A to C for curl diameter, as well as steps such as detangle and lift and styling techniques
such as twist out, braid out, wash and go, and updo. These terms evolved from Black women's shared
experiences. Likewise, in Hispanic culture, the quinceañera is a custom and rite of passage for 15-year-old
girls. The elaborate celebration is attended by the girl's extended family and recognized by the cultural
community at large. Participation in regular daily practices, such as Black women's natural hair culture, and
once-in-a-lifetime celebrations, such as the quinceañera, can contribute to a person's culture and sense of
identity.
The iceberg is often used as a metaphor for culture. The top of the iceberg, visible to all, is much smaller than
the part hidden below the water. So it is with culture. The less obvious parts of culture can sometimes be
"hidden" from observers. This lack of knowledge can make understanding cultures other than your own more
difficult because these hidden parts are more challenging to recognize or understand.

FIGURE 2.2 Icebergs often serve as a metaphor for the aspects of culture that seem "hidden" or invisible. Notice
how only part of the iceberg is visible above the water. (credit: "iceberg" by Ce?sar Henrique de Santis Nascimento/
flickr, Public Domain)
40 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

      Within a culture, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors are both taught explicitly and learned implicitly. Think back
      for a moment to your high school days. You may have attended a freshman orientation that included a tour of
      the building, a summary of school rules, and an overview of the school schedule. This orientation was the
      beginning of your cultural understanding of the school and your role in it. But as you began attending
      regularly, you probably learned other, often unspoken cultural traditions and norms--perhaps ninth graders
      were expected to sit in a certain part of the cafeteria, for example. All cultures teach in similar ways. This
      conscious and unconscious learning process develops beliefs and attitudes that you come to view as valid. You
      then express these beliefs through your actions and teach them to other members.

      Culture is not static; it changes and grows dynamically in response to any number of variables. Some aspects
      are difficult to interpret, particularly language. In fact, culture plays a significant role in the use of language.
     Not only does it affect what is said, but culture also affects how it is said (including tone). Different aspects of
      culture can be interpreted differently by various groups, making language among the most challenging aspects
      of culture.

     Situating Self

      Attending college and participating in academic traditions are now a part of your identity. This new
      environment not only welcomes the traditions you bring with you but also will teach you new ones, thereby
      broadening your view of culture and the world. In this new cultural environment, you may struggle to find your
      place. Embrace this struggle because it is a sign of personal growth and development. What is important to
      note is that even though you may struggle to situate yourself in this new environment, nothing should prevent
      the self you bring with you to college from finding its proper place. In other words, you do not need to lose who
      you are to become who you will be. Former First Lady Michelle Obama (b. 1964) writes in her book Becoming
      (2018) that your personal story "is what you have, what you will always have. It is something to own." So make
      space in your understanding of yourself for the value that your cultural experiences provide to others in this
      new environment. By sharing yourself--your culture and identity--with peers and professors, you give them an
      opportunity to develop and grow. College or university is a place for you to have experiences that help you first
      figure out who you already are and then explore who you want to be. Allow these experiences to provide that
      opportunity.

      A cultural system includes all parts of a culture that shape its members: its beliefs, traditions, and rituals.
      Self-awareness about your own culture includes an examination of who and what have influenced your
      perception of the world and how you experience it. This perception, often called a cultural lens, affects how
      you understand the world and will change as you form new experiences. For example, your religious culture
      may influence your beliefs. However, if challenged by a new cultural experience, those beliefs may be
      reinforced, shift, or change completely.

     Exploring Voice

      One discovery that often comes out of a first-year college writing experience is finding your writing voice.
      When instructors talk about voice in writing, they are imagining a rhetorical mixture of these elements:

        · Vocabulary: the words used to express your thoughts
        · Tone: the attitude conveyed through your words
        · Viewpoint: the position or perspective that comes through your writing
        · Syntax: the order or arrangement of words

      Because they provide innumerable possibilities, combinations of words, attitude, perspective, and word order
      will create a unique signature for your writing--one that expresses your identity as a writer.

      Communication is a cornerstone of culture. It is the way people share experiences, build relationships, and
      develop community. Similarly, expressing communication through writing is a powerful way to share culture.
      Just as a person's body language reveals a deeper meaning behind their spoken language, so does a writer's

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                       2.2 · Trailblazer 41

voice provide deeper insight into their culture and identity.

2.2 Trailblazer

Identity Trailblazer: Cathy Park Hong

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain how authors weave identity into their compositions.
  · Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.

FIGURE 2.3 Cathy Park Hong (https://openstax.org/r/  "Sometimes you need
cathyparkhong) writes about racism from the               to explain your
perspective of Asians and Asian Americans. (credit:
"Racism is not an option" by GoToVan/flickr, CC BY   experiences in order to
2.0)                                                    understand them
                                                             yourself."

Fear: The Enemy Within

Cathy Park Hong (b. 1976) is an Asian American poet, writer, and educator committed to exploring living art.
Born to Korean parents in Los Angeles, California, Hong studied at Oberlin College and at the Writers'
Workshop at the University of Iowa, where she earned a master of fine arts degree. She has received numerous
fellowships, including a Fulbright scholarship, a Guggenheim Fellowship, a National Endowment for the Arts
Fellowship, and a New York Foundation for the Arts Fellowship. Hong has taught at Sarah Lawrence College
and Rutgers University and served as poetry editor for the New Republic.

In her work, Hong explores her search for identity as a first-generation Asian American, specifically her
struggles with feeling alienated from Anglo-American culture. Hong's first publication, the book of poems
Translating Mo'um (2002), examines the often tenuous challenges experienced by first-generation Americans,
specifically regarding language. Her second book of poems, Dance Dance Revolution: Poems (2007), won the
Barnard Women Poets Prize. The work incorporates the idea of "code switching," a technique in which people
switch between languages or language forms, such as formal and colloquial.

Hong most recently published a collection of essays titled Minor Feelings: An Asian American Reckoning
(2020), a memoir that takes on the lens of cultural criticism. Writing from her personal experiences as an
Asian American woman growing up and living in America, Hong delves into deeply painful and often unseen
racial trauma experienced by Asians and Asian Americans. Published as anti-Asian hate crimes gained
42 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

      increasing national attention, Hong's essays help readers understand the curious place that Asian Americans
      inhabit in American race relations, where they are viewed as caricatures of the "model minority" and face
      invisible racism.

     The title of Minor Feelings comes from the word han, which Koreans use to describe emotions that include
      anger, melancholy, envy, and shame. Hong believes these same emotions are shared by minorities in America
     today. She expresses difficulty in using the pronoun we in her writing because of the diversity of Asian
      Americans. Yet she notes that what this diverse population has in common is that even as second- and third-
      generation Americans, Asian Americans find they still don't enjoy first-class status in American life in the
     same way that White Americans do. She proposes thinking of the label Asian Americans as "less of an identity,
      and more as a coalition" (Hong, "Why") in order to seek common ground with others who share similar
      experiences. Hong believes that one key is cross-cultural community building among Asian communities and
      between Asian, Black, Latina/Latino, and Indigenous communities.

      Hong's poetry and essays also explore the racism she has experienced in the literary world, from graduate
      school to literary circles. Perhaps the most maddening part of those experiences, she notes, is that her
     perception of racism is constantly "questioned or dismissed" (Hong, Minor 55). Although writing about racial
      experiences was discouraged as "anti-academic" when she was a student, Hong has made a career of sharing
      these experiences through poetry and prose. She hopes that her work not only helps Asian Americans feel
      recognized and acknowledged but also encourages readers of all ethnicities to practice self-interrogation.

     Discussion Questions

      1. Cathy Park Hong recalls not having an outlet to express the racism she experienced growing up. How has
          writing provided that outlet for her as an adult?

      2. Race informs Hong's writing, though the academic circles she was a part of discouraged this. How can art
          and language be influenced by identity?

      3. How has Hong's work helped her explore her own culture and provided a window for others to understand
          it?

      4. The myth of the model minority isolates Asian Americans from other people of color. How does Hong's
          writing work to overcome this isolation?

    2.3 Glance at the Issues: Oppression and Reclamation

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Articulate how language conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and writers' practices and purposes.
        · Define oppression and explain its effects.
        · Define inclusion and summarize ways to write inclusively.

      Writing about identity and culture gives authors the opportunity to share personal experiences and provides a
      vehicle for storytelling. This storytelling can turn into a purposeful message with meaningful rhetorical
      impact.

     What Is Oppression?

      Some languages, cultures, and identities face discrimination. People often believe that for one group to
      advance, another must be held back. This suppression of growth, advancement, economic development, and
      educational opportunity has led to systems of oppression--prolonged and sustained unjust treatment--for
      some groups. For example, Black people from various parts of Africa endured centuries of oppression because
      of the transatlantic slave trade. Between the mid-16th and mid-19th centuries, European, Spanish, and
      American groups captured an estimated 10-12 million African men, women, and children from their

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              2.3 · Glance at the Issues: Oppression and Reclamation 43

homelands, boarded them on ships, and transported them to Europe, the Caribbean, and the Americas to be
sold into enslavement. After 1865, when the Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery in the United States,
Black people continued to be denied basic human rights, such as the opportunity to work at certain jobs,
despite their educational achievement; to be served a meal in a restaurant; to use a public restroom or water
fountain; to shop for necessities in a grocery or department store; or to live peacefully in their own
communities. Black Americans have continued to be subjected to social inequities. As a community, they
suffer from higher rates of incarceration, lower pay rates, fewer educational opportunities, and higher
mortality at the hands of law enforcement--injustices that stem from racist policies of centuries past.
Similarly, Indigenous people have been subjected to hundreds of years of oppression and silencing, often the
result of colonialization, which included stripping them of their customs, land, language, and lives.

FIGURE 2.4 This map shows the routes of the Trail of Tears (https://openstax.org/r/trailoftears) (1836-1839), the
U.S. government's forced relocation of tens of thousands of Native Americans from their lands in the southeastern
United States to "Indian Territory" in what is now Oklahoma. Thousands died of starvation, exposure, or disease
during the long and brutal 1,200-mile journey, much of it on foot. (credit: "Trails of Tears" by Nikator and
www.demis.nl/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
Oppression isn't just a historical problem--it extends to society today. In the two decades since the September
11, 2001, attacks on the United States and the subsequent War on Terror, Muslims and Sikhs have experienced
hate crimes and oppression. People who identify as LGBTQ have been shunned or persecuted, subjected to
hate crimes, and banned from serving in the military and have struggled to gain the right to marry. This TED
Talk (https://openstax.org/r/thistedtalk) highlights the struggle for transgender rights.
In addition, migrant and refugee families, largely from countries in Central and South America, have been
separated and jailed in recent efforts to curtail immigration along the southern U.S. border. Asian Americans
have been subjected to racially motivated harassment and attacks, heightened by the COVID-19 pandemic,
including the violent March 2021 mass shooting at an Asian American massage parlor. This TED Talk
(https://openstax.org/r/talksstereotype) discusses the harm of Asian stereotypes. Discrimination has persisted
for generations and continues to make it difficult for those who oppress to view the oppressed as their equals.

Reclaiming Humanity

One way to help restructure the world to reduce or even eliminate oppression is to explore your own biases. A
bias occurs when you prejudicially favor one person, place, thing, or idea over another. People are naturally
conditioned to favor the familiar over the unfamiliar. If you begin to question why you think as you do or make
the decisions you make, you may begin to view others as equal, even though they may look different, live
44 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

      differently, and experience the world differently.

      Two of the most frequent ways people isolate others are through markers of identity, especially race and
      gender, and through language varieties, such as standard and nonstandard English. If your view of people is
      primarily influenced by their physical features and the words they speak, you do not allow yourself to engage
      fully with them in their humanity.

      Viewing others as people first and understanding the importance of questioning the lens through which you
      view them is the beginning. However, you also have to think critically about language bias. When you hear
      people of African descent speak in African American Vernacular English (AAVE) or speak English with
      Caribbean or African accents, you may make assumptions about who they are and what they know. When you
      encounter people who speak English with Spanish accents, you also may make assumptions about who they
      are and their place in the world. However, when you hear British English or English spoken with a French,
      German, or Slavic accent, you may notice the difference, but you also may make a different set of assumptions
      about those people.

     Anti-racism as Inclusion

      One way to be inclusive is to write in specifically anti-racist ways. Inclusive writing begins with identifying
      ways in which language can be and has been used to exclude cultures, social groups, or races. Exclusive
      language is, unfortunately, ingrained in much of academia. It is a product of habit and the assumption that all
      readers are alike, with similar experiences, values, and beliefs. To write inclusively, think beyond yourself by
      considering other perspectives, groups, and races that may be harmed by thoughtless word choices.

      Here are several principles to help you develop inclusive and anti-racist writing:

        · Consider the assumptions you make about readers, and then work to address those assumptions.
        · Choose language carefully.
        · Revise with a critical eye. Look for racist phrases and words that label cultures negatively.
        · Seek feedback and receive it with an open mind primed for learning. Because writing is personal, you may

            easily feel offended or dismissive. However, feedback, especially from people whose perspective differs
            from yours, can help you grow in anti-racist knowledge.
        · Consider rhetoric and presentation. Aim to make your writing understandable, straightforward, and
            accessible. Use a glossary or footnotes to explain complex terms or ideas.
        · Avoid casual phrases that suggest people with disabilities or from other cultures are victims and avoid
            euphemisms that refer to cultures to which you do not belong. Similarly, avoid using mental health issues
            in metaphors.
        · Think about your adjectives. Some groups or people prefer not to be described by an adjective. It is
            important to follow individual groups' preferences for being referred to in either person-first or identity-
            first language.
        · Avoid stereotyping; write about an individual as an individual, not as if they represent an entire group or
            culture. You may also choose to use gender-neutral pronouns.
        · Be precise with meaning. Rather than describing something as "crazy," try a more precise term such as
           intense, uncontrolled, or foolish to give a more accurate description.
        · Impact overrules intent. The impact of your language on your reader is more important than your good
            intentions. When you learn better, do better.

     Exploring the Issues

      The following key terms and characteristics provide a better understand of anti-racist and inclusive writing:

        · Ally: a person who identifies as a supporter of marginalized groups and who advocates for them
        · Anti-racist: adhering to a set of beliefs and actions that oppose racism and promote inclusion and equality

            of marginalized groups

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                          2.4 · Annotated Sample Reading from The Souls of Black Folk by W. E. B. Du Bois 45

  · Critical race theory: the idea that racism is ingrained in the institutions and systems of American society
  · Cultural appropriation: taking the creative or artistic forms of a different culture and using them as one's

      own, particularly in a way that is disrespectful of the original context
  · Culture: the shared beliefs, values, and assumptions of a group of people
  · Emotional tax: the invisible mental stress taken on by people of marginalized backgrounds in an attempt

      to feel included, respected, and safe
  · Ethnocentrism: the idea that one's own culture is inherently better than other cultures
  · Intersectionality: the intertwining of different aspects of social identities, including gender, race, culture,

      ethnicity, social class, religion, and sexual orientation, that results in unique experiences and
      opportunities
  · Microaggression: behavior or speech that subtly or indirectly expresses prejudice based on race, gender,
      ability, age, or other aspects of identity, often but not always without an individual's conscious intention
      (For example, the drill team director instructs all members to wear their hair straight for competition.)
  · Neurodiversity: the idea that humans have a range of differences in neurological functioning that should
      be respected
  · Unconscious bias: any implicit, unfair preferences that people hold without being aware of them

2.4 Annotated Sample Reading from The Souls of Black Folk by W. E. B. Du
Bois

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Articulate how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
  · Analyze relationships between ideas and patterns of organization.
  · Analyze how W. E. B. Du Bois uses language, identity, and culture to shape his writing.

Introduction

               FIGURE 2.5 W. E. B. Du Bois (credit: "Du Bois, W. E. B.." Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
W. E. B. Du Bois (1868-1963) was an American historian and sociologist who graduated from Fisk University in
46 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

1888 and Harvard University in 1895. Du Bois deeply influenced the civil rights movement in the United States
and is widely regarded as among the most important Black protest leaders and activists of the first half of the
20th century. He helped found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and
his essay collection The Souls of Black Folk (1903) is considered seminal American literature.

public domainDtu Bois conducted sociological investigations of Black life in America, specifically the disenfranchisement of

Black Americans and the pervasive nature of racism, including how it can influence how people of color see

themselves. Du Bois dedicated years of his life to sociological studies of Black people in America, at first

applying social science in his quest for racial and social justice. However, he eventually came to believe that the

only path to progress was through protest. In his written works, particularly The Souls of Black Folk, Du Bois

discusses the dual nature of living as a Black person in America and feeling unable to be both a "Negro" and an

American at once. In the excerpt below, Du Bois explains his famed theories of the color line, the veil, and

double consciousness.                                                    end public domain t

Du Bois's work was a direct result of the world in which he lived and the one from which previous generations
came--one that highlighted the complex issues of race and conflict in America. He wrote both for Black and
White audiences, professing that his message was for all and affected the very heart of American democracy.
Learning about the struggles of Black people in 19th- and early 20th-century America is still important today,
and even a century later, Du Bois's words can help all people understand the complex contextual issues that
affect race relations. Understanding these challenges encourages tolerance, acceptance, and connections
between cultures.

             LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

    Between Me and the World

penudblpicuBdbeolitmcwdaeoienmntamine tand the other world there is ever an unasked question: unasked by some through feelings of delicacy;
        by others through the difficulty of rightly framing it. All, nevertheless, flutter round it. They approach me in a half-
        hesitant sort of way, eye me curiously or compassionately, and then, instead of saying directly, How does it feel to
        be a problem? they say, I know an excellent colored man in my town; or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not
        these Southern outrages make your blood boil? At these I smile, or am interested, or reduce the boiling to a
        simmer, as the occasion may require. To the real question, How does it feel to be a problem? I answer seldom a
        word.

     TanhneoCtaotlor Line. Du Bois previously introduced the "color line," the divide between races, in his "Forethought." This
     line is sometimes invisible, but at other times, it is a physical line. The example of White people wondering what it
     feels like to be "a problem" demonstrates the invisible color line separating Black and White citizens into two
     separate communities.end annotat

     Aanundoietantce. Du Bois probably is writing with a White audience in mind, as Black readers likely understand the ideas
     he proposes. He uses academic language, which may be his authentic voice as an academic and a writer, but he also
     seeks to reach his intended audience.end annotat

            And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,--peculiar even for one who has never been anything else,
            save perhaps in babyhood and in Europe. It is in the early days of rollicking boyhood that the revelation first
            bursts upon one, all in a day, as it were. I remember well when the shadow swept across me. I was a little thing,
            away up in the hills of New England, where the dark Housatonic winds between Hoosac and Taghkanic to the
            sea. In a wee wooden schoolhouse, something put it into the boys' and girls' heads to buy gorgeous visiting-
            cards--ten cents a package--and exchange. The exchange was merry, till one girl, a tall newcomer, refused my
            card,--refused it peremptorily, with a glance. Then it dawned upon me with a certain suddenness that I was
            different from the others; or like, mayhap, in heart and life and longing, but shut out from their world by a vast
            veil.

Access for free at openstax.org.
2.4 · Annotated Sample Reading from The Souls of Black Folk by W. E. B. Du Bois 47

                 TanhneoVtaetil. Du Bois's anecdote about the girl refusing his card introduces his idea of the "veil," a symbol he uses               end annot
                 throughout the text to demonstrate the color line. The veil represents the different worlds that Black and White
                 people must inhabit. Though invisible, the veil shuts Du Bois out of this girl's world.end annotat

                        I had thereafter no desire to tear down that veil, to creep through; I held all beyond it in common contempt, and
public domain t lived above it in a region of blue sky and great wandering shadows. That sky was bluest when I could beat my

                        mates at examination-time, or beat them at a foot-race, or even beat their stringy heads. Alas, with the years all
                        this fine contempt began to fade; for the words I longed for, and all their dazzling opportunities, were theirs, not
                        mine. But they should not keep these prizes, I said; some, all, I would wrest from them. Just how I would do it I
                        could never decide: by reading law, by healing the sick, by telling the wonderful tales that swam in my
                        head,--some way. With other black boys the strife was not so fiercely sunny: their youetnhdsphurubnlikc idnotomtaaisntet less
                        sycophancy, or into silent hatred of the pale world aboutetnhdempuabnldicmdoomckainingtdistrust of everything white; or
                        wasted itself in a bitter cry, Why did God make me an outcast and a stranger in mine own house? The shades of
                        the prison-house closed round about us all: walls strait and stubborn to the whitest, but relentlessly narrow,
                        tall, and unscalable to sons of night who must plod darkly on in resignation, or beat unavailing palms against
                        the stone, or steadily, half hopelessly, watch the streak of blue above.

                                                                                             end public domain t
                 Panoninottaotf View and Voice. Du Bois uses the first-person point of view to relate his lived experiences. He writes in a
                 voice that invites readers to picture him speaking, asking rhetorical questions.end annotat

                 VanivniodtaLtanguage. Du Bois uses vivid language to emphasize the bitterness created by the treatment of Black
                 children. The image of the "prison-house" walls closing in shows the inability to escape the veil that society placed
                 between White and Black children. Du Bois emphasizes the impact of this separation in the choice that Black
                 children must make: accept that they will never have the opportunities enjoyed by White children or hopelessly try
                 to achieve them.end annotat

                        After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh
                        son, born with a veil, and gifted with second-sight in this American world,--a world which yields him no true
                        self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the revelation of the other world. It is a peculiar
                        sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one's self through the eyes of others, of
                        measuring one's soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feels his
                        twoness,--an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one
                        dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.

                 DanonuobtlaetConsciousness. Du Bois expands the image of the veil separating the worlds of Black and White people to
                 include the idea of "double-consciousness": that Black people see themselves through the eyes of White people.
                 Racist ideation is inescapable, and Black people end up viewing their own culture negatively.end annotat

                 Canonnofltiactt. These ideas of double consciousness and the veil leave Black Americans at war with themselves. Du Bois
                 uses the metaphor of a measuring tape meant for one world but used to measure another and the warring idea of
                 "twoness."

                        The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife,--this longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to
                        merge his double self into a better and truer self. In this merging he wishes neither of the older selves to be
                        lost. He would not Africanize America, for America has too much to teach the world and Africa. He would not
                        bleach his Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a message for the
                        world. He simply wishes to make it possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being
                        cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face.

                 Canunltoutraet and Self. Du Bois explores the concept of self through the lens of Africanism and Americanism. He
                 recognizes that the "Negro soul" has an important place in the world. Yet he feels that holding on to his Black roots
                 means that the world sees him as un-American and leaves him without opportunity.end annotat
48 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

public domain t  This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the kingdom of culture, to escape both death and
                 isolation, to husband and use his best powers and his latent genius. These powers of body and mind have in the
                 past been strangely wasted, dispersed, or forgotten. The shadow of a mighty Negro past flits through the tale of
                 Ethiopia the Shadowy and of Egypt the Sphinx. Through history, the powers of single black men flash here and
                 there like falling stars, and die sometimes before the world has rightly gauged their brightness. Here in
                 America, in the few days since Emancipation, the black man's turning hither and thither in hesitant and doubtful
                 striving has often made his very strength to lose effectiveness, to seem like absence of power, like weakness.
                 And yet it is not weakness,--it is the contradiction of double aims.

Sanimnoiltea.tThe comparison of Black men to falling stars, never allowed to reveal the possibilities of their success,
demonstrates the difficulties they face.end annotat

                                          end public domain t

Discussion Questions

1. What might have been the impact of Du Bois's use of academic language on his audience?

2. How does Du Bois use his personal experience to relate the experiences of a broader culture?

3. What impact do the images of shadows and darkness have on Du Bois's message?

4. In this section of the text, Du Bois focuses on internalization of race. How does this concept illustrate the
    impact of racism on society?

Assumptions and Stereotypes

Du Bois experiences the veil between worlds as a Black American because of assumptions and stereotypes.
Unfortunately, such assumptions and stereotypes still exist in America today. In Chapter 2, you have begun to
learn about the impact of language on culture and about how developing anti-racist and inclusive ideas is an
important part of the composition process.

2.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically about How Identity Is Constructed
Through Writing

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the importance of communication in various cultural, language, and rhetorical situations.
  · Implement a variety of drafting strategies to demonstrate the connection between language and social justice.
  · Apply the composition processes and tools as a means to discover and reconsider ideas.
  · Participate in the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
  · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

Now it's your turn to join this cultural conversation. As you write, keep your audience in mind as well as the
principles of inclusivity and anti-racism that you have learned about. Consider how you can share your
personal experiences, ideas, and beliefs in a way that is inclusive of all and shows sensitivity to the culture of
your readers.

Summary of Assignment: Cultural Artifact

Choose an artifact that symbolizes something about a culture to which you belong. This might be a physical
object that you have, or it may be a metaphorical object, such as Du Bois's color line or veil, that represents
something larger about your culture. Write approximately 350-700 words describing it, using sensory detail
and explaining its meaning both to you personally and within your culture. To begin your thinking, view this
TEDx Talk (https://openstax.org/r/thistedxtalk) for a discussion of cultural artifacts and narrative led by artist
David Bailey.

Another Lens 1. Choose a space that is important to a cultural community to which you belong. While visiting

Access for free at openstax.org.
   2.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically about How Identity Is Constructed Through Writing 49

   this space, conduct an hour-long observation. Respond in writing to these items: Describe the space in detail.

   What do you see permanently affixed in the space? What activity is going on? How is the space currently used?

   What is the atmosphere? How are you feeling while conducting your observation? Then, do some brief

   research on the space (using the Internet, the library, or campus archives), and answer these questions: What

s  is the history of the space? When was it established, and under what circumstances? How has this space been

   used in the past? What is your response or reaction to this history? Then write a passage in which you

   highlight a unique feature of the space and your cultural relationship to it.

   Another Lens 2. Considering Du Bois's theory of double consciousness, explore the ways in which you may
   experience competing identities or competing cultures in your own life. What experiences have you had or
   witnessed where language clashed with or supported your identity or culture? What happeneedn?dHsow did
   others react? How did you react? What insight does your experience offer on this discussion of rhetoric and the
   power of language to define, shape, and change or give birth to identity or culture?

         Quick Launch: Joining the Dialogue

   You may choose to use journaling to develop your language use and voice. Journaling, or keeping a written
   record of your thoughts and ideas, can clarify your thoughts and emotions, help you better understand your
   values, and increase your creativity. The following two journaling techniques should help you get started.

   Character Sketch and Captured Moment

   Because your cultural artifact may be tied to a person, a character sketch might help you think about its
   significance. A character sketch is a brief description of a real or fictional person--in this case, likely someone
   you know or even yourself. In it, you describe the character's personality, physical traits, habits, history,
   relationships, and ties to the cultural artifact. You may include research about the character to introduce
   readers to them. Use the following format if you need more guidance:

   Character Sketch

     · Introduction
     Quotation
     Anecdote about the character
     Most important traits

     · Supporting Details
     Physical appearance
     Actions
     Thoughts
     Language
     Ties to cultural artifact

   A character sketch of your grandmother might read as follows.

         My first memory of Nonna materializes in the kitchen, where we are baking Swedish cookies together. She
         carefully shows me how to measure ingredients, stirring with her hand over mine in her deep "cookie-making"
         bowl. Nonna is a slight woman with a big heart full of kindness. She teaches me many skills, both in and out of
         the kitchen, that I still use today. Some have proven to be life lessons. She never met a stranger she didn't like
         and often said it takes more effort to be unkind than kind. Because of Nonna, the Swedish cookie has become a
         metaphor for my life. The ingredients of one's life make up an identity, and the combination is always delicious.

   Another journaling technique is to record a captured moment through the examination of a cultural artifact.
   This exercise lets you use an artifact as a means to look at an event in your life and create a written piece that
   captures its importance, emotion, or meaning. Select an artifact and an experience. Think about what they
   mean to you. What do you remember, and why? Then go deeper. Analyze the long-term meaning of it in your
50 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

      life. Try to recreate the artifact and then the experience in your mind, and relive the sensations you
      experienced in the moment.
      Choose the Artifact
      Begin your assignment by choosing your artifact. You may take inspiration from W. E. B. Du Bois's image of the
      veil in the annotated sample in the previous section. Or, going back to the beginning of this chapter and
      Sequoyah's syllabary, you may choose to take inspiration from something linguistic, an expression or a way of
      talking that is associated with your culture. You may choose an artifact that, like the veil, has metaphorical
      significance. Or you may choose a more tangible artifact, such as a religious symbol, a traditional clothing
      item, or any number of objects related to your chosen culture.
      Once you have chosen your artifact, do a prewriting exercise called a freewrite. In this activity, set a time limit
      (say, 10 minutes), and write whatever comes to mind about your object within that time. Don't worry about
      organization, flow, grammar, punctuation, or whether your writing is "good"; just write. This exercise not only
      gets your creative juices flowing but also allows you to put pen to paper and opens your mind to what may be
      subconscious thoughts about the object as it relates to culture.
      Next, it is time to take a more refined approach to planning your writing. Think back to The Digital World:
      Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically, which addresses the different purposes for writing.
      To help shape your writing use a separate sheet of paper to answer the questions in Table 2.1.

                      Who is my audience?

                      What is my purpose for writing?

                      What organizational strategies will I use?

                      How will I introduce my artifact?

                      How will I describe my artifact using sensory language?

                      Will I share personal anecdotes, examples, or ideas?

                      How will I add cultural context to my writing to help my audience understand my culture?

                      What transitions will I use?

                      How will I end my writing?

                    TABLE 2.1 Planning questions

          Drafting: Critical Context

      In your writing, try to incorporate and respond to the current cultural climate. Context is information that
      helps readers understand the cultural factors that affect your ideas, actions, and thoughts. Context helps build
      the relationship between you as a writer and your audience, providing clarity and meaning. For example, Du
      Bois's veil means very little until readers understand the deep racial divide that existed during his lifetime,
      including Jim Crow laws, segregation, and violent crimes committed against his fellow Black Americans.
      Cultural Context
      Sharing cultural context helps your readers understand elements of culture they may be unfamiliar with.
      Consider what background information you need to provide, especially information that is integral to readers'
      understanding of the traditions, beliefs, and actions that relate to your artifact. Essentially, you will need to
      close the gap between your own culture and that of your readers.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                          2.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically about How Identity Is Constructed Through Writing 51

Armed with your freewrite and your answers to the questions as a starting place, create your first draft. As you
write, embed cultural context and explain the significance of your artifact in a way that is relatable and
meaningful to your audience. Like Du Bois, try to use figurative language, such as similes or personification, in
your description, and include the relevant sensory elements of the artifact: its appearance, taste, smell, sound,
and feel. See Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read for definitions and examples of some figurative
language, or consult this site (https://openstax.org/r/figurativelanguage). Consider using a graphic organizer
like Figure 2.6 as a guide. Add more outer circles if needed, and be mindful of writing in a way that it is
accessible and inclusive.

             FIGURE 2.6 Idea web (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Remember that your first draft is just a starting point. The most important thing is to get your ideas on paper.
This draft can be considered a test of sorts--one that determines what should and should not appear in the
final paper.
Consider the following sensory description of Broadway in New York, written by British novelist Charles
Dickens (1812-1870) in his book American Notes for General Circulation (1842). What does Dickens, as a
British observer, note about this street in America? How does he use language to convey what he sees, hears,
and smells? In what ways does he use language to convey a British viewpoint?
52 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

public domain t  Warm weather! The sun strikes upon our heads at this open window, as though its rays were concentrated
                 through a burning-glass; but the day is in its zenith, and the season an unusual one. Was there ever such a
                 sunny street as this Broadway! The pavement stones are polished with the tread of feet until they shine again;
                 the red bricks of the houses might be yet in the dry, hot kilns; and the roofs of those omnibuses look as though,
                 if water were poured on them, they would hiss and smoke, and smell like half-quenched fires. No stint of
                 omnibuses here! Half-a-dozen have gone by within as many minutes. Plenty of hackney cabs and coaches too;
                 gigs, phaetons, large-wheeled tilburies, and private carriages--rather of a clumsy make, and not very different
                 from the public vehicles, but built for the heavy roads beyond the city pavement. . . . [C]oachmen . . . in straw
                 hats, black hats, white hats, glazed caps, fur caps; in coats of drab, black, brown, green, blue, nankeen, striped
                 jean and linen; and there, in that one instance (look while it passes, or it will be too late), in suits of livery. Some
                 southern republican that, who puts his blacks in uniform, and swells with Sultan pomp and power. Yonder,
                 where that phaeton with the well-clipped pair of grays has stopped--standing at their heads now--is a Yorkshire
                 groom, who has not been very long in these parts, and looks sorrowfully round for a companion pair of top-
                 boots, which he may traverse the city half a year without meeting. Heaven save the ladies, how they dress! We
                 have seen more colours in these ten minutes, than we should have seen elsewhere, in as many days. What
                 various parasols! what rainbow silks and satins! what pinking of thin stockings, and pinching of thin shoes, and
                 fluttering of ribbons and silk tassels, and display of rich cloaks with gaudy hoods and linings! The young
                 gentlemen are fond, you see, of turning down their shirt-collars and cultivating their whiskers, especially under
                 the chin; but they cannot approach the ladies in their dress or bearing, being, to say the truth, humanity of quite
                 another sort. Byrons of the desk and counter, pass on, and let us see what kind of men those are behind ye:
                 those two labourers in holiday clothes, of whom one carries in his hand a crumpled scrap of paper from which
                 he tries to spell out a hard name, while the other looks about for it on all the doors and windows.

Now, how might Dickens go on to provide context and make connections between British and American
cultures so that readers understand both more keenly? Although American Notes is generally critical of the
United States, this description creates a positive mood, as if Dickens recognizes something of home during his
visit to Broadway--a cultural artifact. This recognition suggests that moments oef nudnepxupbelicctdedomjoayincat n create
connections between cultures.

                 Peer Review:

One of the most helpful parts of the writing process can be soliciting input from a peer reviewer. This input will
be particularly helpful for this assignment if the peer reviewer is not a member of the culture you are writing
about. An outsider's view will help you determine whether you have included appropriate cultural context.
Peer reviewers can use the following sentence starters to provide feedback.

· One piece of your writing I found meaningful was ________.
· Something new I learned about your culture is ________; you explained this well by ________.
· Something I was confused by was ________; I don't understand this because ________.
· A major point that I think needs more detail or explanation is ________.
· In my opinion, the purpose of your paper is ________.
· To me, it seems that your audience is ________.
· I would describe the voice of your piece as ________.
· I think you could better build cultural context by ________.

                 Revising:

Writing is a recursive process; you will push forward, step back, and repeat steps multiple times as your ideas
develop and change. As you reread, you may want to add, delete, reorder, or otherwise change your draft. This
response is natural. You may need to return to the brainstorming process to mine for new ideas or
organizational principles.

As you reread and prepare for revisions, focus on the voice you have used. If a friend were to read your draft,

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                               2.6 · Evaluation: Antiracism and Inclusivity 53

could they "hear" you in it? If not, work on revising to create a more natural cadence and tone. Another area of
focus should be to explain cultural context and build cultural bridges. Use your peer reviewer's feedback to
develop a piece that will be meaningful to your audience.

While describing your artifact is likely a deeply personal endeavor, an important part of writing is to consider
your audience. Composition offers a unique opportunity to build and share cultural understanding. One way to
achieve this goal is by using anti-racist and inclusive language. Try to view your composition from outside of
your own experience.

  · Is any language or are any ideas harmful or offensive to other cultures?
  · Are you using the language of preference for a specified group?
  · Can people of various abilities read and understand your writing?

One overarching strategy you can use for anti-racist revision is to constantly question commonly used words
and phrases. For example, the word Eskimo is a European term used to describe people living in the Arctic
without regard for differentiation. The term was later used to describe a popular frozen treat known as an
Eskimo pie. Today, the term is considered offensive to Inuit communities--Indigenous people living in Alaska,
Canada, and Greenland. You can also make yourself aware of the evolving preferences for language use. For
example, the term Negro gave way to African American, which is now giving way to the term Black. Finally,
consider the use of the word see, for example, to mean "to understand": Do you see what I mean? Is the use of
see in this way inclusive of a visually impaired person who may be reading your text? To start, determine one
or two places to include anti-racist or inclusive language or ideas in your writing, and build those into your
piece.

2.6 Evaluation: Antiracism and Inclusivity

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply or challenge measurement outcomes for anti-racist and inclusive language.
  · Compare your written work with evaluation criteria.

Learning to be both anti-racist and inclusive in your writing will help you share your culture with others and
build bridges with cultures that differ from yours. As a writer, you have a unique opportunity to share your
understandings, beliefs, and ideas, but if you do so in a way that limits understanding, you will reach only
those who already agree with you or have similar experiences.

Anti-racist writing actively identifies and opposes racism. Its goal is to directly challenge racist ideas, methods,
and behaviors and to replace them with anti-racist ones. Unfortunately, the history of academic writing often
has been entrenched in racism at institutional and structural levels. Like Du Bois's "double-consciousness,"
students from other cultures have been penalized unfairly for their adherence to cultural traditions. American
culture has made some strides, yet it isn't enough to be "not racist"--it must do better by being actively anti-
racist. One way to do this is to work to understand, use, and appreciate cultural forms, voices, and attitudes
and to share beliefs that communicate identity and issues within cultures.

Inclusive writing encourages writers to think about what readers need and how they interact with the content.
Inclusive writing represents culture authentically, helping readers find common threads in the writer's words,
though they may not share a particular culture.

Ask a peer to use the following rubric to evaluate your final draft. The rubric is designed to help you think
about your writing in anti-racist and inclusive terms.
54 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

Rubric

Score         Critical Language            Clarity and Coherence                     Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

5             The text works to            The writer presents an artifact and       The paper consistently
Skillful      communicate cultural         describes it clearly with sensory detail  exhibits strong cultural
              ideas using inclusive        and figurative language. The              awareness in the author's
              language and shows           connection to culture is evident and      rhetorical choices. It uses
              ample evidence of the        successfully builds cultural context.     anti-racist and inclusive
              writer's intent to           The writer's ideas are well organized     language to appeal to
              consciously meet or          and linked with appropriate               readers from a variety of
              challenge conventional       transitions.                              cultural backgrounds.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

4             The text works to            The writer presents an artifact and       The paper exhibits some
Accomplished  communicate cultural         describes it with some sensory detail     cultural awareness in the
              ideas using some             and figurative language. The              author's rhetorical
              inclusive language and       connection to culture is evident and      choices. It uses mostly
              shows some evidence of       builds cultural context. The writer's     anti-racist and inclusive
              the writer's intent to       ideas are organized and linked with       language to appeal to
              consciously meet or          some transitions.                         readers from a variety of
              challenge conventional                                                 cultural backgrounds.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

3             The text tries to            The writer presents an artifact with      The paper exhibits some,
Capable       communicate cultural         some description but uses little or no    but not enough, cultural
              ideas using limited          figurative language. The connection to    awareness in the author's
              inclusive language and       culture and cultural context may          rhetorical choices. It uses
              shows limited evidence of    sometimes be weak. Some, but not all,     some anti-racist and
              the writer's intent to meet  of the writer's ideas are presented       inclusive language but
              or challenge conventional    clearly; the writing is choppy at times   needs work to appeal to
              expectations in              and needs more, or more appropriate,      readers from a variety of
              rhetorically effective       transitions.                              cultural backgrounds.
              ways.

TABLE 2.2

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                  2.7 · Spotlight on ... Variations of English 55

       Score  Critical Language            Clarity and Coherence                       Rhetorical Choices
 2                Awareness
 Developing                                                                       The paper exhibits weak
              The text attempts to         The writer presents an artifact with   cultural awareness in the
 1            communicate cultural         little connection to culture and only  author's rhetorical
 Beginning    ideas using emerging         minimally develops cultural context.   choices. It uses minimal
              inclusive language and       The description is basic, lacking      anti-racist and inclusive
TABLE 2.2     shows emerging evidence      sensory details and figurative         language and does not
              of the writer's intent to    language. The writer has used few      appeal to readers from a
              meet or challenge            transitions or has used them           variety of cultural
              conventional expectations    incorrectly.                           backgrounds.
              in rhetorically effective
              ways.                                                               The paper does not exhibit
                                                                                  cultural awareness in the
              The text begins to           The writer does not describe an        author's rhetorical
              communicate cultural         artifact in any detail and makes no    choices. It does not use
              ideas but uses little to no  mention of cultural connection or      anti-racist or inclusive
              inclusive language and       cultural context. The ideas are        language and does not
              shows little to no           disconnected, and no transitions are   appeal to readers from a
              evidence of the writer's     used.                                  variety of cultural
              intent to meet or                                                   backgrounds.
              challenge conventional
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

2.7 Spotlight on ... Variations of English

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify situations and contexts calling for purposeful shifts in voice, diction, tone, level of formality, and
      structure.

  · Identify linguistic structures, including American English dialects.
  · Write a description in an authentic voice.

English and Its Dialects

Although English is the primary language of the United States, distinctive dialects, or forms of language
specific to a particular region or social group, vary according to location, culture, ethnicity, socioeconomic
status, and other factors. American dialects may have their own grammar, vocabulary, syntax, pronunciation,
and common expressions. Many, mainly regional, differences in pronunciation are often marked by rhotic and
non-rhotic accents. Speakers with rhotic accents pronounce the /r/ before consonants and at the end of a
word. Those with non-rhotic accents do not pronounce the /r/; for example, think of the Boston accent
pronunciation of park as pahk or the Coastal Southern (areas along the Gulf of Mexico) pronunciation of better
as bettuh.

While the American Midwest has what might be considered the closest variation to General American
English, the language spoken by most Americans, it has its own regional and cultural dialect variations. In
characteristic Midwest American English words such as cot and caught are pronounced as homophones. As
in rhotic dialects, /r/ sounds are pronounced, even in words that don't contain the letter r: wash, for example,
56 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

     becomes warsh. And /s/ may be added to words as a grammatical construction: Alls we need is more ice cream.

      Variations in pronunciation and dialect result from a host of factors. Dialects are formed when people are
      divided socially, geographically, or both. Despite the difficulties in categorizing such complex variations in
      language, most scholars agree that dialects can be classified on the basis of location and social groupings,
      despite the overlap between them. A regional dialect is a variation in language that occurs within a
      geographical region. A social dialect includes differences in speech associated with a social group or
      socioeconomic level.

      Among the most common--and most debated--language variations is African American Vernacular English
      (AAVE). AAVE, also referred to as Black English Vernacular or Ebonics, is a generalized term for a variety of
      dialects spoken by Black Americans. These dialects are influenced by American Southern dialects. With roots
      in the language patterns of people descended from enslaved Africans in the United States, AAVE has its own
      syntax, grammar, and tense system. Some common features include the absence of third-person singular and
      possessive pronouns and the use of double negatives.

     AAVE has distinct grammar conventions. The speaker or writer will often omit forms of the verb to be from a
      sentence, as in these examples:

     "What [omitted is] he talking about?"

     "She [omitted was] the one who took it."

      While General American English requires verb and tense agreement, AAVE features more variations. For
     example, in AAVE, the word been is often placed before a verb in order to convey a past event: for example, "He
      been married" rather than the General American English "He was married." This change in grammar can
      actually convey different meanings. In General American English, the sentence implies that the man is no
      longer married, whereas the sentence in AAVE indicates that the man is still married.

      This is by no means an inclusive list of AAVE conventions, as languages are constantly evolving.
      Understanding that language differences result from culture, identity, and geography and that you, as a writer,
      have the opportunity to express yourself using your social norms is an important first step in recognizing the
      role of culture in language.

      Although differences in pronunciation abound, English dialects are widely classified as "standard" or
      "nonstandard." Standard dialect follows specific rules for syntax, vocabulary, and grammar. This dialect is
      often perceived as more academic than nonstandard dialects and is used in formal situations. Other dialects,
      usually lacking such standardization and generally perceived as having less stature, are considered
      nonstandard dialects. For years, academic scholars and teachers have subscribed to the idea that so-called
      standard English should be the default dialect used in schools and academic writing. This dialect is spoken by
      newscasters, television news anchors, and a large percentage of middle-class Americans, especially those with
      formal educations.

      And yet you, like others, have your own patterns of speech based largely on your culture, family, and region.
      Code-switching, or alternating between two or more languages or language forms, was taught explicitly in
      schools with the intent that students learn to speak and write standard English for certain academic and
      professional situations. However, newer research in best practices is revealing that allowing students to learn
      in and use their authentic voices, including nonstandard dialects, is a more equitable practice that is both
      culturally responsible and beneficial to learning.

     "Students' Right to Their Own Language"

      The Conference on College Composition and Communication (CCCC) is the world's largest professional
      organization committed to writing research, theory, and teaching. It publishes the quarterly journal College
      Composition and Communication and holds an annual convention. The CCCC also publishes position
      statements on writing and the teaching of writing based on research, best practices of writing pedagogy, and

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                   2.7 · Spotlight on ... Variations of English 57

language practices. Recent research completed by the CCCC addresses the use of a wide variety of linguistic
expressions and choices, including various regional and cultural dialects.

In 1974, the Conference on College Composition and Communication adopted "Students' Right to Their Own
Language," a statement that affirmed students' rights to use "their own patterns and varieties of language--the
dialects of their nurture" or those that help them create their own identity. The statement recognizes that so-
called General American English is aligned with a dominant White majority and includes implicit bias against
students from other backgrounds. Finally, the statement reinforces the idea that a nation that praises and
encourages diversity, particularly in academic circles, should not only accept diversity in language and dialect
but also celebrate it. Doing so allows students to use the totality of their lived experiences, cultural language,
and ideas to create fuller meaning in their writing. Over the years, the statement has undergone revisions and
has been expanded to address students learning and writing in a second language.

This statement takes a step toward confronting the assumptions and hidden bias present in the educational
system and works toward creating more equitable, anti-racist teaching for students, particularly from Black
and other BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and people of color) backgrounds. The most recent updated and
reaffirmed statement (https://openstax.org/r/statementnewsrtol) stems from 2014.

Demand for Linguistic Justice

One position statement released by the CCCC in July 2020 was "This Ain't Another Statement! This Is a
DEMAND for Black Linguistic Justice!" Responding to the historical and sociopolitical context of today's world,
this statement coincided with #BlackLivesMatter, a movement to fight racism directed at the Black
community, often at the hands of police and vigilantes. The statement shifts the narrative to composition and
communication, asking how Black lives matter in language education, research, and scholarship.

The CCCC strongly promotes students' language rights based on their own cultural backgrounds, yet it
acknowledges that language rights have suffered from a similarly "inadequate response" as other social justice
movements. Specifically for Black students and writers, cultural traditions such as AAVE/Ebonics continue to
be devalued and diminished in line with the devaluation of Black lives. The demand upholds the organization's
earlier statement that Ebonics communicates Black traditions and social truths. The statement includes these
demands:

  · That teachers stop teaching only standard English as the communicative norm
  · That teachers stop teaching Black students to code-switch and instead teach about linguistic racism
  · That teachers teach "Black Linguistic Consciousness" and work to unravel anti-Black linguistic racism
  · That Black perspectives be included in the research and teaching of Black language

You can learn more about the impact of linguistic bias in education in this TEDx Talk (https://openstax.org/r/
thistedxtalk_QrTFJ5NlM1g).

Publication: Writing as Your Artifact

Try this short exercise to identify and practice writing in a dialect that directly reflects the culture your artifact
comes from. Write a short three- to five-paragraph story from the perspective of the artifact you chose for this
chapter's writing assignment. What might your artifact see, hear, feel, or experience in its everyday life?
Concentrate on using an authentic dialect, including vocabulary, grammatical conventions, and sentence
structure, when constructing your story. As you reread your writing, ensure that you can hear your authentic
voice in the text.

When all stories have been written, consider collaborating with your instructor to collect them in a class book
that includes illustrations of the artifacts and a short quotation from the point of view of each artifact, similar
to the format of the Trailblazer sections of this book.
58 2 · Language, Identity, and Culture: Exploring, Employing, Embracing

    2.8 Portfolio: Decolonizing Self

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Write a reflection of your composition process and how it affects your work.
        · Apply the composing processes as a means to discover and reconsider ideas.

      After each writing assignment in this course, you will reflect on and write about the composition process.
      Doing so makes you a more thoughtful writer as you think about the ideas, audience, purpose, and cultural
      considerations of your work.

     The Colonized Self

      The colonized lived experience is an important topic of academic discourse. When one refers to a situation as
      colonized, they mean that the ideas, customs, and culture of one group of people have been imposed onto the
      Indigenous people of a land. For example, colonization occurred when European explorers arrived in the
      Americas between the 16th and 18th centuries to inhabit land already populated by various Native American
      peoples with their own culture and customs. Many scholars and students are interested in exploring what it
      means to remove this foreign experience from the curriculum and to discontinue operating under the
      assumption that groups in power determine customs and culture.

      Such a process begins with an examination of individual identities and cultures. You have likely attended
      school in systems that privilege a mainstream culture over all others. The challenge is to figure out the identity
      of your authentic self, stripped of colonizing forces, the way Sequoyah, Cathy Park Hong, W. E. B. Du Bois, and
      others have tried to do. Essentially, two versions exist of the self: the colonized self that conforms to academic
      standards even when they do not align with personal cultural experiences and the decolonized self that
      challenges mainstream standards, especially when they do not include or make space for lived experiences. So
      what does the process of decolonizing look like?

     The Decolonized Self

      Throughout much of American history, education has focused on advancing the colonial purposes of
      assimilation. This practice can be harmful to everyone, especially to students identifying as BIPOC (Black,
      Indigenous, and people of color). While outright racism and exclusion are now frowned upon in academia,
      colonial racism and exclusion persist through more subtle means: systems of oppression, curricula, and
      institutional structures.

      As a student and writer, you likely have experienced the effects of colonization either to your benefit or your
      detriment. While it can be difficult to break through entrenched racism and exclusion, through the process of
      decolonization you can form your identity and better understand the identities of people from other cultures.

      The word decolonization refers to the process of a nation or territory breaking free from an oppressive colonial
      power that controls it. In essence, decolonization is a statement of independence. When used in cultural terms,
     decolonization refers to challenging and changing the individual and collective consciousness rooted in
      racism and oppression. Essentially, then, it means undoing colonial practices that have influenced education
      in the past and continue to do so today. You can learn more about decolonizing education in this TEDx Talk
      (https://openstax.org/r/thistedxtalk_zeKHOTDwZxU).

      As you work to develop your decolonized self, you will likely spend time on introspection, examining
      unconscious biases and how they affect your perspective on your culture and other cultures. Learning to be
      anti-racist and inclusive is a lifelong process, one that can be developed in part through the writing process.
      Continual questioning and reflection is the most important part of decolonization.

     Reflection Prompt

      In your portfolio for this chapter, imagine that other students in colleges and universities across the country

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                               2.8 · Portfolio: Decolonizing Self 59

are talking about some of these same cultural issues. Think of it as one big conversation. American
philosopher and rhetorician Kenneth Burke (1897-1993) created the metaphor of a parlor where academics
across time and space have gathered to help you imagine what academic conversations must be like. Burke
describes an academic conversation as "unending": "Others . . . are engaged in a heated discussion. . . . You
listen for a while . . . then you put in your oar" (Burke 110). In other words, as you write, you are adding to a
timeless conversation among thinkers and authors. Your words help define cultural understanding of the
future. (More about this "conversation" appears in Glance at Genre: Introducing Research as Evidence.)

Consider Burke's concept of joining an unending conversation along with the intersections of your cultural
identities. Write a reflection in which you imagine what happens in the Burkean parlor of your own making
when you enter. How does the conversation change as a result of your presence? What parts of yourself
contribute to, or maybe even derail, the ongoing conversations? How does the parlor change after you leave?
Do you leave the parlor bubbling like warm, nourishing soup or in (figurative) flames?

[continued from previous conversation]

Former U.S. President Barack Obama: "The worst thing that colonialism did was to cloud our view of our
past."

Nigerian Author Chinua Achebe: "Until the lions have their own historians, the history of the hunt will always
glorify the hunter."

British Writer E. M. Forster: "And Englishmen like posing as gods."

American Professor J. M. Blaut: "Eurocentrism is quite simply the colonizer's model of the world."

American Theologian Catherine Keller: "Western dominology can with religious sanction identify anything
dark, profound, or fluid with a revolting chaos."

Senegalese Author Mariama Bâ: "The assimilationist dream of the colonist drew into its crucible our mode of
thought and way of life."

Antiguan American Author Jamaica Kinkaid: "What I see is the millions of people . . . made orphans: no
motherland . . . no . . . holy ground."

African American Author Ralph Ellison: "When I discover who I am, I'll be free."

YOU: ". . ."

[to be continued]
60 2 · Further Reading

Further Reading

To read more about the process of exploring language, identity, and culture, you may seek out the following
    authors and titles.

DiAngelo, Robin J. White Fragility: Why It's So Hard for White People to Talk about Racism. Beacon Press, 2018.
Hong, Cathy Park. Minor Feelings: An Asian American Reckoning. One World, 2020.
Jones, Saeed. How We Fight for Our Lives: A Memoir. Simon & Schuster, 2019.
Kynard, Carmen. Vernacular Insurrections: Race, Black Protest, and the New Century in Composition-

   Literacies Studies. State U of New York P, 2013.
Pollock, Mica, ed. Everyday Antiracism: Getting Real about Race in School. New Press, 2008.
Rabaka, Reiland. Africana Critical Theory: Reconstructing the Black Radical Tradition, from W. E. B. Du Bois

   and C. L. R. James to Frantz Fanon and Amilcar Cabral. Lexington Books, 2009.
Reynolds, Jason, and Ibram X. Kendi. Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You. Little, Brown, 2020.

Works Cited

Burke, Kenneth. The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in Symbolic Action. 3rd ed., U of California P, 1973.
"Cathy Park Hong." Poets.org, Academy of American Poets, poets.org/poet/cathy-park-hong.
"Colonialism Quotes." Goodreads, www.goodreads.com/quotes/tag/colonialism?page=2.
Dickens, Charles. American Notes for General Circulation. 1842. Project Gutenberg, 18 Feb. 2013,

    www.gutenberg.org/files/675/675-h/675-h.htm.
Du Bois, W. E. B. The Souls of Black Folk. 1903. Project Gutenberg, Jan. 1996, www.gutenberg.org/files/408/

    408-h/408-h.htm.
Hall, Stuart. "Cultural Identity and Cinematic Representation." Framework: The Journal of Cinema and Media,

   no. 36, 1989, pp. 68-81. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/44111666.
Hong, Cathy Park. Minor Feelings: An Asian American Reckoning. One World, 2020.
Hong, Cathy Park. "Why This Wave of Anti-Asian Racism Feels Different." Interview by Morgan Ome. The

   Atlantic, 17 Mar. 2021, www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/03/cathy-park-hong-anti-asian-racism/
    618310/.
"How Sequoyah, Who Did Not Read or Write, Created a Written Language for the Cherokee Nation from
   Scratch." American Masters, WNET, 24 Nov. 2020, www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/blog/how-
    sequoyah-who-did-not-read-or-write-created-a-written-language-for-the-cherokee-nation-from-scratch/.
"Identity Quotes." Goodreads, www.goodreads.com/quotes/tag/identity.
Mufwene, Salikoko Sangol."African American English." Encyclopædia Britannica, 17 Dec. 2004,
    www.britannica.com/topic/African-American-English.
Obama, Michelle. Becoming. Crown, 2018.
"Postcolonialism Quotes." Goodreads, www.goodreads.com/quotes/tag/postcolonialism.
Rudwick, Elliott. "W. E. B. Du Bois." Encyclopædia Britannica, 23 Feb. 2021, www.britannica.com/biography/W-
    E-B-Du-Bois.
"Sequoyah." Encyclopædia Britannica, 28 July 2021, www.britannica.com/biography/Sequoyah.
"Sequoyah and the Creation of the Cherokee Syllabary." National Geographic, 13 Nov. 2019.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                2 · Works Cited 61

    www.nationalgeographic.org/article/sequoyah-and-creation-cherokee-syllabary/.

Sidnell, Jack. "African American Vernacular English (Ebonics)." Language Varieties, Charlene Junko Sato
    Center for Pidgin, Creole, and Dialect Studies, www.hawaii.edu/satocenter/langnet/definitions/aave.html.

"Statement on Anti-racism to Support Teaching and Learning." NCTE, 11 July 2018, ncte.org/statement/
    antiracisminteaching/.

"Students' Right to Their Own Language (with Bibliography)." Conference on College Composition and
   Communication, National Council of Teachers of English, 16 June 2018, cccc.ncte.org/cccc/resources/
    positions/srtolsummary.

Tang, Terry. "As Virus-Era Attacks on Asians Rise, Past Victims Look Back." Associated Press News, 2 Mar.
    2021, apnews.com/article/victims-anti-asian-attacks-reflect-0632beaa1726f17dcabb672c224ad86a.

Tegegne, Wondimu. "The Use of Dialects in Education and Its Impacts on Students' Learning and
   Achievements." Education Journal, vol. 4, no. 5, Sept. 2015, pp. 263-269,
    article.sciencepublishinggroup.com/html/10.11648.j.edu.20150405.22.html.

"This Ain't Another Statement! This Is a DEMAND for Black Linguistic Justice!" Conference on College
   Composition & Communication, National Council of Teachers of English, July 2020, cccc.ncte.org/cccc/
    demand-for-black-linguistic-justice.

Young, Vershawn Ashanti. "`Nah, We Straight': An Argument against Code Switching." JAC, vol. 29, no. 1/2,
   2009, pp. 49-76. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/20866886.

Zaharna, R. S. "Rhetorical Ethnocentricism: Understanding the Rhetorical Landscape of Arab-American
   Relations." R.S. Zaharna, American U, fs2.american.edu/zaharna/www/rhetoric.htm.
62 2 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Bridging Gaps Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, 3

FIGURE 3.1 Five Black officers of the Women's League in Newport, Rhode Island, c. 1899. Mary Dickerson
(1830-1914) and her husband, Silas, moved to Newport, Rhode Island, around 1865. Empowered by literacy, Mary
had founded a dressmaking business by 1872, and she helped found the New England Federation of Colored
Women's Clubs (later renamed the Northeastern Federation), which is still active, in 1896 and the Rhode Island
Union of Colored Women's Clubs in 1903. The women pictured, among others, are credited with "an inherited
interest in social questions and a . . . spirit and pride" that contributed to social equality and justice, including the
empowerment of women through the right to vote. For more information, read Mary Dickerson`s obituary
(https://openstax.org/r/obituary). (credit: "Five female Negro officers of Women's League, Newport, R.I." by Library
of Congress Prints and Photographs Division, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

3.1 Identity and Expression
3.2 Literacy Narrative Trailblazer: Tara Westover
3.3 Glance at Genre: The Literacy Narrative
3.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass
3.5 Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy
3.6 Editing Focus: Sentence Structure
3.7 Evaluation: Self-Evaluating
3.8 Spotlight on ... The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN)
3.9 Portfolio: A Literacy Artifact
64 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

      INTRODUCTION "Literacy is now understood as a means of . . . communication in an increasingly digital, text-
      mediated, information-rich, and fast-changing world," according to UNESCO. The literacy narrative is a genre
      that provides an account of an individual or a member of a community and their experience with learning.
     Combining the broad definition of literacy with the term narrative, or storytelling, produces the literacy
      narrative: a story that provides an account of a learning experience. As you begin to reflect on what it means to
      learn, particularly in a college setting, this chapter will guide you through an exploration of the various
      features of the literacy narrative genre to prepare you to write one of your own.
      One path to becoming familiar with the language of higher institutional learning, or the academy, is what
     professors like to call entering the academic discourse community. This phrase means that you begin to reflect
      on the experiences that have laid the path for your admission to this new community. In the traditional sense,
      when talking about literacy, people think of reading and writing. However, in the modern multimedia and
     kinesthetic world, the definition of literacy has been expanded to mean "competence in communication,"
      including a multitude of methods, modes, and texts. This emerging definition means that literacy includes the
      abilities to compose and interpret messages using images, visual arrangements, spoken words, and other
      modes beyond simple written texts. People are considered literate in almost any concentrated area in which
      they demonstrate knowledge and communicate proficiently.

      FIGURE 3.2 In fact, literacy may no longer involve physical pages of paper. (credit: "Woman working on iPad" by
      Marco Verch/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
      Having this broad understanding of literacy allows individuals to think about the genre, or writing type, of the
      literacy narrative in many ways: ways that are textual, musical, digital, social, communal--the list continues.
      What scholars know for certain is that literacy involves individual as well as community engagement. One does
      not achieve literacy through isolation but rather as a result of active engagements with members of
      communities.

    3.1 Identity and Expression

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Use reading and composing for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating.
        · Discern the nature of identity in various rhetorical and cultural contexts.
      You likely express your identity, or ideas about who you are, through language. The language you use also
      signals the ways in which you are rooted in specific culture, or groups of people who share common beliefs
      and lived experiences. Because the ways in which people speak and write are closely intertwined with their
      self-images and community affiliations, you can think, communicate, and interact most freely with others by

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                   3.1 · Identity and Expression 65

using your personal idiolect--that is, your individual way of speaking and writing--which is based in cultural
language use. This section examines a few myths about language use and explores some productive ways to
think about language and communication.

FIGURE 3.3 Various language families in Europe (credit: "Indo-European languages" by Servitje/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

Language and Identity

As members of different communities, most Americans speak and write in a number of English varieties
without even thinking about doing so. Like others, you generally speak differently with friends than you do
with elders. You usually use different types of language when texting on your phone than when writing a
professional email. As you make these communication choices based on different settings and audiences, you
signal your identity and culture through word choice, sentence structure, and use of language in specific
situations. For example, when speaking with friends, you may engage in wordplay to show identification with
the group. On the other hand, you may speak with respect to elders to show an identity as a well-mannered
younger relative, and you may use a standard email format to show a professional identity. If you speak other
languages, you may find yourself freely switching between English and those other languages when conversing
with people who share the same linguistic abilities; these shifts from one language to another showcase your
identity as a multilingual person. As author Gloria Anzaldúa (1942-2004) writes in Borderlands / La Frontera,
"I will no longer be made to feel ashamed of existing. I will have my voice: Indian, Spanish, white" (59).
Every time you communicate, you signal some aspect of your identity. In the same way that everyone has
multiple, intersecting identities, everyone has multiple ways of expressing themselves through language. As
members of a multiethnic, multicultural society, everyone should recognize and respect these personal ways
of communicating, which are integral to a shared human experience.
66 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

      FIGURE 3.4 Many view the world as a global village, which contains many language identities. (credit: "Anonymous
      globe of flags" by Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

     Expressing Identity in Writing

      Even though individuals speak and write effectively using different varieties of English, many people
      nevertheless believe that one standard, "proper" English variety exists and that this "correct" way of speaking
      and writing should be used universally in all settings. This viewpoint considers varieties of English outside the
      imagined norm to be "wrong," "bad," or "substandard." For example, speakers of some southern U.S. English
      varieties are often judged as "poor" or "unintelligent." Similarly, people who speak English with the accent of
      another language may be incorrectly assumed to be illiterate. If you speak and write using one of those
      undervalued English varieties, others may have judged you for your language use or told you that your writing
      is "wrong." Even without such judgment, you may have felt apprehensive when sharing your writing with
      others; you may still fear a harsh assessment, or you may feel vulnerable when others read your compositions.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                      3.2 · Trailblazer 67

FIGURE 3.5 Leaders of the Writing in a Foreign Language panel at Finncon 2013 (credit: "Writing in a foreign
language at Finncon 2013" by Henry So?derlund/ Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)
The truth is that people speak and write in different ways for different rhetorical situation, or instances of
communication. People in different communities and professions employ distinct kinds of English. You
already use different varieties of English in different parts of your life; as you progress through college and into
your career, you will learn the language expectations for the rhetorical situations you will encounter in those
spaces. In learning these expectations, you will gain new identities. For example, you may become someone
who knows how to write an exemplary lab report, you could develop an identity as an emerging researcher in
any number of fields, or you may simply become someone who is comfortable letting other people read your
writing. These new linguistic identities do not need to replace language use in other areas of your life. For
instance, you should not feel the need to use a different form of grammar or punctuation in your social media
posts. You should feel comfortable using your familiar English varieties in familiar rhetorical situations while,
if needed, using new varieties of English you may learn in the new rhetorical situations you encounter.
Additionally, you can and should seek out opportunities to use your familiar, nonacademic English varieties in
academic and professional settings when you feel it is appropriate and aligns with the expectations of your
instructor or employer.
Because people write in many different settings for many reasons, no particular English variety is appropriate
for all writing tasks. As you become more familiar with the different ways English is used in different settings
and communities, you can choose which variety to draw on in each rhetorical situation. You also may choose
whether to meet or to disrupt the expectations of the people you are communicating with. In making these
choices, you will rely on your existing literacies as well as newly learned ones.

3.2 Trailblazer

Literacy Narrative Trailblazer: Tara Westover

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Use reading for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating.
  · Identify various types of literacy in the context of a literacy narrative.
68 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

                                                               "We are all more
                                                            complicated than the
                                                            role we are assigned

                                                                  in stories."

FIGURE 3.6 The Book of Mormon was the basis of one
of Tara Westover's (https://openstax.org/r/Tara) early
literacies. (credit: "The Book of Mormon" by Tony
Webster/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Being Educated

In her 2018 best seller, Educated: A Memoir, Tara Westover (b. 1986) considers the effects of academic and
nonacademic literacies in her life. She also contemplates the ways in which identification with certain
literacies can both create and disturb an individual's relationships and community memberships. While
Educated addresses a variety of themes, including the tensions that family members must confront when they
disagree, the memoir can be read largely as a literacy narrative.

Early in her memoir, Westover discusses a range of literacies she developed as the youngest of seven children
in a homeschooled family. Although she was taught to read, her literary world consisted almost exclusively of
the Book of Mormon and other religious texts. Her other literacies included preserving food, preparing herbs,
and caring for the animals on the family farm, located on an Idaho mountain. She felt a keen sense of
belonging both to her family and to their mountain home. Westover also learned how to work in and survive
the dangerous junkyard her family owned and operated. Even though many family members sustained a
variety of horrific accidents and injuries over the years, mostly at the junkyard or in car accidents, the family
relied entirely on natural remedies; both parents considered doctors and medicine to be sinful. Despite the
range of literacies that Westover learned at home, her parents did not value formal schooling and were
indifferent to the development of a broad understanding of science, history, or current events. The Westover
children were almost entirely self-directed in their academic studies.

As a young child, Westover fully embraced her parents' beliefs that "government schooling" was wholly
unchristian and equivalent to brainwashing. Her brother Tyler, however, had always loved "book learning" and
decided to leave home to attend college. He could not fully articulate why he felt compelled to be the first to
leave, and his departure intrigued Westover. She, too, began to think about pursuing higher education. After
another brother became physically abusive toward her, Tyler encouraged her to use college as an escape. She
then bought an ACT prep book, studied on her own, and did well enough on the exams to be accepted to
Brigham Young University.

Westover articulates in her memoir that once on campus, she realized how her haphazard homeschooling
experience had left her with large gaps in knowledge and no preparation for studying and taking tests. As she
improved her academic skills, she also learned methods of academic inquiry that were at odds with her
parents' faith-based interpretations of both world and personal events.

As Westover gained a science-based worldview through her college experience, she struggled to integrate her

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                             3.3 · Glance at Genre: The Literacy Narrative 69

new understandings with her family's perspectives; in other words, her new literacies were at odds with her
old ones. She still felt connected to her family, but her new understanding of the world was irreconcilable with
her father's survivalist, fundamentalist beliefs. When she refused to submit to her father's will and return to
his rigid worldview and interpretation of Mormonism, Westover's relationship with most of her family
members disintegrated. Instead, she used her academic literacies to examine the history of their religion in
her doctoral research. All three Westover children who left the mountain--and, to some extent, their
family--earned PhDs.

For Westover, the schism with her family was not primarily the result of her literacy learning; rather, the
relationship ruptured because she refused to repudiate her newfound knowledge as inferior to her family's
ways of knowing. In subsequent interviews, Westover has discussed the loss she felt in being cut off from her
family and place of origin. Although many college students experience similar challenges when integrating
new ways of encountering the world with their family's views of "how things are" or "how things should be,"
some families feel enriched by the new information, whereas others feel threatened by it.

Discussion Questions

1. What are some of the literacies that Westover learned while living at home? How might they conflict with
    the new ones learned away from home?

2. How might literacy learning have the potential both to separate and to unite individuals and their
    communities?

3. Do you think the Westovers with PhDs are more "literate" than the ones who remained at home? Explain
    your answer.

4. How are literacy and gaining new literacies related? Ambition? Desire for knowledge? Rebellion?
    Dissatisfaction? Explain your answer.

5. How do your childhood literacy experiences align with Westover's? How do they differ?

6. At this point in your college experience, have you had any encounters with ideas that conflict with the value
    system(s) with which you were raised, as Westover did? How do you envision navigating those differences?

3.3 Glance at Genre: The Literacy Narrative

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read and compose in several genres to understand how genre conventions shape and are shaped by readers'
      and writers' practices and purposes.

  · Match the capacities of different environments to varying rhetorical situations.

Over time, people have developed specific ways of writing for particular rhetorical situations. These distinctive
ways of writing can be referred to in part as genres. You may have heard the term genre in reference to
publishing categories, such as novels or memoirs, but the term can refer to any type of writing that conforms to
specific forms and benchmarks. Many genres include stories of different kinds--for example, folktales, short
stories, accounts of events, and biographies. As author Jonathan Gottschall says in his 2012 book of the same
title, humankind is "the storytelling animal"; people of all cultures have engaged in telling stories, both as
storytellers and as audience members. Simply put, narrative stories are essential to many genres of writing.
70 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

      FIGURE 3.7 Bronwyn Vaughan, storyteller (credit: "At the foot of the storytellers chair" by Mosman Library/flickr, CC
      BY 2.0)

     Exploring Narrative: Elements of Storytelling

      Narratives, whether about literacy or anything else, include these key elements:
        · Plot. Authors of narratives tell about one or more events. In fiction, the plot is the sequence of those
            events. In nonfiction, a plot is often referred to simply as the events, but nonfiction texts follow similar plot
            patterns, including exposition or introduction, a series of events leading to a climax or discovery, and
            events following the climax or discovery.
        · Characters. The events in the story happen to characters, or individuals who are part of the story. In
            nonfiction, these characters are usually real people. The audience should feel a connection to the main
            character or characters. Readers may like or dislike characters, blame them or feel sorry for them, identify
            with them or not. Skilled writers portray characters through the use of dialogue, actions or behavior, and
            thoughts so that readers can understand what these individuals are like.
        · Setting. Stories, fiction and nonfiction, take place in settings, which include locations, time periods, and
            the cultures in which the characters or real people are immersed.
        · Problem and Resolution. In narratives, the characters generally encounter one or more problems. The
            tension caused by the problem builds to a climax. The resolution of the problem and the built-up tension
            usually occurs near the end of the story.
        · Story Arc. Most narratives have a story arc--a beginning, a middle, and an end--but not necessarily in that
            order. The story arc, or order of events, may occur chronologically, or the story may begin in the middle of
            the action and explain earlier events later in the sequence.

     Specific Details and Other Conventions

      To immerse the audience in the story, authors provide specific details of the scenes and action. Many authors,
      and teachers, call this strategy "showing, not telling." These aspects can include the following elements:

        · Sensory Details: Full, literal or figurative descriptions of the things that the characters see, smell, hear,
            touch, and taste in their surroundings.

        · Dialogue: Conversation between characters.
        · Action: Vivid portrayal of the events in the story. Writers often use short sentences and strong verbs to

            indicate physical or mental action.
        · Engaging Language: Sentence structure and word choices, including tone (vocal attitude of the narrator

            or characters), diction (language used by the narrator or characters), and varied constructions (different
            kinds of sentences), that provide specific, clear, and compelling information for the audience.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                          3.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass 71

Establishing the Significance

Most importantly, the audience must feel that the story has some significance. While the author's main point
may only be implied, rather than stated outright as in a conventional academic essay, readers should
understand the point of the story and believe that it matters.

FIGURE 3.8 Malala Yousafzai in 2015 (credit: "Malala Yousafzai- Education for girls" by UK Department for
International Development/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
For example, in the prologue to her memoir about the importance of education for girls, I Am Malala: The Girl
Who Stood Up for Education and Was Shot by the Taliban (2013), Malala Yousafzai (b. 1997) writes, "The day
when everything changed was Tuesday, 9 October 2012." Yousafzai provides reference to an exact date, the
precise moment when a Taliban gunman shot her in the head because she had spoken publicly in favor of
girls' right to education. Identifying the date in this way is a technique that serves a variety of purposes. This
technique provides a focal point to draw the audience into the story, identifies details that serve as rising
action that the audience can assume will culminate on this date, marks the setting in both time and place for
the audience, and ultimately foreshadows a climax of action for the reader. The following elements, therefore,
are crucial for writers of narratives to consider when creating content for their writing.

  · Audience. Narratives are designed to appeal to specific audiences; authors choose storytelling elements,
      details, and language strategies to engage the target audience.

  · Purpose. Authors may tell stories for different reasons: to entertain, to reinforce cultural norms, to
      educate, or to strengthen social ties. The same story may, and often does, fulfill more than one purpose.

3.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Narrative of the Life of Frederick
Douglass by Frederick Douglass

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read in several genres to understand how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and
      expectation.

  · Use reading for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Read a diverse range of texts, attending to relationships among ideas, patterns of organization, and interplay

      between verbal and nonverbal elements.
72 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

     Introduction

      FIGURE 3.9 Frederick Douglass: speaker, writer, abolitionist (credit: "Frederick Douglass, from an 1856 Ambrotype
      in the National Portrait Gallery" by Mike Licht, NotionsCapital.com/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
      Frederick Douglass (1818-1895) was born into slavery in Maryland. He never knew his father, barely knew his
      mother, and was separated from his grandmother at a young age. As a boy, Douglass understood there to be a
     connection between literacy and freedom. In the excerpt from his autobiography, Narrative of the Life of
     Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, that follows, you will learn about how Douglass learned to read. By age
      12, he was reading texts about the natural rights of human beings. At age 15, he began educating other
      enslaved people. When Douglass was 20, he met Anna Murray, whom he would later marry. Murray helped
      Douglass plot his escape from slavery. Dressed as a sailor, Douglass bought a train ticket northward. Within 24
      hours, he arrived in New York City and declared himself free. Douglass went on to work as an activist in the
      abolitionist movement as well as the women's suffrage movement.
      In the portion of the text included here, Douglass chooses to represent the dialogue of Mr. Auld, an enslaver
      who by the laws of the time owns Douglass. Douglass describes this moment with detail and accuracy,
      including Mr. Auld's use of a racial slur. In an interview (https://openstax.org/r/interview) with the Public
      Broadcasting Service (PBS), Harvard professor Randall Kennedy (b. 1954), who has traced the historical
      evolution of the word, notes that one of its first uses, recorded in 1619, appears to have been descriptive rather
      than derogatory. However, by the mid-1800s, White people had appropriated the term and begun using it with
      its current negative connotation. In response, over time, Black people have reclaimed the word (or variations
      of it) for different purposes, including mirroring racism, creating irony, and reclaiming community and
      personal power--using the word for a contrasting purpose to the way others use it. Despite this evolution,
      Professor Kennedy explains that the use of the word should be accompanied by a deep understanding of one's
      audience and by being clear about the intention. However, even when intention is very clear and malice is not
      intended, harm can, and likely will, occur. Thus, Professor Kennedy cautions that all people should understand
      the history of the word, be aware of its potential negative effect on an audience, and therefore use it sparingly,
      or preferably not at all.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                 3.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass 73

In the case of Mr. Auld and Douglass, Douglass gives an account of Auld's exact language in order to hold a
mirror to the racism of Mr. Auld--and the reading audience of his memoir--and to emphasize the theme that
literacy (or education) is one way to combat racism.

public domain t                                  end public domain t

                 LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

Literacy from Unexpected Sources                 end public domain t

Fanronmottahte title and from Douglass's use of pronoun I, you know this work is autobiographical and therefore written
                                                                      end public domain t
from the first-person point of view.end annotat

                 [excerpt begins with first full paragraph on page 33 and ends on page 34 where the paragraph ends]

                 Very soon after I wenet ntod lpivuebwlicitdhoMmr.aainndt Mrs. Auld, she very kindly commenced to teach me the A, B, C. After I
                 had learned this, she assisted me in learning to spell words of three or four letters. Just at this point of my
                 progress, Mr. Auld found out what was going on, and at once forbade Mrs. Auld to instruct me further, telling
                 her, among other things, that it was unlawful, as well as unsafe, to teach a slave to read.

Danonuogtlatss describes the background situation and the culture of the time, which he will defy in his quest for literacy.
The word choice in his narration of events indicates that he is writing for an educated audience.end annotat

                 To use his own words, further, he said, "If you give a nigger an inch, he will take an ell. A nigger should know
                 nothing but to obey his master--to do as he is told to do. Learning would spoil the best nigger in the world.
                 Now," said he, "if you teach that nigger (speaking of myself) how to read, there would be no keeping him. It
                 would forever unfit him to be a slave. He would at once become unmanageable, and of no value to his master.
                 As to himself, it could do him no good, but a great deal of harm. It would make him discontented and unhappy."

Iannnsohtaarting this part of the narrative, Douglass underscores the importance of literacy. He provides a description of
Mr. Auld, a slaveholder, who seeks to impose illiteracy as a means to oppress others. In this description of Mr. Auld's
reaction, Douglass shows that slaveholders feared the power that enslaved people would have if they could read
and write.end annotat

Danonuogtlatss provides the details of Auld's dialogue not only because it is a convention of narrative genre but also
because it demonstrates the purpose and motivation for his forthcoming pursuit of literacy. We have chosen to
maintain the authenticity of the original text by using the language that Douglass offers to quote Mr. Auld's dialogue
because it both provides context for the rhetorical situation and underscores the value of the attainment of literacy
for Douglass. However, contemporary audiences must understand that this language should be uttered only under
very narrow circumstances in any current rhetorical situation. In general, it is best to avoid its use.end annotat

                 These words sank deep into my heart, stirred up sentiments within that lay slumbering, and called into
                 existence an entirely new train of thought. It was a new and special revelation, explaining dark and mysterious
                 things, with which my youthful understanding had struggled, but struggled in vain. I now understood what had
                 been to me a most perplexing difficulty--to wit, the white man's power to enslave the black man. It was a grand
                 achievement, and I prized it highly. From that moment, I understood the pathway from slavery to freedom. It
                 was just what I wanted, and I got it at a time when I the least expected it. Whilst I was saddened by the thought
                 of losing the aid of my kind mistress, I was gladdened by the invaluable instruction which, by the merest
                 accident, I had gained from my master.

Iannnthoitsarteflection, Douglass has a definitive and transformative moment with reading and writing. The moment that
sparked a desire for literacy is a common feature in literacy narratives, particularly those of enslaved people. In that
moment, he understood the value of literacy and its life-changing possibilities; that transformative moment is a
central part of the arc of this literacy narrative.end annotat
              74 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

                        Though conscious of the difficulty of learning without a teacher, I set out with high hope, and a fixed purpose, at
                        whatever cost of trouble, to learn how to read. The very decided manner with which he spoke, and strove to
                        impress his wife with the evil consequences of giving me instruction, served to convince me that he was deeply
                        sensible of the truths he was uttering. It gave me the best assurance that I might rely with the utmost
public domain t confidence on the results which, he said, would flow from teaching me to read. What he most dreaded, that I
                    endmpousbt ldicesdioremda. iWn ht at he most loved, that I most hated. That which to him was a great evil, to be carefully
                        shunned, was to me a great good, to be diligently sought; and the argument which he so warmly urged, against
                        my learning to read, only served to inspire me with a desire and determination to learn. In learning to read, I
                        owe almost as much to the bitter opposition of my master, as to the kindly aid oefnmdypmubislitcredsosm. Iaaincktnowledge
                        the benefit of both.

                 Danonuogtlatss articulates that this moment changed his relationship to literacy and ignited a purposeful engagement with
                 language and learning that would laesntdthpruobulgichoduotmhaisinlot ng life. The rhythm, sentence structure, and poetic phrasing
                 in this reflection provide further evidence that Douglass, over the course of his life, actively pursued and mastered
                 languaegnedapfutebrlihcadvoinmgatihnist experience with Mr. Auld.end annotat

                                                       end public domain t
                       [excerpt continues with the beginning of Chapter 7 on page 36 and ends with the end of the paragraph at the
                       top of page 39]

                        [In Chapter 7, the narrative continues] I lived in Master Hugh's family about seven years. During this time, I
                        succeeded in learning to read and write. In accomplishing this, I was compelled to resort to various stratagems.
                        I had no regular teacher. My mistress, who had kindly commenced to instruct me, had, in compliance with the
                        advice and direction of her husband, not only ceased to instruct, but had set her face against my being
                        instructed by any one else. It is due, however, to my mistress to say of her, that she did not adopt this course of
                        treatment immediately. She at first lacked the depravity indispensable to shutting me up in mental darkness. It
                        was at least necessary for her to have some training in the exercise of irresponsible power, to make her equal to
                        the task of treating me as though I were a brute.

                        My mistress was, as I have said, a kind and tender-hearted woman; and in the simplicity of her soul she
                        commenced, when I first went to live with her, to treat me as she supposed one human being ought to treat
                        another. In entering upon the duties of a slaveholder, she did not seem to perceive that I sustained to her the
                        relation of a mere chattel, and that for her to treat me as a human being was not only wrong, but dangerously
                        so. Slavery proved as injurious to her as it did to me. When I went there, she was a pious, warm, and tender-
                        hearted woman. There was no sorrow or suffering for which she had not a tear. She had bread for the hungry,
                        clothes for the naked, and comfort for every mourner that came within her reach. Slavery soon proved its ability
                        to divest her of these heavenly qualities. Under its influence, the tender heart became stone, and the lamblike
                        disposition gave way to one of tiger-like fierceness. The first step in her downward course was in her ceasing to
                        instruct me. She now commenced to practise her husband's precepts. She finally became even more violent in
                        her opposition than her husband himself.

                 Danonuogtlatss describes in detail a person in his life and his relationship to her. He uses specific diction to describe her
                 kindness and to help readers get to know her--a "tear" for the "suffering"; "bread for the hungry, clothes for the
                 naked, and comfort for every mourner."end annotat

                        She was not satisfied with simply doing as well as he had commanded; she seemed anxious to do better.
                        Nothing seemed to make her more angry than to see me with a newspaper. She seemed to think that here lay
                        the danger. I have had her rush at me with a face made all up of fury, and snatch from me a newspaper, in a
                        manner that fully revealed her apprehension. She was an apt woman; and a little experience soon
                        demonstrated, to her satisfaction, that education and slavery were incompatible with each other.

                 Tanhneoftaactt that Douglass can understand the harm caused by the institution of slavery to slaveholders as well as to
                 enslaved people shows a level of sophistication in thought, identifies the complexity and detriment of this historical
                 period, and demonstrates an acute awareness of the rhetorical situation, especially for his audience for this text.

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                 3.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass 75

The way that he articulates compassion for the slaveholders, despite their ill treatment of him, would create
empathy in his readers and possibly provide a revelation for his audience.end annotat

public domain t  From this time I was most narrowly watched. If I was in a separate room any considerable length of time, I was
                 sure to be suspected of having a book, and was at once called to give an account of myself. All this, however,
                 was too late. The first step had been taken. Mistress, in teaching me the alphabet, had given me the inch, and
                 no precaution could prevent me from taking the ell.

Oannncoetagt ain, Douglass underscores theevnadlupeutbhlaict dliotemraaciny thas for transforming the lived experiences of enslaved
people. The reference to the inch and the ell circles back to Mr. Auld's warnings and recalls the impact of that
menodmpeunbt loicndhoismliafein.etnd annotat

      The plan which I adopted, and the one by which I was most successful, was that of making friends of all the
      little white boys whom I met in the street. As many of these as I could, I converted into teachers. With their
      kindly aid, obtained at different times and in different places, I finally succeeded in learning to read. When I
      was sent of errands, I always took my book with me, and by going one part of my errand quickly, I found time to
      get a leesnsdopnubbelficordeommyairnetturn. I used also to carry bread with me, enough of which was always in the house,
      and to which I was always welcome; for I was much better off in this regard than many of the poor white
      children in our neighborhood. This bread I used to bestow upon the hungry little urchins, who, in return, would
      give me that more valuable bread of knowledge. I am strongly tempted to give the names of two or three of
      those little boys, as a testimonial of the gratitude and affection I bear them; but prudence forbids;--not that it
      would injure me, but it might embarrass them; for it is almost an unpardonable offence to teach slaves to read
      in this Christian country.

Danonuogtlatss comments on the culture of the time, which still permitted slavery; he is sensitive to the fact that these
boys might be embarrassed by their participation in unacceptable, though humanitarian, behavior. His audience will
also recognize the irony in his tone when he writes that it is "an unpardonable offense to teach slaves . . . in this
Christian country." Such behavior is surely "unchristian."end annotat

                 It is enough to say of the dear little fellows, that they lived on Philpot Street, very near Durgin and Bailey's ship-
                 yard. I used to talk this matter of slavery over with them. I would sometimes say to them, I wished I could be as
                 free as they would be when they got to be men. "You will be free as soon as you are twenty-one, but I am a
                 slave for life! Have not I as good a right to be free as you have?" These words used to trouble them; they would
                 express for me the liveliest sympathy, and console me with the hope that something would occur by which I
                 might be free.

Danonuogtlatss pursues and attains literacy not only for his own benefit; his knowledge also allows him to begin to
instruct, as well as advocate for, those around him. Douglass's use of language and his understanding of the
rhetorical situation give the audience evidence of the power of literacy for all people, round out the arc of his
narrative, and provide a resolution.end annotat

Discussion Questions

1. Based on what you have learned about literacy thus far, would you consider this excerpt from Frederick
    Douglass's autobiography a literacy narrative? Explain your response by providing evidence from
    Douglass's text.

2. How do Douglass's descriptions of Mr. and Mrs. Auld make these characters come to life for the reader?

3. What do Douglass's tone, use of language, and commentary reveal about him and why literacy was so
    important?

4. African American storytelling features a common trope (device) of a trickster character. The trickster is
    characterized by intellect or secret knowledge that they use to defy convention. How does Douglass play the
76 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

          role of trickster in this excerpt from his narrative, and what impact does this rhetorical device have on the
          reading audience?

      5. What elements of Douglass's narrative might help you develop your own narrative about literacy?

    3.5 Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Develop a writing project through multiple drafts.
        · Use composing for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in various rhetorical, cultural, and

            language situations.
        · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.
        · Benefit from the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
        · Use language structures, including multilingual structures, grammar, punctuation, and spelling, during the

            processes of composing and revising.

      Many inexperienced writers imagine that "good" writers compose their texts all at once, from beginning to
      end, and need only a small amount of attention to polish the grammar and punctuation before arriving at a
      final draft. In reality, however, the writing process (steps for creating a finished composition) is typically
      recursive. That is, it repeats steps multiple times, not necessarily in the same order, and the process is more
      messy than linear or systematic. You can think of the writing process in terms of these broad categories:

        · Prewriting. You will end up with a stronger composition if you do some work before you begin writing.
            Before putting complete sentences on a page, take some time to think about the rhetorical situation for
            your writing, gather your thoughts, and consider how you might arrange your ideas.

        · Drafting. In the past, you may have dedicated most of your writing time to drafting, or putting words into a
            document. When you have strong prewriting and revision habits, however, drafting is often a smaller
            portion of the writing process.

        · Peer Review. Almost all strong writers rely on feedback from others, whether peers, instructors, or
            editors. Your instructor may guide you in some peer review exercises to complete with your classmates, or
            you might choose to consult with your university's writing center. When others give you clear, honest
            feedback on your draft, you can use that information to strengthen your piece.

        · Revision. After you have a draft, carefully consider how to make it more effective in reaching the audience
            and fulfilling its purpose. You can make changes that affect the piece as a whole; such changes are often
            called global revisions. You can also make changes that affect only the meaning of a sentence or a word;
            these changes can be called local revisions.

     Summary of Assignment: Independent Literacy Narrative

      In this assignment, you will write an essay in which you offer a developed narrative about an aspect of your
      literacy practice or experience. Consider some of these questions to generate ideas for writing: What literacies
      and learning experiences have had profound effects on your life? When did this engagement occur? Where
      were you? Were there other participants? Have you told this story before? If so, how often, and why do you
      think you return to it? Has this engagement shaped your current literacy practices? Will it shape your
      practices going forward?

      The development of your literacy experiences can take multiple paths. If you use the tools provided in this
      section, you will be able to effectively compose a unique literacy narrative that reflects your identities and
      experiences. The questions prompting your writing in this section can help you begin to develop an
      independent literacy narrative. The next section, on community literacy narratives, helps you consider your
      composition course community and ways to think about your shared experiences around literacy. The
      following section, on literacy narrative research, guides you to a database of literacy narratives that offer an
      opportunity to analyze the ways in which others in the academic community have reflected on their literacy

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                     3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 77

experiences. Further sections will guide you through the development and organization of your work as you
navigate this genre.

Another Lens 1. As an alternative to an individual literacy narrative, members of your composition course
community can develop a set of interview questions that will allow you to learn more about each other's past
and present experiences with literacy. After the community has determined what the interview questions will
be, choose a partner from the composition community to work with on this assignment; alternatively, your
instructor may assign partners for the class. Using the interview questions you have discussed and developed,
you will conduct an interview with your partner, and they with you. Your instructor will allow you and your
peers to record and transcribe one another's responses and post them where all students in the community
have access. After you have completed, transcribed, and posted your interviews, everyone will closely examine
each of their peers' interviews and look for recurring themes as well as unique aspects of the narratives
shared. This assignment will inevitably illuminate both the communal nature and the unique, independent
experiences of literacy engagement.

Another Lens 2. Using DALN (https://openstax.org/r/daln), perform a keyword search for literacy narratives on
one aspect or area of concentration that interests you, such as music, dance, or poetry. Select two or more
narratives from the archive to read and analyze. Read and annotate each narrative, and then think about a
unique position you can take when discussing these stories. Use these questions to guide the development of
your stance: Do you have experiences in this concentrated area of literacy? If so, how do your experiences
intersect with or depart from the ones you are reading? What common themes, if any, do these narratives
share? What do these narratives reveal about literacy practices in general and about this area of concentration
in particular?

      Quick Launch: Defining Your Rhetorical Situation, Generating Ideas, and Organizing

When you are writing a literacy narrative, think about

  · your audience and purpose for writing;
  · the ideas and experiences that best reflect your encounters with various literacies; and
  · the order in which you would like to present your information.

The Rhetorical Situation

A rhetorical situation occurs every time anyone communicates with anyone else. To prepare to write your
literacy narrative, use a graphic organizer like Table 3.1 to outline the rhetorical situation by addressing the
following aspects:

Rhetorical  Brainstorming Questions                                 Examples                       Your
Situation                                                                                          Notes
 Element

Author      Which of your identities will you inhabit as you write  Student in this class?
(who)       this assignment?
                                                                    Member of a specific family?

                                                                    Part of a particular cultural
                                                                    group?

                                                                    Person who loves a certain
                                                                    literacy?

TABLE 3.1
78 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

Rhetorical                        Brainstorming Questions             Examples                           Your
Situation                                                                                                Notes
 Element

Message     What do you want to communicate?                          Significance of a particular
(what)                                                                literacy?

                                                                      Meaning of a given literacy in my
                                                                      life?

                                                                      My class community?

                                                                      My instructor?

Audience    Who is your primary audience? How will you shape          Will I want to share this
(to whom)   your writing to best connect with this audience? Do you   narrative with others outside of
            need to consider any secondary audiences?                 class? If so, with whom?

                                                                      How will I shape my language to
                                                                      communicate with these
                                                                      audiences?

Purpose     Earning a grade is a valid purpose, but what other        Informing readers about a
(why)       reasons do you have for writing this piece?               specific literacy or about my
                                                                      community partner?

                                                                      Persuading readers to see a
                                                                      literacy or my community
                                                                      partner differently?

                                                                      Entertaining readers?

                                                                      Reflecting on a deeper meaning
                                                                      of a literacy or literacy
                                                                      experience?

                                                                      Given: literacy narrative

                                                                      May I include visual elements,
                                                                      and do I want to do so?

Means       Your instructor will provide the means for this           Should my drafts and final
(how)       assignment: write a text that conforms to the             submission be printed or
            expectations of the literacy narrative genre, and submit  submitted electronically?
            it in the way the instructor expects.
                                                                      What program should I use to
                                                                      create the document (Microsoft
                                                                      Word, for example)?

                                                                      How and when will I submit
                                                                      drafts in progress and the final
                                                                      draft?

TABLE 3.1

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                      3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 79

Rhetorical   Brainstorming Questions                                 Examples                          Your
Situation                                                                                              Notes
 Element

Context      How will the time period or location change the way     What is happening right now in
(when/       you develop your piece?                                 my city, county, state, area, or
where)                                                               nation or the world that relates
                                                                     to this narrative?

                                                                     Have any new literacies
                                                                     appeared recently that relate to
                                                                     my narrative?

                                                                     Does anything about my college
                                                                     or university connect with this
                                                                     piece of writing?

Culture      What social, cultural, or environmental assumptions do  How will I negotiate between my
(community)  you, your subject, or your audience have?               identity and communication
                                                                     style and the expectations of
                                                                     others?

TABLE 3.1

Generating Ideas

In addition to these notes, write a few ideas relating to your literacy experiences. Feel free to use bullet points
or incomplete sentences.

  · What instructors, formal or informal, helped or hindered you in learning literacies?
  · Which of your literacies feel(s) most comfortable?
  · Which literacy experiences have transformed you?
  · Do you use specialized language to signal your identity as part of a community or cultural group?
  · After you look back over your notes, what is the most compelling story about a literacy or literacy

      experience that you can share, and what is the significance of that story?

Organizing

In one last step before beginning to draft your literacy narrative, think visually about how you will put the
pieces together.

  · Where will you begin and end your literacy narrative, and what is your story arc? Will you jump right into
      some richly described action, or will you set the scene for the reader by describing an important story
      locale first?

  · What tension will the story resolve?
  · What specific sensory details, dialogue, and action will you include?
  · What vignettes, or small scenes, will you include, and in what order should the audience encounter them?
  · Some of your paragraphs will "show" scenes to your readers, and some of your paragraphs will "tell" your

      readers explanatory information. After you decide what elements to show to your readers through vivid
      descriptions and what elements you will inform your readers about, decide how to order those elements
      within your draft.
  · Review the specific writing prompt given in the summary of the assignment, and make any additional
80 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

            notes needed in response to that material. Use visual organizers in such as those presented in Figure 3.10
            through Figure 3.13 to develop the plan for your draft:

               FIGURE 3.10 Plot diagram (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

                FIGURE 3.11 Storyboard (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                             3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 81

         FIGURE 3.12 Web diagram (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

  FIGURE 3.13 Graphic sequence chart (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Use the graphic organizer structure above that best helps you establish the narrative arc for your literacy story,
including the following elements:

  · Beginning. Set the scene by providing information about the characters, setting (where and when the
      narrative takes place), culture, background, and situation.

  · Rising Action. In each successive section, whether it is a paragraph or more, add dialogue and other
      details to make your story vivid and engaging for readers so that they will want to continue reading. Tell
      your story in an order that makes sense and is clear to readers.

  · Climax. At this point, show what finally happened to clinch the experience. How did the literacy
     experience finally take hold? Or why didn't it? What happened at this "climactic" moment?

  · Falling Action. This is the part where the tension is released and you have achieved--or not--what you set
      out to do. This section may be quite short, as it may simply describe a new feeling or reaction. It leads
      directly to the next section, which may be more reflective.

  · Resolution. This is a reflective portion. How has this new literacy affected you? How do you view things
     differently? How do you think it affected the person who taught you or others with whom you are close?

     Drafting: Writing from Personal Experience and Observation

Now that you have planned your literacy narrative, you are ready to begin drafting. If you have been thoughtful
in preparing to write, drafting usually proceeds quickly and smoothly. Use your notes to guide you in
composing the first draft. As you write about specific events and scenes, create a rich picture for your reader
82 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

by using concrete, sensory details and specific rather than general nouns as shown in Table 3.2.

                                    Person             Place                   Thing                       Idea
                             girl                                   game                    competition
                   General   schoolmate         park                chess                   tournament
public domain t
                                                bench
                   Less
                   Specific  Sasha              gaming area         board                   semifinal match

                   More      tall, dark-haired  quiet, tree-shaded  glossy black and white  popcorn-scented semifinal
                   Specific  Sasha              gaming area         board                   match

                   Sensory

TABLE 3.2

Using Frederick Douglass's Text as a Drafting Model

As Douglass does, create your literacy narrative from your recollections of people, places, things, and events.
Reread the following passage.

                                               end public domain t
      The plan which I adopted, and the one by which I was most successful, was that of making friends of all the
      little white boys whom I met in the street. As many of these as I could, I converted into teachers. With their
      kindly aid, obtained at different times and in different places, I finally succeeded in learning to read. When I
      was sent of errands, I always took my book with me, and by going one part of my errand quickly, I found time to
      get a lesson before my return. I used also to carry bread with me, enough of which was always in the house,
      and to which I was always welcome; for I was much better off in this regard than many of the poor white
      children in our neighborhood. This bread I used to bestow upon the hungry little urchins, who, in return, would
      give me that more valuable bread of knowledge. I am strongly tempted to give the names of two or three of
      those little boys, as a testimonial of the gratitude and affection I bear them; but prudence forbids;--not that it
      would injure me, but it might embarrass them; for it is almost an unpardonable offence to teach slaves to read
      in this Christian country. It is enough to say of the dear little fellows, that they lived on Philpot Street, very near
      Durgin and Bailey's ship-yard. I used to talk this matter of slavery over with them. I would sometimes say to
      them, I wished I could be as free as they would be when they got to be men. "You will be free as soon as you
      are twenty-one, but I am a slave for life! Have not I as good a right to be free as you have?" These words used
      to trouble them; they would express for me the liveliest sympathy, and console me with the hope that
      something would occur by which I might be free.

In this selection from Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, elements of the literacy narrative genre as
explained in Glance at Genre: The Literacy Narrative are evident. First, Douglass introduces additional
characters who help him resolve his earlier complication of being prevented from learning to read by the
Aulds. The interaction he records here reiterates the larger conflict of the narrative: Douglass's continuing
enslavement. Although he does not give many scenic details, few more would be needed, for he places the
action on the street near a shipyard, thereby giving an indication of the surroundings. Douglass presents his
own words in dialogue to reinforce for readers that he knows how to speak and write in the ways that white
people with means were taught at the time. In this piece, set against the backdrop of a culture that insisted on
viewing enslaved people as "brutes," Douglass demonstrates his dignity by displaying his facility with language
and his humanity by offering bread to hungry children who have more freedom and opportunity, but less food,
than he does.

To create a draft that draws on multiple elements of storytelling, as this selection from Douglass does, you may
need to generate ideas for additional scenes, or you may need to revisit a particular place so that you can

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 83

provide concrete and sensory details for your readers. Refer to the storyboarding, web diagram, and plot flow
charts in the "Organizing" section above to further develop your draft.

Another Way to Draft the Literacy Narrative

public domainRet ad the literacy narrative by American author and educator Helen Keller (1880-1968). An Alabama native,
                 Keller lost both sight and hearing after a serious illness as a young child. The selection relates a

transformational  literacy  moment  in  her  life,  when  Anne  Sullivan  (1866-1936), Keller's teacher,  helps  her
                                                                                 end public domain t

understand the connection between hand-spelled words and physical items. Keller's literacies, along with

heroic support from her teacher, later enabled her to complete college and tour as an activist and lecturer.

                            end public domain t

FIGURE 3.14 Helen Keller with Anne Sullivan, July 1888 (credit: "Helen Keller with Anne Sullivan in July 1888" by
Family member of Thaxter P. Spencer/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      The most important day I remember in all my life is the one on which my teacher, Anne Mansfield Sullivan,
      came to me. I am filled with wonder when I consider the immeasurable contrasts between the two lives which
      it connects. It was the third of March, 1887, three months before I was seven years old.

Tanhneointatrtoduction sketches the boundaries of this literacy narrative by noting that the arrival of a teacher separated
Keller's life into two distinct parts.end annotat

      On the afternoon of that eventful day, I stood on the porch, dumb, expectant. I guessed vaguely from my
      mother's signs and from the hurrying to and fro in the house that something unusual was about to happen, so I
      went to the door and waited on the steps. The afternoon sun penetrated the mass of honeysuckle that covered
      the porch, and fell on my upturned face. My fingers lingered almost unconsciously on the familiar leaves and
      blossoms which had just come forth to greet the sweet southern spring. I did not know what the future held of
      marvel or surprise for me. Anger and bitterness had preyed upon me continually for weeks and a deep languor
      had succeeded this passionate struggle.

Tanhnisoptaatragraph helps establish the problem to be resolved in this short narrative: Keller is "dumb" but "expectant."
Additionally, the three characters in this section have been introduced--mother, teacher, and Keller herself--though
the audience has few details yet about any of them. The author provides some sensory details in this paragraph,
84 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

however, including her mother's movements, the afternoon sun, and the tactile feeling of the honeysuckle.end annotat

                        Have you ever been at sea in a dense fog, when it seemed as if a tangible white darkness shut you in, and the

                        great ship, tense and anxious, groped her way toward the shore with plummet and sounding-line, and you

                        waited with beating heart for something to happen? I was like that ship before my education began, only I was
public domain t without compass or sounding-line, and had no way of knowing how near the harbour was. "Light! give me light!"

                        was the wordless cry of my soul, and the light of love shone on me in that very hour.
                     end public domain t
                 WanhneontaKteller's autobiography was originally written, the audience was readers of the Ladies' Home Journal, a

                 monthly magazine popular with homemakers; Keller's autobiography weansdppuubblliischdeodminaminotnthly installments. Keller
                 appeals to this audience with her allusions to Judeo-Christian imagery and an evocative writing style. While her

                 wording may seem a bit overdone today, such phrasing would have been familiar to her contemporary readers. A

                 year later, in 1903, Keller's story was published as a book and expanded to a much wider audience.end annotat

I felt approaching footsteps, I stretched out my hand as I suepnpdopsuebdlitcodmoymmaiontht er. Some one took it, and I was

caught up and held close in the arms of her who had come to reveal all things to me, and, more than all things

else, to love me.                 end public domain t

Tanhneostuabtject of love often appears in the literacy narrative genre, whether love of a certain skill or pastime or love for
a relative or teacher who taught a certain literacy.end annotat

The morning after my teacher came she led me into her room and gave me a doll. The little blind children at the
Perkins Institution had sent it and Laura Bridgman had dressed it; but I did not know this until afterward. When
I had played with it a little while, Miss Sullivan slowly spelled into my hand the word "d-o-l-l." I was at once
interested in this finger play and tried to imitate it. When I finally succeeded in making the letters correctly I
was flushed with childish pleasure and pride. Running downstairs to my mother I held up my hand and made
the letters for doll. I did not know that I was spelling a word or even that words existed; I was simply making
my fingers go in monkey-like imitation. In the days that followed I learned to spell in this uncomprehending way
a great many words, among them pin, hat, cup and a few verbs like sit, stand and walk. But my teacher had
been with me several weeks before I understood that everything has a name.

Waninthotahte introduction of finger spelling, this paragraph and the next present the rising action building toward the
climax of this story.end annotat

One day, while I was playing with my new doll, Miss Sullivan put my big rag doll into my lap also, spelled "d-o-l-
l" and tried to make me understand that "d-o-l-l" applied to both. Earlier in the day we had had a tussle over
the words "m-u-g" and "w-a-t-e-r." Miss Sullivan had tried to impress it upon me that "m-u-g" is mug and that
"w-a-t-e-r" is water, but I persisted in confounding the two. In despair she had dropped the subject for the
time, only to renew it at the first opportunity. I became impatient at her repeated attempts and, seizing the new
doll, I dashed it upon the floor. I was keenly delighted when I felt the fragments of the broken doll at my feet.
Neither sorrow nor regret followed my passionate outburst. I had not loved the doll. In the still, dark world in
which I lived there was no strong sentiment or tenderness. I felt my teacher sweep the fragments to one side of
the hearth, and I had a sense of satisfaction that the cause of my discomfort was removed. She brought me my
hat, and I knew I was going out into the warm sunshine. This thought, if a wordless sensation may be called a
thought, made me hop and skip with pleasure.

IannnKoetlaletr's "still, dark world," she offers little indication of setting, giving the audience only glimpses of her
surroundings: honeysuckle, a house with interior stairs, and a hearth in her teacher's room. Because she could not
converse at the time, the only dialogue in this story appears in the form of the finger-spelled words. Plot tensions
rise with Keller's action of breaking the doll.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
                        3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 85

We walked down the path to the well-house, attracted by the fragrance of the honeysuckle with which it was

covered. Some one was drawing water and my teacher placed my hand under the spout. As the cool stream

gushed over one hand she spelled into the other the word water, first slowly, then rapidly. I stood still, my

whole attention fixed upon the motions of her fingers. Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness as of something

public domain t forgotten--a thrill of returning thought; and somehow the mystery of language was revealed to me. I knew then
                        that "w-a-t-e-r" meant the wonderful cool something that was flowing over my hand. That living word

awakened my soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it free! There were barriers still, it is true, but barriers that could

in time be swept away.                                                                          end public domain t

Kanenlloetra'st literacy in finger spelling not only laid the foundation for her future literacieseinndrepaudbinligc,dwormitianing,tand

speaking but also provided her foundational access to language itself. This paragraph provides the climax of this

story as well as the resolution for the problem introduced earlier; having been introduced to language, Keller is no
longer "duemndb"pu(tbhloicugdhomshaeinctannot yet speak).end annotat

I left the well-house eager to learn. Everything had a name, and each name gave birth to a new thought. As we
returned to the house every object which I touched seemed to quiver with life. That was because I saw
everything with the strange, new sight that had come to me. On entering the door I remembered the doll I had
broken. I felt my way to the hearth and picked up the pieces. I tried vainly to put them together. Then my eyes
filled with tears; for I realized what I had done, and for the first time I felt repentance and sorrow.

I learned a great many new words that day. I do not remember what they all were; but I do know that mother,
father, sister, teacher were among them--words that were to make the world blossom for me, "like Aaron's rod,
with flowers." It would have been difficult to find a happier child than I was as I lay in my crib at the close of
that eventful day and lived over the joys it had brought me, and for the first time longed for a new day to come.

Tanhneofitnaat l two paragraphs offer falling action following the dramatic climax.end annotat

Consider the ways in which Douglass's account and Keller's account are stylistically similar and different. Both
use figurative language--"bread of knowledge"--and make allusions to the Christian tradition. However,
Douglass uses dialogue to illustrate a social disparity, whereas Keller's transformation and her language are
largely internal. You should make use of the strategies that best fit your own literacy narrative as shown in
Table 3.3.
86 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

Writing                           Examples and Explanation                                                 Try It
Strategy
                                                                                                  In your literacy
Reflective   Remember                                                                             narrative, where
diction      Filled with wonder                                                                   does the shift in
             Consider                                                                             being occur? Is it
             Guessed vaguely                                                                      mental, emotional,
             Unconsciously                                                                        spiritual, or
             Uncomprehending                                                                      physical? Is it
             annotat                                                                              social, political, or
             Confounding end annotat                                                              cultural?
             Keller uses these words to suggest that the transformation is mental rather
             than physical.                                                                       What words might
                                                                                                  you use throughout
                                                                                                  your draft to
                                                                                                  convey this idea?

                                                                                                  Create a word bank
                                                                                                  from which to
                                                                                                  draw.

Figurative   Have you ever been at sea in a dense fog, when it seemed as if a tangible            Complete the
language     wanhnitoetadtarkness shut you in, and the great ship, tense and anxious, groped her  following sentence
(such as     way toward the shore with plummet anedndsoaunnndoitnagt-line, and you waited with    frames:
comparison   beating heart for something to happen? I was like that ship before my
through      education began, only I was without compass or sounding-line, and had no             My literary practice
metaphor     way of knowing how near the harbour was. "Light! give me light!" was the             or experience is
and simile)  wordless cry of my soul, and the light of love shone on me in that very hour.        like ________.

             Keller's comparison between a ship lost in the fog and her preliterate life          My literary practice
             provides insight into her mental state.                                              or experience is as
                                                                                                  ________ as
                                                                                                  ________.

                                                                                                  My literary practice
                                                                                                  or experience is
                                                                                                  a(n) ________
                                                                                                  (insert a noun)
                                                                                                  because
                                                                                                  ________.

                                                                                                  Add versions of
                                                                                                  some or all of
                                                                                                  these sentences to
                                                                                                  your draft.

TABLE 3.3

Access for free at openstax.org.
                    3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 87

  Writing           Examples and Explanation                                             Try It
 Strategy
                                                                                         Complete the
Sensory                                                                                  following sentence:
language
                                                                                         My literary practice
                                                                                         or experience . . .

           annotat                            end annota.t. . sounds like
                                                            ________.

           We walked down the path to the well-house, attracted by the fragrance of the  . . . smells like
           honeysuckle with which it was covered.                                        ________.

           As the cool stream gushed over one hand, she spelled into the other the word  . . . tastes like
           water, first slowly, then rapidly.                                            ________.

           Keller involves readers in the experience by appealing to their senses.       . . . feels like
                                                                                         ________.

                                                                                         . . . looks like
                                                                                         ________.

                                                                                         Add versions of
                                                                                         some or all of
                                                                                         these sentences to
                                                                                         your draft.

TABLE 3.3
88 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

Writing                           Examples and Explanation                                            Try It
Strategy                                                         end annotat
                                                                                             Complete the
                annotat                                                                      following
                                                                                             sentences:
Allusion    "like Aaron's rod, with flowers"
            Keller equates her literacy with a biblical miracle.                             My literary practice
                                                                                             or experience
                                                                                             reminds me of . . .

                                                                                             . . . the book
                                                                                             ________.

                                                                                             . . . the movie
                                                                                             ________.

                                                                                             . . . the story
                                                                                             ________.

                                                                                             . . . the TV show
                                                                                             ________.

                                                                                             . . . the play
                                                                                             ________.

                                                                                             . . . the song
                                                                                             ________.

                                                                                             Add versions of
                                                                                             some or all these
                                                                                             sentences to your
                                                                                             draft.

                                                                                             Complete the
                                                                                             following sentence:

            annotat                                                       end annotat        My literary practice
                                                                                             or experience
Shift in    On the afternoon of that eventful day, I stood on the porch, dumb, expectant. .  caused me to shift
perception  . . That living word awakened my soul, gave it light, hope, joy, set it free!    from ________ to
                                                                                             ________.
            Keller shifts from expectancy to awakening through literacy.

                                                                                             Add a version of
                                                                                             this sentence to
                                                                                             your draft.

TABLE 3.3

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                  3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 89

Writing             Examples and Explanation                                                        Try It
Strategy
                                                                                           Complete the
           annotat                         end annotat                                     following sentence:

           "Light! give me light!" was the wordless cry of my soul, and the light of love  My literary practice
                                                                                           or experience
Theme      shone on me in that very hour.                                                  means ________
                                                                                           to me.
           Keller equates her literacy with light and then love.
                                                                                           Add a version of
                                                                                           this sentence to
                                                                                           your draft.

TABLE 3.3

     Peer Review: Giving Specific Praise and Constructive Feedback

Although the writing process does not always occur in a prescribed sequence (you can move among steps of
the process in a variety of ways), participating in peer review is a necessary part of the writing process. Having
the response and feedback of an outside reader can help you shape your writing into work that makes you
proud. A peer review occurs when someone at your level (a peer) offers an evaluation of your writing.
Instructors aid in this process by giving you and your peers judgment criteria and guidelines to follow, and the
feedback of the reader should help you revise your writing before your instructor evaluates it and offers a
grade.

When given the opportunity to engage in a peer review activity, use the following steps to provide your peers
with effective, evidence-based feedback for their writing.

  · Review all the criteria and guidelines for the assignment.
  · Read the writing all the way through carefully before offering any feedback.
  · Read the peer review exercise, tool, or instrument provided by the instructor.
  · Apply and complete the peer review exercise while rereading the work.
  · Provide feedback to your peer. Your comments should focus on these questions:

      In what ways are the organization and coherence of the narrative logical and clear so that you can follow
          events?

      What, if anything, do you not understand or need further explanation about?
      What do you want to know more about?

Following these steps will give your reading the necessary context and situate your feedback within the criteria
and guidelines of the assignment. This process will be critical to the revision process for your peer. In addition,
reading and evaluating the work of another, and using the criteria and guidelines for that assignment, will
strengthen your writing skills and help you when you revise your own work.

Before you can engage in a successful peer review exercise, you must develop a first draft and carefully read it
to determine whether you need to make any of these changes.

  · On a global, or structural, level, do you need to insert material, delete tangents, or rearrange some
      sections? Make the changes necessary to strengthen the coherence of your draft as whole

  · On a local, or surface, level, check for grammar, punctuation, and capitalization errors.

After you have done a thorough check of your own work, you are ready to share the draft of your literacy
narrative with a peer review partner or group. Depending on the guidance of your instructor, you may use a
90 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

peer review activity such as the one provided in Table 3.4 to evaluate the literacy narrative and provide
feedback to your partner or group members.

Guided Peer Review Activity

           Essay Criteria                                   Evidence             Suggestion for Revision

The narrative engages the identity of  List evidence of the writer's  The writer could strengthen the ways in
the writer.                            identity in the narrative:     which identity is represented in the
                                       1.                             narrative by making the following
                                       2.                             changes:
                                       3.                             1.
                                                                      2.
                                                                      3.

The narrative is written from a        List evidence that indicates   The writer could develop a (stronger)
particular viewpoint or perspective.   the viewpoint or perspective   viewpoint or perspective in the narrative
                                       of the narrative:              by making the following changes:
                                       1.                             1.
                                       2.                             2.
                                       3.                             3.

The narrative has moments that are     Provide evidence from the      The narrative could be better developed if
centered on either a past or present   narrative of past or present   the following literacy experience(s) were
literacy experience.                   literacy experience(s):        included or expanded:
                                       1.                             1.
                                       2.                             2.
                                       3.                             3.

The narrative has a literacy           Identify the literacy          The focal literacy experience would be
experience that is the focus of the    experience that is the focus   stronger with the following details and/or
writing.                               of the narrative:              development:
                                                                      1.
                                                                      2.
                                                                      3.

The narrative identifies social,       List the ways in which the     The literacy narrative would be stronger if
cultural, or environmental influences  narrative includes social,     the experiences included these details
on the literacy experience(s).         cultural, or environmental     about social, cultural, or environmental
                                       influences on the literacy     influences:
                                       experience(s):                 1.
                                       1.                             2.
                                       2.                             3.
                                       3.

TABLE 3.4

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                   3.5 · Writing Process: Tracing the Beginnings of Literacy 91

           Essay Criteria                Evidence                        Suggestion for Revision

The details of the narrative include     Identify examples within the    The narrative would be stronger if the
descriptions of people, places, things,  narrative that provide details  following details about people, places,
and events.                              about people, places, things,   things, and events were more fully
                                         and events:                     developed:
                                         1.                              1.
                                         2.                              2.
                                         3.                              3.

The elements of the rhetorical           List elements of the            The narrative would be more effective if
situation--author, message, audience,    rhetorical situation included   the following elements of the rhetorical
purpose, means, context, and             in the narrative:               situation were more fully developed and
culture--are addressed and included                                      provided greater details (list all that
in the essay.                              · Author                      apply):
                                           · Message
                                           · Audience                      · Author
                                           · Purpose                       · Message
                                           · Means                         · Audience
                                           · Context                       · Purpose
                                           · Culture                       · Means
                                                                           · Context
                                                                           · Culture

TABLE 3.4

After you and your partner have completed the written guided exercise, spend some time talking about the
elements of the essay and the feedback that you are giving one another. Talk through the suggestions, and ask
questions about issues that arise during your assessment of one another's writing.

     Revising: Adding and Deleting Information

After you have completed the peer review exercise and received the related constructive feedback, you are
ready to revise your literacy narrative in preparation for submission to your instructor for grading and a
possible publication venue. (See "Spotlight on . . . the Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN).") The peer
review exercise guided you and your partner or group members through a thorough assessment of your
narratives. If you are not able to participate in peer review, make an appointment with your campus writing
center to receive similar feedback. After getting responses from peers or the writing center, the next step is to
take that feedback and make changes to your draft.

Look at the criteria in the first row of the peer review chart above, and then look at the evidence for that criteria
that your partner listed. Does your reviewer's understanding of the parts of your essay match your own? Where
are the disconnects between what you intended for a section of your writing and what your reviewer has read
and understood? These points of disconnect are good places to begin your revisions. Your peer reviewers
represent your audience, so if they experience some misunderstandings in the reading of your narrative, you
will want to make changes to clarify your writing.

Imagine you have written a literacy narrative in which you discuss the difficulty of learning to read music.
Imagine the opening paragraph contains the following sentence: "I have always had a hard time reading
music." Your peer reviewer might list in column 2, for the first criterion on engaging identity, that you read
music, and that is all. Such a brief and limited assessment might lead your partner to suggest in column 3 that
92 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

      you strengthen your identity by answering the following questions:

        · When and why did you begin trying to learn to read music?
        · Do you come from a musical background?
        · Did you have a music reading teacher, or are you self-taught?
        · What are your specific challenges in reading music?

      During the discussion after the written peer review, you might share the details of your learning to play the
      piano: that you were five years old and that your grandmother was your teacher. Your revision for this opening
      paragraph might then include a sentence such as the following: "I have struggled to read music since I began
      playing piano at five years old, when my grandmother, our church musician, gave me my first lesson." This
      process demonstrates the way in which the peer review should lead to substantive change and revision in your
      writing.

      You will want to read and discuss the details of the evidence (column 2) and suggestions (column 3) for each of
      the above criteria (column 1) with your peer review partner. On the basis of your partner's assessment--and
      your own judgment, of course--make any necessary revisions before submitting your literacy narrative for
      grading. The more time you take to go through this process, the more developed and comprehensive your
      writing will be. Some people may feel anxious about having others read their work, but the scenario provided
      above demonstrates the valuable ways in which a preliminary reading audience can help improve the
      narrative.

    3.6 Editing Focus: Sentence Structure

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Use language structures, including multilingual structures, grammar, punctuation, and spelling, during the
            process of editing.

        · Develop flexible strategies for drafting, reviewing, collaborating, revising, rewriting, and editing.
        · Use composing processes and tools as a means to discover and reconsider ideas.

      After writing a draft of your literacy narrative and revising it to strengthen the overall structure and content of
      the text, you are ready to pay closer attention to individual sentences within it. This section offers several
      strategies for improving your sentences to communicate meaning more effectively to your audience and to
      make the reading experience more engaging.

     Sentence Combining

      Sentence combining is an often-used revision strategy that can completely transform a narrative. When
      writers compose early drafts with many short sentences rather than more sophisticated efforts at varied or
      complex sentence construction, the writing appears choppy and disjointed. Once you have a complete draft of
      your essay, consider combining sentences to provide your audience with more effective and nuanced ways of
      reading your work. You can combine short, repetitive sentences into a simple sentence with a compound
      predicate or subject, as in the first example below. Or you can combine the shorter sentences into a complex
      sentence with a dependent clause, as in the second example. See Clear and Effective Sentences for more
      information about effective sentences and sentence structure.

      1a. I learned to play piano. I was five years old. Learning to play piano is my literacy experience. Memorizing
      the location of the keys is also my literacy experience.

      1b. Learning to play piano at the age of five and memorizing the location of the keys are my literacy
      experiences.

      2a. I learned to read in first grade. Learning to read made me want to be a teacher. I want to share my
      experience with reading with future first graders.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                     3.6 · Editing Focus: Sentence Structure 93

2b. Learning to read as a first grader made me want to become a teacher so that I could share my experiences
with future first graders.

Read through the draft of your essay, and look for sentences that are closely related enough that they can be
combined for richer meaning. However, keep in mind that short sentences can be effective in your writing,
especially when you want to create realistic dialogue or show action. Strive to create a balance among sentence
lengths and types to engage your audience. Remember, too, that the best test of whether words are pulling their
own weight and providing rhythm, balance, and emphasis is to read the passage aloud. Let your ear tell you
what is sharp and clear and what could benefit from editing.

Revising Common Sentence Patterns for More Effective Communication

If you have often been told to make your sentences clearer, less wordy, or both, but you do not know where to
start, this section offers some quick strategies to address some of the most common issues that contribute to
unclear or wordy writing.

Defining You and This. One common pattern that makes writing less clear is the use of you to mean "a random
person" rather than "you," the audience. Here is an example, followed by a revision.

1a. You must plan your document carefully to connect with your audience.

1b. Wunrditeerrlsinemnedusutnpdlaenrlitunhnedireerdnloidnceumndeenrtlsincearefully to connect with tuhnedireeranluidndeiuenndceersl.ine

This sentence is stronger with the revision clearly indicating who needs to plan their writing. You might be
writing a piece addressed directly to the audience, as this textbook is. If so, be careful to distinguish between
the use of you to mean your specific audience--appropriate when directly addressing an audience--and a
hazier use of you that needs clarification. Use the "find" function to search your document for the word you,
and then replace every unclear you with a definite noun.

Another pattern affecting the clarity of written work is using the word this on its own without an explanation of
what "this" is. Here is an example, along with its revision.

1a. This can be confusing to the reader.

1b. This luancdkeorflienxeplanationecnadnubnedceornlifnuesing to the reader.

In the first sentence, the audience wonders, "This what?" In the second sentence, the writer simply adds a
noun phrase to explain, and readers will appreciate the clarification. Use the "find" function to search your
document for this, and make sure you have defined or explained this in all cases.

Revising Sentences to Change There are / There is or It is. Readers relate better to sentences that feature a
"doer"--someone or something performing an action--and an "action"--the activity of the doer. For this reason,
writing that overuses the sentence patterns There are . . . / There is . . . and It is . . . in place of a doer and action
can seem unclear, remote, or dull for the reader. As you revise such sentences, you may find at times that you
need to insert a doer or an action; one or both may be missing from the first version of the sentence. Here is
one example, with a suggested revision.

1a. There are many strategies to revise written work.

1b. Aunudtheorrlisneemployemndanuynsdterarltiengeies to revise written work.

In the first sentence, the doer ("authors") is implied, but the second sentence includes a doer for a more
reader-friendly version.

Sentences using the It is . . . pattern need similar attention to present a doer and an action to the reader. Here is
one example and revision.

1a. It is challenging and rewarding to revise a composition.
94 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

      1b. Iufnedeelercnlhindaelulenndgeerdlinaend rewarded when revising a composition.

      Again, the first sentence needs an agent to do the sentence's actions. Use the "find" function to search your
      document for "there are," "there is," and "it is," and replace these weaker sentence constructions with doers
      and actions wherever possible.

     Eliminating Wordiness. To begin, look at the sentences below to get a sense of what wordiness is. Eliminating
      wordiness should not alter or omit information. In these sentences, the information remains the same, but the
     edited sentence shows a trimmed-down version. There was and that are eliminated, as is the unnecessary
     adverb really; was shining becomes shone; and the phrase waves in the ocean becomes ocean waves.

      1a. There was a really bright light that was shining on the waves in the ocean.

      1b. A bright light shone on the ocean waves.

      In general, try to cut out words that do not add meaning, rhythm, or emphasis. Sentences clogged with
      unnecessary words often cause readers to lose interest, patience, and comprehension. Edit sentences to
      include concrete nouns and action verbs--or "doers" and "actions," as described above. Additionally, choosing
      modifiers carefully will help you weed out unnecessary words. Look at the following sentences, which all say
      essentially the same thing. However, you will see some changes and omissions.

        · In almost every situation that I can think of, except with few exceptions, it will make good sense for you to
            look for as many places as possible to cut out needless, redundant, and repetitive words from the papers
            and reports, paragraphs and sentences you write for college assignments. (49 words)

        · In most situations, it makes good sense to cut out needless words from your college papers. (16 words)
        · Whenever possible, omit needless words from your writing. (8 words)
        · Omit needless words. (3 words)

      The 49-word sentence is full of early-draft language; you can almost visualize the writer finding their way while
      writing. The 16-word sentence says much the same thing with far fewer words. Most of this editing simply cut
      out unnecessary words. Only at the end were several wordy phrases condensed: "from the papers and reports,
      paragraphs and sentences you write for college assignments" was reduced to "from your college papers." That
      16-word sentence was reduced by half by rephrasing and dropping the emphasis on college writing. And that
      sentence was whittled down by nearly two-thirds to arrive at the core three-word sentence, "Omit needless
      words."

      The first sentence is long-winded by any standard or in any context; each of the next three might serve well in
      different situations. Thus, when you edit to make language more concise, think about the overall effect you
      intend to create. Sometimes the briefest construction is not the best one for your purpose. For example, the
      three-word sentence is more suited to a brief list than to a sentence of advice for this book.

     Editing for More Effective Sentences

      This paragraph from a student's first draft of a narrative contains sentences that need editing. On a separate
     sheet of paper, revise the sentences to eliminate There are . . . / It is . . . , unclear you and this, and wordiness.
      For better flow, combine sentences that are repetitive or choppy.

      It is now hours later. I think it is almost midnight, in fact. I have finally managed to get my paper started and
      studied for my exam. My eyes are very tired. I get up and leave my comfortable chair. Next, I walk out of the
      library. You have to walk through a glass door. I retrace the path that goes back to my apartment, where I came
      from earlier.

      Revision: _________________________________________________________________

      Since it is midnight, it is dark, and I nervously listen to footsteps. They are coming up behind me. Then they
      get too close for comfort. This is really making me very, very nervous. I am really very scared, but I step over to
      the sidewalk's edge. I am trying to be calm, and I let a man walk briskly past. Phew!

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                          3.7 · Evaluation: Self-Evaluating 95

Revision: _________________________________________________________________

When I am finally at my door to my apartment, I fumble for the key to the door. I insert the key in the lock. I
open the door, put my hand on the switch to turn on the hall light, and step inside the door to my apartment.
There are two slices of pizza left in the box that is on the kitchen counter. They are really cold and very
congealed.

Revision: _________________________________________________________________

Possible edited version. Hours later--my paper started, my exam studied for, my eyes tired--I leave my
comfortable chair in the library, go through the glass door, and retrace the path to my apartment. It is midnight
now. I listen closely when I hear footsteps approaching behind me, their steady rhythm making me nervous.
Scared, I step to the sidewalk's edge to let a man walk briskly past. Phew! At my apartment door, I fumble for
the key, insert it in the lock, open the door, tum on the hall light, and step inside. On the kitchen counter, I see
the box with its two slices of cold, congealed pizza.

3.7 Evaluation: Self-Evaluating

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Gain experience negotiating variations in genre conventions.
  · Learn common formats and design features for different kinds of texts.
  · Identify how genre conventions for structure, paragraphing, tone, and mechanics vary.

The section below provides a rubric that your instructor will use to evaluate the aspect of your literacy
experience that you have chosen to explore in a full essay. Refer to it frequently throughout the writing process
to make sure that you are fulfilling the requirements of the assignment.

Rubric

      Score  Critical Language Awareness                  Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical
                                                                                                Choices
5            The text always adheres to the "Editing      The text always maintains
Skillful     Focus" of this chapter--combining            focus on the central narrative  The text always
             independent clauses appropriately, as        and provides detailed           demonstrates an
             discussed in Section 3.6--and employs a      description and thorough        awareness of the
             variety of complex sentence structures. The  development of characters,      rhetorical
             text also shows ample evidence of the        setting, and sensory details,   situation: author,
             writer's intent to consciously meet or       and it demonstrates a clear     message,
             challenge conventional expectations in       and organized sequence of       audience,
             rhetorically effective ways.                 events.                         purpose, means,
                                                                                          context, and
                                                                                          culture.

TABLE 3.5
96 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

Score         Critical Language Awareness                   Clarity and Coherence           Rhetorical
                                                                                             Choices

4             The text usually adheres to the "Editing      The text usually maintains      The text
Accomplished  Focus" of this chapter--combining             focus on the central narrative  consistently
              independent clauses appropriately, as         and provides detailed           demonstrates an
              discussed in Section 3.6--and employs         description and development     awareness of the
              complex sentence structures.                  of characters, setting, and     rhetorical
                                                            sensory details, and it         situation: author,
              The text also shows some evidence of the      demonstrates an organized       message,
              writer's intent to meet or challenge          sequence of events.             audience,
              conventional expectations in rhetorically                                     purpose, means,
              effective ways.                                                               context, and
                                                                                            culture.

3             The text generally adheres to the "Editing    The text generally maintains    The text
Capable       Focus" of this chapter--combining             focus on the central narrative  generally
              independent clauses appropriately, as         and provides detailed           demonstrates an
              discussed in Section 3.6--and employs         description and development     awareness of the
              complex sentence structures.                  of characters, setting, and     rhetorical
                                                            sensory details, and it         situation: author,
              The text also shows limited evidence of the   demonstrates some               message,
              writer's intent to meet or challenge          organization in the sequence    audience,
              conventional expectations in rhetorically     of events.                      purpose, means,
              effective ways.                                                               context, and
                                                                                            culture.

2             The text occasionally adheres to the          The text occasionally           The text
Developing    "Editing Focus" of this chapter--combining    maintains focus on the central  occasionally
              independent clauses appropriately, as         narrative and provides          demonstrates an
              discussed in Section 3.6--and employs         detailed description and        awareness of the
              complex sentence structures.                  thorough development of         rhetorical
                                                            characters, setting, and        situation: author,
              The text also shows emerging evidence of      sensory details, and it         message,
              the writer's intent to meet or challenge      demonstrates an attempt at      audience,
              conventional expectations in rhetorically     organization in the sequence    purpose, means,
              effective ways.                               of events.                      context, and
                                                                                            culture.

1             The text does not adhere to the "Editing      The text does not maintain      The text does
Beginning     Focus" of this chapter--combining             focus on the central narrative  not demonstrate
              independent clauses in meaningful ways, as    or provide detailed             an awareness of
              discussed in Section 3.6--or employ           description or thorough         the rhetorical
              complex sentence structures.                  development of characters,      situation: author,
                                                            setting, or sensory details,    message,
              The text also shows little to no evidence of  and it does not demonstrate a   audience,
              the writer's intent to meet or challenge      clear and organized sequence    purpose, means,
              conventional expectations in rhetorically     of events.                      context, and
              effective ways.                                                               culture.

TABLE 3.5

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                           3.8 · Spotlight on ... The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN) 97

3.8 Spotlight on ... The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN)

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Use a variety of technologies to address a range of audiences.
  · Match the capacities of different environments to varying rhetorical situations.

FIGURE 3.15 Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom (credit: "The Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom" by Garrett/
flickr, CC BY 2.0)
An archive is a collection of artifacts, often historical, that serve to document a time period, location, or group
of people. Archives may be located far from cities, accessible only in person, and they typically house rare
documents that visitors view or handle with particular care. When an archive is digitized, however, visitors are
allowed to view the document in virtual spaces, thus creating an open and accessible environment. The Digital
Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN) "is an open public resource made up of stories from people just like you
about their experiences learning to read, write, and generally communicate with the world around them."
People who have diverse identities, lived experiences, and engagement with literacies have uploaded their
literacy narratives and given permission for their stories to be read and shared with public audiences.

Using the Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN)

The DALN is completely keyword searchable, so if you are looking to read literacy narratives on particular
subjects--such as music or dance as literacy, or any other concentrated subject about which one can
demonstrate knowledge--you can search for shared narratives with these literacies. As the website states, "The
DALN invites people of all ages, races, communities, backgrounds, and interests to contribute stories about
how--and in what circumstances--they read, write, and compose meaning, and how they learned to do so (or
helped others learn)." Sharing your literacy narrative in the DALN can be a rewarding way to celebrate the
completion of this writing milestone. The DALN welcomes literacy narratives of all kinds and in all formats,
including diaries, blogs, poetry, music, videos, letters, stories, chat rooms, and so on.

Publish Your Literacy Narrative

After you have completed and revised your literacy narrative, consider sharing it with the DALN
(https://openstax.org/r/daln) You may also want to consider reimagining your literacy narrative in the form of a
podcast or a TED Talk-type video. The TED Talks in TED Talk is an acronym that stands for the phrase
"Technology, Entertainment, and Design." TED (https://openstax.org/r/ted) is a nonprofit organization devoted
to the distribution of ideas; the website is keyword searchable and provides an archive where you can find
short talks about just about any topic. The criteria (https://openstax.org/r/criteria) for a TED Talk can be found
on the organization's website. To prepare for this publication alternative, take an opportunity to watch the
98 3 · Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps

      following sample TED Talks that fit the genre of literacy narrative:
        · Luvvie Ajayi (https://openstax.org/r/luvvieajayi) discusses how blogging and creating a post that went viral
            led to her identifying as a writer.
        · John Trischitti (https://openstax.org/r/johntrischitti) talks about how reading literally saves lives and
            advocates for providing young people with books to secure their futures.

    3.9 Portfolio: A Literacy Artifact

      LEARNING OUTCOMES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to:

        · Reflect on the development of composing processes.
        · Consider how those processes affect your work.
      Your instructor may require a portfolio as a part of the composition course curriculum. A portfolio is a
      collection of your work, gathered in a single place for the purpose of assessing your growth and achievement as
      a writer. A portfolio allows you not only to include writing artifacts but also to reflect on the process of
      composing those artifacts. In this section, you will have an opportunity to compose a reflection on the process
      of writing your literacy narrative.

     Reflection Prompt

      One of the most valuable writing exercises is to reflect on work you have completed or experiences you have
      had. Reflection supports learning by allowing writers to articulate the impact that experiences have had on
      various aspects of their lives. In responding to the ideas in this section, take some time to reflect on your
      experiences, as well as the experiences of others, with literacy and learning. Using the guidelines your
      instructor provides, compose a reflection that responds to the following questions:

        · How has your understanding of literacies been affected by the opportunity to reflect on your engagement
            with literacy practices, the practices of those in your composition course community, or the practices of
            people beyond your immediate community?

        · How will this experience and reflection affect your future engagement with various literacies?

     Literacy Narrative Revision

      Submitting the best version of your work is an important part of preparing a portfolio. After you have received
      a graded essay with comments from your instructor, use those comments as a resource to revise the essay for a
      final time. You will want to use this revised essay for your portfolio submission.

       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                          3 · Further Reading 99

Further Reading

The digital and hard-copy texts and other materials listed below can provide additional models and context for
    your work in reading and writing in the literacy narrative genre.

Coates, Ta-Nehisi. "Ta-Nehisi Coates on Asking Questions That Have No Answers." YouTube, uploaded by The
    Atlantic, 21 Feb. 2017, www.youtube.com/watch?v=JIgpNuCy-eA.

Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives. The Ohio State U and Georgia State U, www.thedaln.org/#/home.
Hernandez Castillo, Marcelo. Children of the Land: A Memoir. Harper, 2020.
Hurston, Zora Neale. Dust Tracks on a Road: An Autobiography. J. B. Lippincott, 1942.
Lamott, Anne. "Shitty First Drafts." Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life, Pantheon Books, 1994,

    pp. 21-27.
"Literacy." UNESCO, 8 Mar. 2021, en.unesco.org/themes/literacy.
Peterson, Amber. "Literacy Is More Than Just Reading and Writing." Literacy & NCTE, National Council of

    Teachers of English, 23 Mar. 2020, ncte.org/blog/2020/03/literacy-just-reading-writing/.
Polacco, Patricia. Thank You, Mr. Falker. Philomel Books, 1998.
Rose, Mike. Why School? Reclaiming Education for All of Us. New Press, 2009.

Works Cited

Anzaldúa, Gloria. Borderlands / La Frontera: The New Mestiza. Aunt Lute Books, 1987.
Douglass, Frederick. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Anti-slavery Office, 1845.
"Frederick Douglass." U.S. National Park Service, 15 July 2020, www.nps.gov/people/frederick-douglass.htm.
Gottschall, Jonathan. The Storytelling Animal: How Stories Make Us Human. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.
Keller, Helen. The Story of My Life. 1903. Project Gutenberg, 4 Feb. 2013, www.gutenberg.org/files/2397/

    2397-h/2397-h.htm.
"Literacy." UNESCO, 8 Mar. 2021, en.unesco.org/themes/literacy.
"Rhode Island Union of Colored Women's Clubs." League of Women Voters of Rhode Island, 12 May 2021,

    my.lwv.org/rhode-island/centennial-suffrage-history/rhode-island-union-colored-women%E2%80%99s-
    clubs.
Westover, Tara. Educated: A Memoir. Random House, 2018.
Yousafzai, Malala. I Am Malala: The Girl Who Stood Up for Education and Was Shot by the Taliban. Weidenfeld
    & Nicolson, 2013.

Works Consulted

Baker-Bell, April, et al. "This Ain't Another Statement! This Is a DEMAND for Black Linguistic Justice!"
   Conference on College Composition and Communication, National Council of Teachers of English, July
    2020, cccc.ncte.org/cccc/demand-for-black-linguistic-justice.

Banks, Adam J. "Oakland, the Word, and the Divide: How We All Missed the Moment." Race, Rhetoric, and
   Technology: Searching for Higher Ground, Lawrence Erlbaum, 2006, pp. 11-46.

Burke, Kenneth. A Grammar of Motives. Prentice-Hall, 1945.
"Definition of Literacy in a Digital Age." National Council of Teachers of English, 7 Nov. 2019, ncte.org/
100 3 · Works Consulted

    statement/nctes-definition-literacy-digital-age/.
Elbow, Peter. "Inviting the Mother Tongue: Beyond `Mistakes,' `Bad English,' and `Wrong Language.'" JAC, vol.

    19, no. 3, 1999, pp. 359-388.
Horner, Bruce, et al. "Language Difference in Writing: Toward a Translingual Approach." College English, vol.

    73, no. 3, 2011, pp. 303-321.
"Paramedic Method: A Lesson in Writing Concisely." OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab, Purdue U, 2021,

    owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/academic_writing/paramedic_method.html.
Royster, Jacqueline Jones. "When the First Voice You Hear Is Not Your Own." College Composition and

   Communication, vol. 47, no. 1, 1996, pp. 29-40.
"Students' Right to Their Own Language." 1974. Conference on College Composition and Communication,

    National Council of Teachers of English, prod-ncte-cdn.azureedge.net/nctefiles/groups/cccc/newsrtol.pdf.
Williams, Joseph M., and Joseph Bizup. Style: The Basics of Clarity and Grace. 5th ed., Pearson, 2015.

Access for free at openstax.org.
3 · Works Consulted 101
Unit 2

Bridging the Divide
Between Personal
Identity and Academia

Introduction

Unit 2 is about academia, a term for the world of education. The challenge in
this part of your journey is learning to showcase your identity and your viewpoint
within an exploration of traditional writing genres. You will learn that academia is
defined in part by its traditions. In the writing classroom, expect to be asked to
write in a variety of narrative and academic genres. Each of these genres is
characterized by a defined set of structures and expectations. However,
because writing is also a creative art form, you will find more than enough room
in academia to develop your individual voice and to challenge conventions and
expectations as you write about different subjects. As you approach the
assignments in this unit, consider ways to infuse your writing with your
personality and identity--your unique voice.
Learning Lessons from the Personal Memoir or Personal Narrative: 4

FIGURE 4.1 Personal narratives and memoirs give the narrator's perspective on a life experience. Here, a Florida
family is having a makeshift meal together at a shelter set up during Hurricane Charley in 2004 for people who had
to evacuate their homes. How do you imagine the parents and children are feeling and getting along during this
time? What might the children, now adults, say about their memories of the hurricane? Family relationships and
living through natural disasters are frequent subjects of personal writing. (credit: "Photograph by Mark Wolfe" by
Mark Wolfe/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

4.1 Exploring the Past to Understand the Present
4.2 Memoir Trailblazer: Ta-Nehisi Coates
4.3 Glance at Genre: Conflict, Detail, and Revelation
4.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Life on the Mississippi by Mark Twain
4.5 Writing Process: Making the Personal Public
4.6 Editing Focus: More on Characterization and Point of View
4.7 Evaluation: Structure and Organization
4.8 Spotlight on ... Multilingual Writers
4.9 Portfolio: Filtered Memories
INTRODUCTION Since pen was first put to paper, authors have been recording their personal experiences in
order to perpetuate them, share meaningful lessons learned, or simply entertain an audience. Indeed, even as
far back as Roman ruler Julius Caesar (100-44 BCE), who wrote accounts of his epic battles, authors have
104 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

       written to preserve history, seek acclaim for accomplishments, and pass down wisdom. Writing about your
       own life can feel alternately satisfying, terrifying, and exhilarating. It allows you to share meaningful personal
       experiences, to reflect on them, and to connect on a new level with your audience. Personal writing can reveal
       more than just events you've experienced--it tells your audience who you are as you relate personal
       experiences to convey humor, compassion, fears, and beliefs.

       A personal narrative is a form of nonfiction writing in which the author recounts an event or incident from
       their life. A memoir is a type of nonfiction writing in which the author tells a first-person version of a time
       period or an event in their life. Because the two genres, or forms of writing, share more similarities than
       differences, they are covered here together. Personal writing, whether a narrative or a memoir, is an
       opportunity to share your lived experiences with readers. A personal narrative tells a story and often includes
       memories and anecdotes (short, amusing, or interesting stories about something that happened in real life) to
       relate events and ideas. Like all good writing, personal narratives have an overarching theme (message you
       want to impart to your readers) and a purpose beyond the story itself. Although personal narratives usually
       follow the traditional narrative arc of exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, and resolution, personal
       writing has several unique features. Unlike some forms of academic writing, personal writing welcomes the
       use of first-person point of view (narrator participates in events), and narratives and memoirs often have a
       narrow focus.

       The key to effective personal writing is to know your audience and purpose. You may write to relay an event, to
       teach a lesson, or to explore an idea. You may write to help provide relief from stages of deep emotion (a
       process called catharsis), to evoke an emotional response, or simply to entertain readers. Above all, a personal
       narrative or memoir tells about an individual's experience or a series of events in a way that emotionally
       engages readers. The more clearly and vividly you share your experience, the more likely readers will be
       moved.

       This chapter presents an excerpt from American writer Mark Twain's Life on the Mississippi (1883), a memoir
       about his years as a steamboat pilot on the Mississippi River. Studying this text and Twain's use of the
       components of personal narrative will help you understand how authors create meaningful accounts of
       personal events. Later in the chapter, you too will create a personal narrative about an important event in your
       life.

     4.1 Exploring the Past to Understand the Present

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating.
         · Read in several genres to understand how genre conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and writers'

             practices and purposes.

       Personal writing is unique in that it tells your story. Because it is a form of storytelling, there may be a
       tendency to discount personal writing as less academic or less valuable a skill than more formal writing.
       Although it may allow for greater freedom in style and content, personal writing is valuable in its own right
       because it enables you to make sense of the world as you--not others--experience it.

       Two genres of this type of writing are personal narratives and memoirs. A genre is a category of writing that
       features compositions with distinct characteristics, styles, content, and formats. These two genres belong to
       the larger family of creative nonfiction, a term that applies to the kind of nonfiction writing that shares many
       traits with fiction writing. The main difference is that the plots, settings, and characters come from real life
       rather than an author's imagination. (For more about the characteristics of literary nonfiction, see Print or
       Textual Analysis: What You Read.) Works of creative nonfiction include American writers Sebastian Junger's (b.
       1962) The Perfect Storm (1997), Jon Krakauer's (b. 1954) Into Thin Air (1997), and Terry Tempest Williams's
       (b. 1955) Refuge (1991). Shorter pieces appear regularly in popular literary magazines, especially in The New

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                      4.2 · Trailblazer 105

Yorker, Harper's Magazine, and The Atlantic, as well as in periodicals such as Sports Illustrated, Rolling Stone,
and The Wall Street Journal.

Writers of narrative nonfiction commonly borrow stylistic and formal techniques from the fast-paced visual
narratives of film and television as well as from the innovative language of poetry, fiction, and drama. These
influences encourage a multifaceted, multidimensional prose style to keep pace with the multifaceted and
multidimensional real world. In addition to memoirs and personal narratives, biographies, autobiographies,
and literary journalism are considered creative nonfiction.

Differences between Memoir and Personal Narrative

Both a memoir and a personal narrative are accounts of personal experiences written in a narrative style, but
there are some differences. A memoir is an account of certain incidents in a person's life, often from a specific
period of time. The narrator is a character in the story and reflects on past events to draw a conclusion based
on those events. Memoirs focus on how the author remembers a part of their own life. On the other hand,
personal narratives typically center on one major event through which the narrator reveals thoughts, feelings,
and possibly related experiences. Like other works in the narrative genre, personal narratives and memoirs
develop setting, plot, characterization, and dialogue.

The word memoir comes from the French mémoire, meaning "memory." Personal writing relies on memory
but is not necessarily an account of every detail of the event the author is writing about. If this were the case, it
could make for dry and tedious reading, contrary to what most authors seek--audience engagement. The more
important aim is to create a composition that is emotionally authentic and conveys the core sentiment of an
event, time period, or lesson and its impact on you, the writer. In the next section, you will meet an author who
does just that. He reflects on deeply personal events from his own life as they relate to broader cultural and
social issues. The subject of your personal narrative or memoir should not be just you, though you will tell a
story from your life. The overall message of the story should be about something bigger--a universal
understanding, a lesson learned, a common human experience. The more readers can relate to your story
through the details you include, the more it will mean to them.

The Cultural Aspect

Personal writing provides a unique opportunity to explore cultural contexts. Culture--shared values, customs,
arts, and traits of a social group--is at the heart of personal narratives and memoirs and should be part of their
central focus. Including historical information, anecdotes, and vivid details in your writing, as well as using a
specific and relevant English variety, helps you depict the cultures that are part of your life and enhances
readers' understanding. Thus, readers are likely to experience deeper empathy and emotional responses in
connection to the larger issues presented. You also provide opportunities for culture to be shared as a
common human experience.

4.2 Trailblazer

Memoir Trailblazer: Ta-Nehisi Coates

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read for inquiry, learning, and critical thinking to determine how authors develop personal narratives and
      memoirs.

  · Identify composition techniques for personal writing in various rhetorical and cultural contexts.
106 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

                                               "I just felt this . . .
                                            deep need to express

                                              myself. . . . I felt the
                                                  deep need to
                                                  understand."

           FIGURE 4.2 Author Ta-Nehisi Coates often frames
           current events from the perspective of his own lived
           experiences. (credit: "Ta Nehisi Coates 2 BBF 2010
           Shankbone" by David Shankbone/ Wikicommons, CC BY
           3.0)

      The Storyteller's Tools: Context and Voice

       Ta-Nehisi Coates (b. 1975) is a best-selling author, journalist, and educator. His writing explores complex
       issues such as race relations, urban policing, and racial identity, often focusing on his personal experiences as
       a person of color. Coates was born in Baltimore, Maryland. His mother was a teacher, his father a librarian and
       founder of the Black Classic Press, which publishes and republishes significant works by and about lesser-
       known people of African descent. Reading the works of these authors instilled in oates a lifelong love of reading
       and learning and a desire to experience the world outside his neighborhood.
       Coates began his writing vocation at age 17, first exploring the genre of poetry. He studied journalism at
       Howard University for five years but did not graduate. However, he did write and begin earning bylines as a
       young writer, publishing articles in popular periodicals such as Washington Monthly, Mother Jones, and Time.
       In 2008, he became a national correspondent for The Atlantic, often writing articles and covering stories about
       national current events. Among other topics, he has written about Barack Obama (b. 1961) as the first Black
       president and the shooting of Florida teen Trayvon Martin (1995-2012).
       True to the genre of personal narrative, Coates focuses his writing not only on his lived experiences but also on
       their meaning in the context of larger cultural and social issues, specifically examining race relations and
       racial equity. In 2008, Coates published his first book, the critically acclaimed memoir The Beautiful Struggle:
       A Father, Two Sons, and an Unlikely Road to Manhood. In it, he writes about his childhood, especially his
       memories of his father. A former member of the Black Panther Party (founded in 1966), Coates's father raised

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                      4.2 · Trailblazer 107

him and his six siblings as a family unit in West Baltimore. Coates's father and the children's four mothers
raised the siblings together. Though they didn't all live together, they were a continuing and active presence in
one another's lives.

FIGURE 4.3 Bobby Seale (left; b. 1936) and Huey P. Newton (right; 1942-1989) founded the Black Panther Party in
1966 in response to police violence and racism. (credit: "Black and white poster of Huey Newton and Bobby Seale"
by Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture, Public Domain)
Coates credits his unusual upbringing with providing him both stability and early access to influential "Afro-
centric" literature, which would influence his life and career. His memoir reflects the steps his father took to
encourage his son's development into adulthood, from reading all types of books to exploring the
neighborhood to helping him grapple with what it means to be a Black man in America. This lived experience
is central to the personal narrative he creates in The Beautiful Struggle.
Coates's best-known essay, "The Case for Reparations," which proposes reparations for slavery, was published
in The Atlantic in June 2014. Framing his argument around the history of slavery, Coates paints a picture
detailing the connections among slavery, race, and economics, specifically focusing on the modern Chicago
housing crisis and policy. "The essence of American racism is disrespect," he proposes.
The next year, Coates published the best seller Between the World and Me, a personal narrative written as a
letter to his teenage son. In this book, recounting his own upbringing in Baltimore's violent inner city during
the crack cocaine epidemic, Coates explores the idea that the structure of American society fosters white
supremacy. He reveals his wish for his son, now "growing into consciousness": "that you feel no need to
constrict yourself to make other people comfortable." In 2019, Coates published his first novel, The Water
Dancer, a work of historical fiction about a slave who helps in the Underground Railroad.
In addition to writing, Coates is an educator. From 2012 to 2014, he was a visiting professor at MIT, and in
2014, he joined the faculty of the City University of New York as a journalist-in-residence. Coates compares
writing to a refining process: by applying pressure to yourself, you develop new muscles. He calls writing "an
act of physical courage" that relies on the revision process to translate thought to page: "I . . . consider the
entire process about failure, and I think that's . . . why more people don't write."
108 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

       Coates uses doubling in his writing. Because he is both protagonist and narrator, he sees himself as both
       subject and object, both character and storyteller, and at once a participant and an observer in his narration.
       Such doubling is often symbolic in memoirs, represented by paired events or mirroring.

       You can watch Advice on Writing (https://openstax.org/r/adviceonwriting) to learn more of Coates's advice to
       writers such as yourself. You can also read some of his articles (https://openstax.org/r/articles) to study his
       writing style. Listen as American correspondent Martha Teichner (b. 1948), interviews Coates on CBS Sunday
       Morning (https://openstax.org/r/cbssundaymorning), November 5, 2017.

      Discussion Questions

       1. How might Coates's use of personal stories influence the emotions of his readers?

       2. How might Coates use personal anecdotes and current events to create commentary on broad historical
            ideas? What personal events can you link to more wide-ranging ideas or issues?

       3. What is the impact of the cultural and lived experiences that Coates weaves into his personal writing? How
            would the impact differ if he wrote in a more academic style?

       4. Coates says his writing process is about pressure and failure. In what way is failure part of the development
            of narrative writing?

       5. On what turning points or important events might Coates focus in his memoir when discussing his father?

     4.3 Glance at Genre: Conflict, Detail, and Revelation

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify common formats and design features used to develop a personal narrative or memoir.
         · Show that genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.

       In personal writing genres, you share experiences of your life, centering them on a specific theme or memory.
       Unlike an autobiography, which typically extends across an entire lifetime or at least a number of years,
       memoirs and personal narratives are shaped by a narrower focus, with more specific storytelling surrounding
       a time period or an event. When writing in these personal genres, authors seek to make an emotional
       connection with their audience to relate an experience, emotion, or lesson learned.

      Characteristics of Memoirs and Personal Narratives

       One way to approach a memoir or personal narrative is to think of it as a written series of
       photographs--snapshots of a period of time, moment, or sequence of events connected by a theme. In fact,
       writing prose snapshots is analogous to constructing and arranging a photo album composed of separate
       images. Photo albums, when carefully assembled from informational snapshots, tell stories with clear
       beginnings, middles, and endings. However, they show a lot of white space between one picture and the next,
       with few transitions explaining how the photographer got from one scene to another. In other words, while
       photo albums tell stories, they do so piecemeal, requiring viewers to fill in or imagine what happens between
       shots. You also might think of snapshots as individual slides in a slideshow or pictures in an exhibition--each
       the work of the same maker, each a different view, all connected by some logic, the whole presenting a story.

       Written snapshots function in the same way as visual snapshots, each connected to the next by white space.
       Sometimes written snapshots can function as a series of complete and independent paragraphs, each an
       entire thought, without obvious connections or transitions to the preceding or following paragraph. White
       space between one snapshot and another gives readers breathing space, allowing them time to digest one
       thought before continuing to the next. It also exercises readers' imaginations; as they participate in
       constructing logic that offers textual meaning, the readers themselves make connections and construct
       meaning. At other times, snapshots flow more directly, one after another, through chronological, circular,

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                 4.3 · Glance at Genre: Conflict, Detail, and Revelation 109

parallel, or other structures to move from event to event.
The secret to using snapshots successfully in your writing is to place them carefully in an order that conveys a
theme and creates an unbreakable thread. And as with visual snapshots, writers must carefully choose which
moments to include--and which to omit. Because they tell stories, memoirs and personal narratives share
aspects of the fictional narrative genre. In writing them, you will use crafting tools to tell a vivid and purposeful
story that takes into consideration your personal experience and the needs of your reader.

The Storyteller's Dilemma: Clarity of Action

How you construct your story is as important as the story you choose to tell. Deciding on the most effective way
the way to tell the story--that is, deciding what framework to use--helps you develop clarity of action to lead
readers to the theme or message you seek to develop. Various components work together to bring clarity, but
most often in a memoir or personal narrative, clarity comes from plot and character development. Narratives
often follow a general structure called an arc to develop characters and plot and build the emotional impact of
a story. Look at Figure 4.4 for an idea of what a story arc looks like.

          FIGURE 4.4 Narrative arc (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
This arc, also called a narrative arc or a plot triangle, is composed of the following elements:

  · The exposition sets up the narrative. It introduces characters and setting and establishes the primary
      conflict of the story, allowing readers to learn the who, what, when, where, and why of the events that will
      unfold.

  · Next, the rising action fully develops the conflict. This developed series of events, the longest part of the
      narrative, produces increasing tension that engages readers.

  · The climax is the turning point of the narrative, in which the story reaches its highest point of tension and
      conflict. It is the moment when some kind of action must be taken.

  · In the falling action, the conflict begins to be resolved, and the tension lessens.
  · Finally, during the resolution, the conflict is resolved, and the narrative ends. In memoirs and personal

      narratives, the resolution often includes or precedes a reflection that examines the broader implications of
      the theme or lessons learned. Of course, as in real life, conflicts are not always resolved, but the narrator
      can still reflect on the outcome of the situation.
Although many narratives and memoirs follow this plot-driven arc, narratives can also focus on character arcs.
Character-driven narratives explore an individual, most often the narrator, and their development. The stories
focus on creating an emotional connection between the character and the reader. Both plot and character arcs
may be, and often are, present in memoirs and personal narratives.
Regardless of whether the focus is on plot or characters, conflict is synonymous with the reason for telling your
story--it is the driving force. Conflict is often the main challenge faced by a character, and it urges the story
along by engaging readers through tension and encouraging them to keep reading. Without conflict, your
110 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

       memoir or personal narrative will lack an overall theme. The major conflict is the undercurrent that drives
       each scene and is often developed by an inciting incident. Introduced in the exposition and developed in the
       rising action, this incident sets the mood of the story and engages readers. After the story's climax, where the
       conflict reaches its peak, the tension gradually resolves during the falling action and moves toward resolution,
       during which you can explicitly or implicitly explore the theme that ties the story elements together.
       Sometimes the resolution is accompanied by a revelation, in which the narrator or reader understands
       something about the bigger picture, such as a lesson learned from the events recounted or knowledge about
       the general human condition. Of course, each scene or section should have its own conflict, connected in some
       way to the overarching message of your writing. As you write, ask yourself, What's the conflict? By identifying
       the conflict explicitly, you will ensure that it remains central to your narrative.

       Two important aspects of plot structure regarding time in a memoir are chronos and kairos. Chronos is the
       sequence of events told according to their order. This order is often chronological and linear, but not always--it
       can be interrupted, fragmented, circular, or otherwise out of sequence and can sometimes include flashbacks.
       Chronos develops themes by the telling of events. Kairos, on the other hand, is the Greek concept of
       timeliness. Events told through the lens of kairos are often transcendental, an argument that is made at the
       right time, often rooted in a cultural moment or movement.

       Other important aspects of personal writing overlap with the narrative genre. Both reader engagement and
       plot rely largely on vivid details and sensory descriptions to move readers through the story. For more
       information on narrative elements that may enhance your personal narrative or memoir, revisit Literacy
       Narrative: Building Bridges, Bridging Gaps.

      Key Terms for Memoir or Personal Narraive Writing

         · anecdotes: a short, interesting story or event told to demonstrate a point or amuse the audience.
         · Bias: the inclusion or exclusion of certain events and facts, the decisions about word choice, and the

             consistency of tone. All work together to convey a particular feeling or attitude. Bias comes from a specific
             stance or worldview and can limit a text, particularly if that bias is left unexamined.
         · Characters: fictional people (or other beings) created in a work of literature. The narrator of a memoir or
             personal narrative is the nonfiction equivalent of the main character.
         · Climax: the point of highest level of interest and emotional response in a narrative.
         · Conclusion: in narrative writing, the resolution. It is the point at which the narrator has reached a
             decision.
         · Conflict: the major challenge that the main character faces.
         · Doubling: a mirroring of events, objects, characters, or concepts in a memoir.
         · Exposition: the beginning section of a narrative that introduces the characters, setting, and plot.
         · Falling action: the section of the plot after the climax in which tension from the main conflict is decreased
             and the narrative moves toward the conclusion, or resolution.
         · Flashback: a scene that interrupts the chronological order of the main narrative to return to a scene from
             an earlier time.
         · Foreshadowing: hints of what is to come in the text.
         · Mood: the atmosphere of the text, often achieved through details, description, and setting.
         · Plot: the events that make up a narrative or story.
         · Point of view: the perspective from which a narrative is told. Memoirs and personal narratives usually use
             the first-person point of view, or tell the story through the eyes of the narrator.
         · Resolution: the point at which a story's conflict is settled; the conclusion of a narrative.
         · Revelation: a discovery about a person, event, or idea that shapes the plot.
         · Rising action: a series of events in the plot in which tension surrounding the major conflict increases and
             the plot moves toward its climax.
         · Setting: when and where a narrative occurs. Setting is revealed through narration and details.
         · Theme: the underlying idea that reveals the author's message about a narrative.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                 4.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Life on the Mississippi by Mark Twain 111

  · Vivid details: sensory language and detailed descriptions that help readers gain a deeper and fuller
      understanding of ideas and events in the narrative.

  · Voice: the combination of vocabulary, tone, sentence structure, dialogue, and other details that make a text
      authentic and engaging. Voice is the "identity" or "personality" of the writer and includes the specific
      English variety used by the narrator and characters.

4.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Life on the Mississippi by Mark Twain

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read for understanding, showing that genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
  · Analyze relationships between ideas and patterns of organization in a nonfiction text.

Introduction

      FIGURE 4.5 Mark Twain, 1907 (credit: "Mark Twain" by A.F. Bradley/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
An image in literature is a description that engages one of the five senses. Details rich in imagery appeal to
readers' emotions, create new meaning, and draw an audience into the story. Sensory images--what the
narrator sees, hears, tastes, feels, and smells--should be specific and contain emotional content that enhances
your writing. When you write your personal narrative, you will use imagery to engage readers, convey
meaning, and bring your story to life.
In the text excerpt you are about to read, Mark Twain (1835-1910) uses imagery to place readers with him
aboard a steamboat on the Mississippi River as Mr. Bixby trains him to pilot it. As you read, put yourself in the
shoes of the narrator--Mark Twain. Notice how vividly he describes sensory experiences and how they
enhance your understanding of his purpose.
Twain lived in a pre-Civil War America in which slavery was accepted and prevalent. He used his literature to
criticize slavery and hierarchical social codes of the American South, though he wasn't necessarily an
outspoken opponent in his public life. Twain provides an example of the ways in which literature can subtly
influence the beliefs and identities of generations of readers. Visit Project Gutenberg (https://openstax.org/r/
112 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

       projectgutenberg) for the full text of Life on the Mississippi.

                 LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

public domain t  end publiecnddopmuabinlict domain t end publiecnddopmuabinlict domenaidnptublic domain t
The Storyteller's World: Entering through Imagery

                 end public domain t

end public domain t

FIGURE 4.6 In this illustration, appearing in Life on the Mississippi, the steamboat is an older vessel but is similar to
the one in Twain's memoir. (credit: "MISSISSIPPI STEAMBOAT - FIFTY YEARS AGO" by Samuel Langhorne Clemens/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

       Mr. Bixby served me in this fashion once, and for years afterward I used to blush even in my sleep when I
       thought of it. I had become a good steersman [a person steering a boat or ship]; so good, indeed, that I had all
       the work to do on our watch, night and day; Mr. Bixby seldom made a suggestion to me; all he ever did was to
       take the wheel on particularly bad nights or in particularly bad crossings, land the boat when she needed to be
       landed, play gentleman of leisure nine-tenths of the watch, and collect the wages. The lower river was about
       bank-full, and if anybody had questioned my ability to run any crossing between Cairo and New Orleans without
       help or instruction, I should have felt irreparably hurt. The idea of being afraid of any crossing in the lot, in the
       day-time, was a thing too preposterous for contemplation. Well, one matchless summer's day I was bowling
       down the bend above island 66, brimful of self-conceit and carrying my nose as high as a giraffe's, when Mr.
       Bixby said,--
Panoninottaotf view. Twain writes in first person, using the pronouns I and me.end annotat
Eanxnpootsaition. Though the excerpt starts in the middle of a chapter of a larger work, this paragraph begins an anecdote
that Twain relates about a specific incident in his time in training. The paragraph acts as the exposition, establishing
the setting, characters, and lead-in to the conflict related in the anecdote.end annotat
Ranenfloetcattion. Twain's reflection of the memory, saying he would "blush even in my sleep," reveals his embarrassment
in a way that readers can relate to.end annotat
       "I am going below a while. I suppose you know the next crossing?"
       This was almost an affront. It was about the plainest and simplest crossing in the whole river. One couldn't
       come to any harm, whether he ran it right or not; and as for depth, there never had been any bottom there. I
       knew all this, perfectly well.
       "Know how to run it? Why, I can run it with my eyes shut."
Taonnoe.taItn this dialogue, the narrator takes on a tone of confidence, which helps develop his own voice and character.end annotat
Danianlootgaute. Twain uses dialogue to recreate the scene and reveal characters.end annotat
       "How much water is there in it?"
       "Well, that is an odd question. I couldn't get bottom there with a church steeple." "You think so, do you?"

 Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                      4.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Life on the Mississippi by Mark Twain 113

                        The very tone of the question shook my confidence. That was what Mr. Bixby was expecting. He left, without
                        saying anything more. I began to imagine all sorts of things. Mr. Bixby, unknown to me, of course, sent
                        somebody down to the forecastle [forward part of the ship, below the deck] with some mysterious instructions
                        to the leadsmen, another messenger was sent to whisper among the officers, and then Mr. Bixby went into
public domain tenedhnipdduinepbgnulidbcbepldihcuoibdmnlodiacmaindasotimnmotakine-tsteancdkpwuhbelircedhoemcaoiunldt obseenrvdepereunenbdsdulpiclptusdub.oblPimlcircedasdioneomnmtatlaiynintthte captain stepped out on the
                        hurricane deck [an upper deck on a ship]; next the chief mate appeared; then a clerk. Every moment or two a
                        straggler was added to my audience; and before I got to the head of the island I had fifteen or twenty people
                        assembled down there under my nose. I began to wonder what the trouble was. As I started across, the captain
                        glanced aloft aetnmdepaunbdlicsadiodm, waiitnhta sham uneasiness in his voice,--
                 VanivniodtaDtetails and Imagereyn. dTwpauibnlibcudilodms ateinnstion through vivid detail and imagery that recreates the sounds and
                 paints a picture of his experience. From the whispers of the messengers to the sight of more and more people
                 appearing on the deck to observe the narrator, readers can almost feel the narrator becoming more nervous.end annotat

                                                                                          end public domain t
                 RanisniontgatAction. The reader begins to understand the conflict through the sequence of events. This rising action builds
                 tension by contrasting Twain's earlier stated confidence with his increasing anxiety.end annotat

                        "Where is Mr. Bixby?" "Gone below, sir."

                 Danianlootgaute. Twain employs dialogue to advance the plot and simultaneously increase tension, thus defining the
                 conflict. The dialogue here signals the narrator's move from confidence to anxiety, the next line indicating that the
                 captain's questioning "did the business" for him. Dialogue also helps establish authenticity and recreate "reality" for
                 readers, allowing them an opportunity to "witness" the scene and the characters directly.end annotat

                        But that did the business for me. My imagination began to construct dangers out of nothing, and they multiplied
                        faster than I could keep the run of them. All at once I imagined I saw shoal [shallow] water ahead! The wave of
                        coward agony that surged through me then came near dislocating every joint in me. All my confidence in that
                        crossing vanished. I seized the bell-rope; dropped it, ashamed; seized it again; dropped it once more; clutched
                        it tremblingly once again, and pulled it so feebly that I could hardly hear the stroke myself. Captain and mate
                        sang out instantly, and both together,--

                 VanivniodtaDtescription. Twain moves the plot toward the climax in this paragraph, particularly with his description of the
                 dangers multiplying and the peril he imagines.end annotat

                 Manonoodt.aItn this section, Twain creates a frazzled and frantic mood through not only the details and description but
                 also the sentence structure. Particularly in the sentence "I seized the bell-rope; dropped it, ashamed; seized it
                 again; dropped it once more . . . ," the short, connected clauses and phrases and the repetition of the words dropped
                 and seized all add to the sense of panic.end annotat

                        "Starboard lead there! and quick about it!"

                        This was another shock. I began to climb the wheel like a squirrel; but I would hardly get the boat started to
                        port [the left side of the ship when a person on board is facing forward] before I would see new dangers on that
                        side, and away I would spin to the other; only to find perils accumulating to starboard [the right side of the ship
                        when a person on board is facing forward], and be crazy to get to port again. Then came the leadsman's
                        sepulchral [bleak, morbid] cry:--

                 Oanrngaontaizt ation. After the introduction in which Twain writes in the present tense to indicate he will tell an
                 embarrassing story from the past, the rest of the passage follows a chronological organization, recounting the event
                 from beginning to end.end annotat

                        "D-e-e-p four!" Deep four in a bottomless crossing! The terror of it took my breath away.

                        "M-a-r-k three! . . . M-a-r-k three . . . Quarter less three! . . . Half twain!"

                        This was frightful! I seized the bell-ropes and stopped the engines.
114 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

"Quarter twain! Quarter twain! Mark twain!"

Danianlootgaute. Here, the dialogue emphasizes the narrator's terror and leads to the climax.end annotat

I was helpless. I did not know what in the world to do. I was quaking from head to foot, and I could have hung

                        my hat on my eyes, they stuck out so far.         end public domain t
public domain tend public domain t end puebnlidc pduobmliacindotmain t

Hanynpoetrabtole. Twain useensdapcuoebmnlibdcidnpoaumtbiolaicnindoetofnmsdeeapnniusndbotplriyucbddleoictmadiaoliamnntadinhyt perbole, or exaggeration, to emphasize hoewndppanuibclkiceddomain t
he feels in theemndompuebnltic.ednodmaaninnottat

        end public domain t
      "Quarter less twain! Nine and a half!"

We were drawing nine! My hands were in a nerveless flutter. I could not ring a bell intelligibly with them. I flew
to the speaking-tube and shouted to the engineer,--

"Oh, Ben, if you love me, back her! Quick, Ben! Oh, back the immortal soul out of her!"

Canlinmoataxt. In this part of the story the narrator calls out for help as the tension reaches its peak.end annotat

I heard the door close gently. I looked around, and there stood Mr. Bixby, smiling a bland, sweet smile. Then the
audience on the hurricane deck sent up a thundergust [roar] of humiliating laughter. I saw it all, now, and I felt
meaner than the meanest man in human history. I laid in the lead, set the boat in her marks, came ahead on the
engines, and said:--

VanivniodtaDtetails. The narrator describes Mr. Bixby's "bland" smile, contrasted with the uproarious laughter of the rest
of the group. He also uses vivid details to describe his own reaction: he "felt meaner than the meanest man in
human history."end annotat

FananllointagtAction. After it is revealed that the group was tricking Twain, the tension begins to dissipate.end annotat

"It was a fine trick to play on an orphan, wasn't it? I suppose I'll never hear the last of how I was ass enough to
heave the lead at the head of 66."

"Well, no, you won't, maybe. In fact I hope you won't; for I want you to learn something by that experience.
Didn't you know there was no bottom in that crossing?"

"Yes, sir, I did."

"Very well, then. You shouldn't have allowed me or anybody else to shake your confidence in that knowledge.
Try to remember that. And another thing: when you get into a dangerous place, don't turn coward. That isn't
going to help matters any."

Tanhneomtaet. Through this dialogue, Twain introduces the message of the story. More than providing an amusing
recollection about a time he was embarrassed, his purpose is to convey the message that it is important to rely on
your knowledge and training rather than allow fear to rule.end annotat

It was a good enough lesson, but pretty hardly learned. Yet about the hardest part of it was that for months I so
often had to hear a phrase which I had conceived a particular distaste for. It was, "Oh, Ben, if you love me, back
her!"

Ranensotlauttion. The narrator explicitly states his lesson learned at the end of the story and adds a detail about his
continuing humiliation.end annotat

Discussion Questions

1. For what reason might Twain have chosen to tell this anecdote in his memoir?
2. How does telling this story help Twain reveal his experience of learning to be a riverboat pilot?
3. How does Twain build tension to support the conflict in the anecdote?

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                       4.5 · Writing Process: Making the Personal Public 115

4. How does the narrator pull the reader into the action in the paragraph beginning "But that did the business
    for me"?

5. How do the narrator's word choices in the story shape the tone and mood?

6. How does Twain's use of vivid details and descriptions help the reader connect to the text?

4.5 Writing Process: Making the Personal Public

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop a writing project through multiple drafts.
  · Apply correct genre conventions for structure, paragraphs, tone, and mechanics.
  · Write with purposeful shifts in voice, diction, tone, formality, and structure appropriate to personal narratives.
  · Proficiently employ cultural and language variations in composition.
  · Experience the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
  · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

Now it's your turn to put pen to paper and experience the genre through action. Once you choose a moment to
write about and begin the narrative process, you may want to rearrange, rewrite, or even omit some parts
entirely. The goal is to create a story that not only gets your message across but also creates an emotional
connection with your readers.

Summary of Assignment: A Turning Point

Choose an event from your life that has stuck in your memory as a turning point of some sort. Certainly, you
can write about major milestones--graduations, achievements, and the like--but consider small moments and
events, too: something that someone said to you or that you overheard, a time you got or didn't get what you
wanted, a time you were disappointed, or a time you thought you knew better than a more experienced person.
To get the most accurate perspective of the event, go back in time as far as you can so that you think about the
event as objectively as possible and know it as a real and meaningful turning point. Write a story about the
event, and use narrative techniques to show why the event has become meaningful. Here are some other ideas
about possible turning points:

  · A changed attitude toward a friend, sibling, or other family member
  · A change of major, if that change is a big step away from what you planned to do
  · Making or not making the cut for a team or some other group
  · Your feelings when you learned something about yourself or someone close to you
  · A move from another country to the United States or from another U.S. location to where you are now
  · Becoming fluent in another language
  · Realizing that a certain behavior either gets you what you want or doesn't
  · Realizing that someone you admire is not so admirable, or vice versa
  · Becoming friends with someone you didn't expect to be friends with
  · Facing an illness or crisis and how it changed or didn't change you

Another Lens. An alternative to writing a first-person narrative about a turning point is to consider writing
about the event from the perspective of someone--or something--else. If the story involves another person in
addition to yourself, consider making that person the narrator and having them tell the story as they might
view it. Also consider telling your story from an outside observer's perspective, or even from the perspective of
an inanimate object--for example, the pen used to sign a contract. This perspective may be beneficial for
exploring your own emotions and may also offer a helpful alternative if including details about your personal
life in your story makes you uncomfortable.
116 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

                      Quick Launch: Plot Diagram

Once you have chosen a topic, freewrite for 5 to 10 minutes, considering the following questions:

                   ·  Why is this event memorable?
public domain t·      What conflict did you face?
                      What images come to mind when you think of this event?
                   ·

Then, begin to isolate details to create a plot diagram. Remember, following a plot diagram involves focusing
on the building of tension surrounding the conflict in a story and then reesnodlvpiunbgliict dinoma amineat ningful way.

     Drafting: Conflict, Point of View, Organization, and Reflection

With the skeleton of a plot diagram in mind, freewrite again for 5 to 10 minutes, considering the following
questions:

· Why is this event memorable?
· What conflict did you face?
· What images come to mind when you think of this event?
· What do you want to express to your readers about the event?
· What lessons did you learn from the event?

Purpose

Along with your freewrite, consider what message you want to leave with readers. The reason this moment is
important to you should be made clear to readers through the development of the story, most often through the
conflict and its resolution. Remember that the conflict is the primary problem or obstacle that the main
character--most likely you in this personal narrative--faces and must overcome in order to reach a resolution.
Conflict in a personal narrative, as in fiction, usually consists of one or more of five main conflict types:

· Character vs. character
· Character vs. self
· Character vs. environment or nature
· Character vs. society
· Character vs. fate or the supernatural

The purpose and theme are shaped by the conflict. Consider the conflict in the Mark Twain excerpt. Twain
needs to run a crossing that, at the beginning of the passage, he feels confident to handle. But as the story
progresses and Mr. Bixby sends more people to make him nervous, Twain begins to second-guess himself.

                      But that did the business for me. My imagination began to construct dangers out of nothing, and they multiplied
                      faster than I could keep the run of them. All at once I imagined I saw shoal water ahead! The wave of coward
                      agony that surged through me then came near dislocating every joint in me. All my confidence in that crossing
                      vanished. I seized the bell-rope; dropped it, ashamed; seized it again; dropped it once more; clutched it
                      tremblingly once again, and pulled it so feebly that I could hardly hear the stroke myself.

This conflict not only builds the reader's interest in the main character's problem but also helps Twain develop
the theme, his message to the reader: you must rely on your knowledge and training rather than second-guess
yourself. In this anecdote, the theme is explicitly stated, but more often than not, authors are more subtle,
requiring readers to infer themes on the basis of details in the text. The ways in which you craft your conflict
and theme will affect its significance to your readers.

To help you organize you work, complete a graphic organizer like Table 4.1 as you are able at this point. You
may want to revise it later as you write your draft.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                       4.5 · Writing Process: Making the Personal Public 117

                                                              Basic Story
                                                               Elements
                                                              Purpose

                                                              Conflict

                                                              Main
                                                              Characters

                                                              Theme

                                                             TABLE 4.1 Basic story
                                                             elements

Plot Elements

Now that you have considered your overall message and have a general idea of what you will write about, think
of how you will structure your story. You already have diagrammed some of the Mark Twain excerpt and know
how plots move along. One idea for organizing the plot of your narrative is to write down individual moments
or events on notecards and physically place them on a table to mimic a hands-on plot diagram. You should
have a series of events leading to the climax and fewer events that make up the falling action. This method of
plot diagramming also helps you identify where holes may turn up in your plan. For example: Is your
exposition missing key background information that is necessary for readers to understand the story? Have
you created sufficient tension in the lead-up to the climax of your story? Examine your plot diagram to identify
where you need more (or perhaps less) detail in your outline. You might notice that the plot diagram is a bit
lopsided, skewing left. If it does, then much of your story leads up to the climax, as it should, with fewer words
between the climax and resolution.

Most, but not all, personal narratives are written in chronological order; that is, the storyteller follows the
sequence of events according to the order in which they occur. However, there are other structures, such as
anecdotes told according to theme, through flashbacks, or in reverse chronological order. The order in which
you recount events is important in building tension in the story, thus stimulating readers' curiosity. Seriously
consider how each choice that you make will create readers' engagement and emotional connection to your
story as you plan toward the climax.

Exposition

Next, follow your plot diagram to begin writing your narrative. Start with a strong introduction. Try to think of
this introductory section as the "hook," engaging readers so that they want to continue reading. Create the
introduction with vivid details or a relatable anecdote. Remember that this section will introduce the main
characters, the setting, and the conflict. Here are some suggestions for an opening strategy, all of which should
be brief, generally not more than two paragraphs:

  · Anecdote related to your story
  · Description of one of the characters involved
  · Scenario in which you ask readers what they might do in that situation
  · Description of a setting in which you found yourself
  · Significant dialogue or action that you will explain later
  · One or more open-ended questions that relate closely to the theme; avoid yes/no questions

Transitions

As you do in other writing, build your overall structure through transitions--words and phrases you use to
move readers through events, ideas, and time. Transitions smooth connections between ideas, clarifying them
118 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

       and making reading easier. In narratives, transitions often indicate the passage of time. They may also
       introduce new characters or ideas, tie ideas together, or make connections to the larger theme or message.
       Transitions may be concrete, as is the one Mark Twain uses: "Well, one matchless summer's day. . ." This
       statement clearly establishes the passage of time. But transitions can also be abstract or subtle, helping the
       author organize ideas and information. More subtle transitions include changes in elements such as tone,
       voice, point of view, or even setting. Use the plot diagram as an outline, and move from event to event as you
       draft your narrative. You will have freedom with paragraph length and structure because you will use dialogue
       and description. Also, some events or characters may require more detail than others. As you write your
       narrative, use transitions to move readers along until you ultimately resolve the central conflict and tie its
       resolution to the theme.
       Point of View
       Authors have options for narrating a literary work--that is, they can choose from whose point of view they tell
       the story. In your narrative, you most likely will use the first-person point of view. When a story is told from
       this point of view, the narrator is a character in the story and tells it as it happens--that is, as the narrator
       experiences the event. Mark Twain tells his story from the first-person point of view in the excerpt from Life on
       the Mississippi. The first sentence of that excerpt reads, "Mr. Bixby served me in this fashion once, and for
       years afterward I used to blush even in my sleep when I thought of it." Not only do readers understand that the
       narrator is telling the story, using pronouns such as me and I, but the narrator also describes his feelings
       ("blush[ing] even in my sleep") and thoughts. For more information about point of view, see Editing Focus:
       Characterization and Point of View and Point of View.
       Characters
       Characters in a personal narrative are generally real people, at least in part. As the author, you can focus on
       certain character traits and ignore, minimize, or exaggerate others. In making the people in your narrative
       come to life, you will likely assign them different ways of behaving and speaking. For example, one character
       may use long words and speak condescendingly to another. Another character may find conversation difficult
       and say little, relying on gestures more than words. Still another character might be generous, sympathetic,
       arrogant, or sneaky. When creating characters, make sure the characters' language and behavior reflect their
       characterizations. For more information about characterization, see Editing Focus: Characterization and Point
       of View.
       You can use a web diagram, similar to the one shown in Figure 4.7, to keep track of characters' traits.

                 FIGURE 4.7 Character web (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
       Setting
       Where and when your narrative takes place is an important part of a narrative, as it is in the excerpt from

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                         4.5 · Writing Process: Making the Personal Public 119

Twain's story. You may want to describe a setting in detail if it is important in the course of the story, or you
may find it a less essential part of the narrative. In either case, the setting must be described to some extent to
give the narrative a sense of time and place.

Verb Tense

Choose the tense in which you want to tell your story, and ensure that you stay consistent throughout the
narrative. Typically, you will choose between past tense and present tense. Past tense provides a familiar
sense of storytelling, as Twain develops in his anecdote: "I looked around, and there stood Mr. Bixby, smiling a
bland, sweet smile." Another option is to tell your story in the present tense, which provides a sense of
urgency to the events and allows readers to feel closer to the action. If you are considering using the present
tense, try substituting it in the excerpt from Life on the Mississippi. Consider how it sounds and the difficulties
you might encounter in using it. Whichever tense you choose, however, the most important thing is to stick to
it, changing it only to indicate a change in chronology. For example, if you are narrating in the present tense
and want to indicate something that happened at a time before the events of your story, you would change
tenses for clarity. Read more about verb tense consistency in Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency.

Active vs. Passive Voice

Verbs have two voices: active and passive. In an active-voice sentence structure, the subject performs the
action of the verb. In a passive-voice sentence structure, the subject receives the action of the verb. Consider
the examples in Table 4.2.

Active Voice                             Passive Voice

I devoured the silky pudding.            The silky pudding was devoured by me.

The teacher will give you directions.    Directions will be given to you by the teacher.

The barnacles scraped my skin.           My skin was scraped by the barnacles.

The sloth carried her baby on her back.  The baby sloth was carried by its mother on her back.

The two presidents are signing the agreement. The agreement is being signed by the two presidents.

A tornado destroyed the neighborhood.    The neighborhood was destroyed by a tornado.

TABLE 4.2 Active vs. passive voice

The meanings in both passive and active voice remain the same, yet their effect is different. In active voice, the
message will be clearer and often more convincing. While it is not wrong to write in the passive voice on
occasion, you will usually strengthen your writing by focusing on how a subject performs an action rather
removing it from the direct action. For more information about active and passive voice, see Clear and
Effective Sentences.

Imagery

In personal narratives and memoirs, imagery not only brings the experience to life but also engages readers
through their senses. For example, Twain appeals to the sense of hearing when he describes "the leadsman's
sepulchral cry:--`D-e-e-p four!'" The use of figurative language, such as similes, metaphors, hyperbole, or
personification, often enhances these descriptions. Think of images and figurative language as ways of
showing versus telling. Consider Twain's recounting of the moment he loses his nerve: "I began to climb the
wheel like a squirrel." Certainly, he could have said instead, "I spun the wheel back and forth." But the use of
figurative language, in this case a simile comparing his action to a squirrel's, helps readers imagine and share
Twain's terror as if they are experiencing the event in the same way. Within a scene in your story, choose an
            120 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

                  event, moment, or place, and practice using imagery to describe it. Then use a graphic organizer like Figure
                  4.8 to imagine how you might use each sense to describe the same event or another event, moment, or place
                  from your story.

public domain t

                                                                                                                                                          end public domain t

                            FIGURE 4.8 Senses chart (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
                 For your narrative, you do not have to use all the descriptions in the graphic organizer, and doing so would
                 likely clutter your story. Choose the best, most powerful details to enhance your writing and help readers
                 viscerally experience the event, moment, or place.
                 Sentence Structure
                 You can structure your text in various ways to achieve your intended mood, tone, and overall message. No
                 matter what your form or style, sentences are your main units of composition, explaining the world in terms of
                 subjects, actions, and objects: some force (a subject) does something (action) that causes something else to
                 happen (an object). Narrative writing, like all prose, is built around complete and predictable sentences.
                 Sometimes, however, writers use sentences in less predictable and more playful ways. For example,
                 fragmented sentences suggest fragmented stories. Fragmented sentences can be used judiciously in
                 conventional writing, even academic writing, as long as their purpose is clear and your fragment is not
                 mistaken for a grammatical error. Writers sometimes use fragments audaciously and sometimes with abandon
                 to create the special effects they want: A flash of movement. A bit of a story. A frozen scene.
                 Fragments force quick reading, ask for impressionistic understanding, and suggest parts rather than wholes.
                 Like snapshots, fragments invite strong reader participation to stitch information together and move toward
                 clear meaning. Fragmented sentences suggest, too, that things are moving fast. Often used in dialogue as well
                 to mimic real speech, purposeful fragments can be powerful: Deliberate. Intentional. Careful. Functional.
                 Usually brief.
                 Consider British novelist Charles Dickens's (1812-1870) use of fragments in this story told in The Pickwick
                 Papers (1836). The impact of the sentence fragments here conveys a sensory experience and creates a mood
                 for the reader.

                        "Heads, heads--take care of your heads!" cried the loquacious stranger, as they came out under the low
                        archway, which in those days formed the entrance to the coach-yard. "Terrible place--dangerous work--other
                        day--five children--mother--tall lady, eating sandwiches--forgot the arch--crash--knock--children look
                        round--mother's head off--sandwich in her hand--no mouth to put it in--head of a family off--shocking,
                        shocking!"
                 On the opposite pole of sentence structure are labyrinthine sentences. A labyrinthine sentence seems never

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                            4.5 · Writing Process: Making the Personal Public 121

                 to end. Instead, it goes on and on and on, using all sorts of punctuational and grammatical tricks to create a
                 compound sentence (two or more independent clauses joined by a comma and a conjunction such as and, or,
                 or but) or a complex sentence (one independent clause with one or more dependent clauses). Such sentences
                 are often written to suggest that events or time are running together and hard to separate. However, such
public domainwtriting may more often suggest error than experiment, so be careful.
                 Another type of sentence variation is achieved through ernepdeptuitbiolinc doof mwaoirndts, phrases, or sentences for
                 emphasis. Repeated words and ideas suggest continuity of idea and theme, help meld ideas and paragraphs,
                 and sometimes create rhythms that are pleasing to the ear. While refrain is a term more often associated with
                 music, poetry, and sermons, it is a form of repetition that is quite powerful in prose as well. A refrain is a
                 phrase or group of words repeated throughout a text to remind readers (or listeners) of an important theme.
                 For example, the words "I have a dream" are a refrain from American activist Martin Luther King Jr. 's
                 (1929-1968) speech by the same name. Look at how Mark Twain uses repetition to increase the tension.

                        I seized the bell-rope; dropped it, ashamed; seized it again; dropped it once more; clutched it tremblingly once
                        again, and pulled it so feebly that I could hardly hear the stroke myself.

                 Variation in sentence structure, established through such techniques as fragments, labyrinthine sentences,
                 and repetition, creates certain effects within the text because each technique conveys its information in an
                 unmistakable way. These techniques are stylistic devices that add an emotional dimension to the typically
                 factual material of narrative prose without announcing, labeling, or dictating what those emotions should be.
                 The wordplay of alternate-style composing allows narrative prose to convey themes more often conveyed
                 through more obviously poetic forms. These sentence variations are a large component of what constitutes
                 voice. For more information about sentence structure, see Clear and Effective Sentences.

                 Voice

                  As you write, focus on developing your voice, which in writing is the identity or personality of the narrator or
                  writer. A writer's voice is sometimes equated with an individual's personal style--the elements that contribute
                 to the way that person looks and acts. Do you favor certain kinds of clothing? Do you walk in a certain way? Do
                 you have certain characteristic gestures or speech patterns? In writing, your voice is the sum total of the words
                  you choose, the way you use them, the attitude you project by your word choice, the mood you create, the way
                  your words describe characters, the way characters speak and behave, and the way you relate events. In
                  personal writing, voice comes through via narration, dialogue, and characterization and the way you project
                  your personality through them.

                 Further, writers often speak with more than one voice, or maybe with a single voice that has a wide range,
                 varied registers, multiple tones, and different pitches. In any given composition, a writer may try to say two
                 things at the same time. Sometimes writers question their own assertions, sometimes they say one thing aloud
                 and think another silently to themselves, sometimes they say one thing that means two things, and sometimes
                 they express contradictions, paradoxes, or conundrums.

                 Double voices in a text may be indicated by parentheses--the equivalent of an actor speaking an aside on the
                 stage or in a film. In a film, the internal monologue of a character may be revealed as a voice-over or through
                 printed subtitles while another reaction is happening on-screen. With text, you can change the type size or
                 font or switch to italic, boldface, or CAPITAL LETTERS to signal a switch in your voice as a writer. The double
                 voice can also occur without distinguishing markers at all or with simple paragraph breaks or spaces.

                 Effective voice can be achieved through sentence structure and word choices. Try to balance descriptive
                 language and dialogue. You likely have heard the expression "Show, don't tell." Use narration to describe
                 events, actions, and even the narrator's thoughts, but don't fall into the trap of feeling as though you need to
                 describe everything. Allow events to flow naturally through the narration, weaving in action and dialogue.
                 Precisely placed dialogue can reinforce the narration.
122 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

Because voice infuses personality into the composition, the lack of voice or a weak voice may make your story

read like a timeline rather than selected events leading to a meaningful turning point. You want your voice to

be consistent, reliable, and relatable to your readers. Often this voice will sound like you, infusing your

personality or identity into the text. If you recreate authentic (or a good imitation of authentic) dialogue,

public domainnat rration, and description, your voice will likely be strongest, as it suggests a real connection with you.

Mood                                                                                           end public domain t

                  end public domain t
When expressing the narrator's emotions and point of view about the events of the text, voice is a major factor

in creating mood (atmosphere). For example, a mood may be gloomy, happy, or tense. The same event told by a

narrator with a casual, lighthearted voice can be read completely differently if narrated with a formal,

argumentative voice. Consider these two sentences and the effect created by the word choice:

· The rain danced on the pavement, sparkling droplets falling from cotton balls above.
· The rain pounded the pavement, pouring buckets from thundering gray clouds above.

The mood in the first sentence reflects a positive disposition toward the rain. The second sentence, though it
says nearly the same thing, shows a negative attitude, expressing the violence of the rain. The two distinct
moods, developed through imagery, details, and language, influence the reader's perception of the rain.

Conclusion and Reflection

At the end of your story, you will have the opportunity to reflect on the turning-point event, its impact on you,
and perhaps its application to a universal theme. In the Twain example, the reflection is relatively
straightforward.

"Very well, then. You shouldn't have allowed me or anybody else to shake your confidence in that knowledge.
Try to remember that. And another thing: when you get into a dangerous place, don't turn coward. That isn't
going to help matters any."

It was a good enough lesson, but pretty hardly learned. Yet about the hardest part of it was that for months I so
often had to hear a phrase which I had conceived a particular distaste for. It was, "Oh, Ben, if you love me, back
her!"

Twain uses Mr. Bixby's words to teach both himself and readers the lesson. Twain's reflection also points to a
universal lesson, creating a relatable thread from which readers can learn. As you compose your reflection,
ask yourself these questions:

· What have you learned from your turning point?
· What can readers learn from your turning point?
· How will you express this lesson?

You may reflect by using literary elements such as imagery or figurative language that help develop the theme
or message. You will want to leave room for your readers' own interpretations so that they can apply the lesson
to their own lives, as Twain does. Certainly, most people have doubted their knowledge and abilities at some
point, and Mr. Bixby's directive "Don't turn coward" has universal meaning.

Peer Review: Focus on Big-Picture Elements

After your first draft is complete, begin the process of peer review. In this initial review, peer reviewers should
focus on big-picture elements, such as plot, point of view, organization, and reflection. Peer reviewers can use
the following sentence starters to assess these elements.

· My first impression of the story is _________. From it, I learned _________.
· The story begins with/by _________. It could be made more engaging by _________.
· The author uses dialogue to _________.
· The narrative is organized by _________. Doing _________ could strengthen the organization.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                   4.6 · Editing Focus: More on Characterization and Point of View 123

  · The author's main point is _________ and is developed by _________.
  · The author wants to tell me _________.
  · I think these details could be made stronger to better develop the main idea or theme of _________.

In addition, peer reviewers may choose to mark the manuscript in the following ways:

  · Circle unnecessary details. Underline places where more vivid details would bring events or ideas to life.
  · Mark places where transitions are needed.
  · Place quotation marks in the margin to indicate places where dialogue might better develop the story.

     Revising: Let the Small Stuff Go for Now

After reading through your peer review, you now have the opportunity to revise your story. When you revising,
reimagine your manuscript until it reaches your audience in the way you want it to. Begin this process by
identifying the physical changes you want to make. These might include moving, adding, or deleting content
and rewriting ideas. There are also nonphysical ways to revise. Focus on the big picture; think about whether
the way you have told your story has delivered your intended message effectively. Avoid getting caught up in
minute details before you have shaped the narrative to relate your intended ideas.

Use the following checklist to work through the revision process.

 Introduction: Does the introduction hook the reader and establish the background knowledge needed,
including plot and setting?
 Sequence of events: Is the story told in a logical and consistent order?
 Vivid details: Do you provide vivid details that engage your readers' senses?
 Tone and mood: Are the tone and mood effective for your purpose?
 Characterization, narration, and voice: Have you developed consistent and specific characterization
through your narration and voice?
 Dialogue: Does the dialogue help move the plot and reflect the characters?
 Transitions: Have you used clear transitions and time signals to establish chronology and connect
important ideas?
 Structure: Have you developed a cohesive structure, including varying sentence lengths and structures?
Can you improve sentences by restructuring, combining, or separating them?
 Conclusion: Does your conclusion clearly explain the significance of the turning-point event, including its
relationship to the theme you want to develop?

4.6 Editing Focus: More on Characterization and Point of View

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Correctly identify and use conventions of the personal narrative genre, including structure, paragraphing, tone,
      and mechanics.

  · Gain experience negotiating variations in genre conventions.

When you began writing your story, you likely concentrated on developing the plot and placing events and
ideas in an order that made sense. Now, as you edit, work toward refining characterization and point of view in
your narrative.

The Storyteller's Personas: Characterization

After you have developed your narrative, consider the characterization you used to develop the narrator's
voice. Characterization helps create a picture of the narrator as a character, drawing the reader in and giving
life and interest to the story. Persona, from the Latin word for a type of mask worn by stage actors, develops
the impression the narrator leaves on the reader.

A persona is actually a construct. Although the story is about you, the actual character on the page is not you.
            124 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

                 Like the Latin word, it is a mask, or a stand-in for you. You can carefully choose a persona for your character to
                 communicate more authentically and directly with your audience. In real life, your persona refers to your
                 appearance, mannerisms, voice, and body language. In a personal narrative, it is similar--the voice of the
                 narrator as developed through thoughts, actions, and dialogue. Just as you might have a different persona
public domainwthen interacting with a teacher than you would with a friend, your persona as narrator should be carefully
                 crafted to create the most meaning. Use your inner life to help bring the narrator to life. You can be who you
                 want (or do not want) to be.
                 Consider how Twain cernedatpeusbalipcedrosmonaainatt the beginning of the excerpt from Life on the Mississippi. The
                 opening of the excerpt provides information about both the narrator and Mr. Bixby, and the characterization of
                 each supports the other. The narrator is portrayed as the junior steersman. He is confident but perhaps slightly
                 cross at doing the majority of the work while the more experienced Mr. Bixby plays "gentleman of leisure."

                        I had become a good steersman; so good, indeed, that I had all the work to do on our watch, night and day; Mr.
                        Bixby seldom made a suggestion to me; all he ever did was to take the wheel on particularly bad nights or in
                        particularly bad crossings, land the boat when she needed to be landed, play gentleman of leisure nine-tenths
                        of the watch, and collect the wages.

                 Like Twain, you can develop persona through characterization in your story. Keep in mind that characters are
                 viewed through your eyes. Other people or characters may view them differently, but in your personal
                 narrative, it is your opinion that counts most. Use the following tips to strengthen characterization:

                   · Observe and report on a character's surroundings.
                   · Relay a character's personality through mannerisms, style, physical appearance, and dialogue.
                   · Build characters on the basis of relationships and roles.
                   · Report on how characters interact with one another and how they confront events.
                   · Relate characters to time.
                   · Express a character's role in plot events.

              Choosing the First-Person Point of View

                  Remember that point of view has to do with the narrator of a story and how that narrator reports and
                  understands events. A narrator may be biased or only have access to certain information and will relate and
                  interpret events accordingly. You most likely have chosen or been assigned to write from the first-person point
                  of view.

                 First-Person Point of View

                 A first-person narrator is a character in the story, whether fiction or nonfiction. Memoirs and
                 autobiographies, as well as personal narratives and many works of fiction, are narrated from the first-person
                 point of view. In telling their stories, first-person narrators, whether real people or fictional characters, are part
                 of the story. They participate in the action, share opinions, and provide descriptions and interpretations. It is
                 important in writing to remember that these narrators know only what they observe around them--what they
                 learn from dialogue, what they are told, and what actions or events occur. They do not know what other
                 characters are thinking and cannot go beyond what they imagine regarding other characters. For example, as
                 Mark Twain begins to steer the boat, he observes Mr. Bixby leave and the others arrive. He cannot know what
                 they are thinking or what motivates them. First-person narrators use I and me to indicate that they are the
                 ones speaking and observing.

                 First-person point of view is the most frequently used in memoirs and personal narratives and serves as an
                 authentic and credible point of view.

                 Third-Person Point of View

                 Third-person narration is also used frequently in narrative writing, but usually in fiction and nonpersonal
                 narratives. In this point of view, a narrator who is not a character tells the story. In other words, the narrator is

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                          4.7 · Evaluation: Structure and Organization 125

outside the story and sees it from a broader angle. The narrator's point of view may be limited point of view,

in which case the narrator aligns with one or several characters and knows only what they know--that is, the

narrator reveals only the thoughts of that one or those several characters. Alternatively, the point of view may

be omniscient, or all-knowing. Omniscient narrators know all characters' thoughts and actions regardless of

public domainwthether the characters are present. Third-person narrators do not put themselves in the story, and they
                 narrate with third-person pronouns such as he, she, and they. This point of view may provide more reliable

and objective narration--but not always.  end public domain t

Second-Person Point of View

A final type of narration is the second-person point of view, in which the narrator uses the pronoun you to
address readers directly. As in first-person narration, the narrator in this case is usually a character in the
story; however, second-person narration folds the reader into the story as a character, a technique that draws
them closer to the plot. Consider how American author Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864) draws in the reader
in the opening of his short story "The Haunted Mind" (1835).

What a singular moment is the first one when you have hardly begun to recollect yourself after starting from
midnight slumber! By unclosing your eyes so suddenly, you seem to have surprised the personages of your
dream in full convocation round your bed, and catch one broad glance at them before they can flit into
obscurity.

The second-person point of view is used much less in literary writing than either first or third person.
Although it sometimes can be an effective perspective for experienced authors, second person presents
problems for both readers and writers. It is difficult to develop successfully, and it's easy to lose track of the
narration, thus confusing the reader. You can be sure that if you as the author have difficulty following the
narration as you work through the revision process, your readers have little chance. Also, use of the second-
person point of view may not be clear to readers who might not notice a difference between addressing readers
as you simply to provide some information and actually drawing readers into the story as characters. Finally,
second person can be difficult for readers to trust, for you are essentially asking them to suspend disbelief and
take on all the qualities and experiences that you, as the author, assign them.

You will mostly likely use first-person narration as you retell a turning point in your life, but whichever
narration you choose, be consistent.

Practice with Point of View

To become more familiar with first- and third-person points of view, rewrite a paragraph of your personal
narrative using both types of third-person point of view, limited and omniscient. For the limited point of view,
choose one of the characters for the narrator to focus on. For the omniscient point of view, focus on all of the
characters. Then reflect on how the point of view changes the story. Which point of view do you prefer--first,
limited third, or omniscient third? Why?

4.7 Evaluation: Structure and Organization

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop flexible strategies for reviewing and revising.
  · Give and act on productive feedback for works in progress.
  · Correctly identify and use conventions of the personal narrative genre, including structure, paragraphing, tone,

      and mechanics.

Ask your peer reviewer to evaluate your second draft by using the rubric in this section. The rubric can help
you evaluate your writing regarding the conventions and style of a personal narrative. Though you may make
personal writing choices that your peer reviewer doesn't agree with, a peer's perspective offers you a window
into a reader's mind and can help you ensure that your story's impact matches your intentions. After
126 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

considering your peer reviewer's feedback, revise your paper by incorporating the changes you believe will
strengthen it.

Rubric

Score         Critical Language Awareness             Clarity and Coherence          Rhetorical Choices

5             The text always adheres to the          The writer creates a           The writer consistently
Skillful      "Editing Focus" of this                 meaningful narrative and       demonstrates strong
              chapter--characterization and point     provides effective             awareness of the
              of view, discussed in Section           development of characters,     rhetorical situation,
              4.6--and reflects well-developed,       vivid details, and reflection  including narrator,
              relatable characters and a consistent   through a clear and            message, audience,
              point of view. The text also shows      organized sequence of          purpose, context, and
              ample evidence of the writer's intent   events. Tenses are always      culture. The writer uses
              to consciously meet or challenge        consistent, and events are     dialogue and action to
              conventional expectations in            seamlessly connected with      bring readers into the
              rhetorically effective ways.            transitions.                   scene. Sentences are
                                                                                     varied appropriately.

4             The text usually adheres to the         The writer creates a           The writer usually
Accomplished  "Editing Focus" of this                 consistent narrative and       demonstrates strong
              chapter--characterization and point     provides effective             awareness of the
              of view, discussed in Section           development of characters,     rhetorical situation,
              4.6--and reflects developed,            some vivid details, and        including narrator,
              relatable characters and a consistent   reflection through a fairly    message, audience,
              point of view. The text also shows      well- organized sequence       purpose, context, and
              some evidence of the writer's intent    of events. Tenses are          culture. The writer uses
              to consciously meet or challenge        usually consistent, and        dialogue and action to
              conventional expectations in            events are usually             bring readers into the
              rhetorically effective ways.            connected with transitions.    scene. Some sentences
                                                                                     are varied.

3             The text generally adheres to the       The writer sometimes           The writer sometimes
Capable       "Editing Focus" of this                 creates a consistent           demonstrates awareness
              chapter--characterization and point     narrative and provides         of the rhetorical situation,
              of view, discussed in Section           reasonably effective           including narrator,
              4.6--and reflects fairly developed,     development of characters,     message, audience,
              relatable characters and a somewhat     some vivid details, and        purpose, context, and
              consistent point of view. The text      reflection through a           culture. The writer uses
              also shows limited evidence of the      somewhat organized             some dialogue and action
              writer's intent to consciously meet or  sequence of events. Tenses     to bring readers into the
              challenge conventional expectations     may be inconsistent at         scene, but more of both
              in rhetorically effective ways.         times, and more transitions    are needed. Some
                                                      may be needed for              sentences may be varied.
                                                      coherence.

TABLE 4.3

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                      4.8 · Spotlight on ... Multilingual Writers 127

       Score  Critical Language Awareness             Clarity and Coherence         Rhetorical Choices
 2
 Developing   The text occasionally adheres to the    The writer rarely creates a   The writer may
              "Editing Focus" of this                 consistent narrative and      occasionally demonstrate
 1            chapter--characterization and point     provides little development   awareness of the
 Beginning    of view, discussed in Section           of characters, few details,   rhetorical situation,
              4.6--and reflects somewhat              and minimal reflection        including narrator,
TABLE 4.3     developed, relatable characters and     through a mostly              message, audience,
              a somewhat inconsistent point of        disorganized sequence of      purpose, context, and
              view. The text also shows emerging      events. Tenses are            culture. The writer uses
              evidence of the writer's intent to      inconsistent or ineffective,  little dialogue and action
              consciously meet or challenge           and transitions are lacking   to bring readers into the
              conventional expectations in            or inappropriate.             scene. Sentence structure
              rhetorically effective ways.                                          shows little variation.

              The text does not adhere to the         The writer creates a          The writer demonstrates
              "Editing Focus" of this                 disorganized narrative with   little or no awareness of
              chapter--characterization and point     little or no development of   the rhetorical situation,
              of view, discussed in Section           characters, details, and      including narrator,
              4.6--and reflects undeveloped,          reflection. Tenses are        message, audience,
              unrelatable characters and an           inconsistent or ineffective,  purpose, context, and
              inconsistent point of view. The text    and transitions are lacking   culture. The writer uses
              also shows little to no evidence of     or inappropriate.             little or no dialogue and
              the writer's intent to consciously                                    action. Sentence structure
              meet or challenge conventional                                        is not varied.
              expectations in rhetorically effective
              ways.

4.8 Spotlight on ... Multilingual Writers

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Respond to a variety of situations and contexts by recognizing diction, tone, formality, design, medium, or
      structure to meet the situation.

  · Read a diverse range of texts, attending especially to patterns of organization, the interplay between verbal and
      nonverbal elements, and how these features function for different audiences and situations.

Multilingual writers are those who write in both first and second (or third . . . or more!) languages, as opposed
to monolingual writers, who write in a single language. In the United States, it is not uncommon that English is
the second language of multilingual authors, many of whom may have extensive familiarity and literacy in
both their first and second languages. Colleges and universities, too, in their quest to include a more diverse
population within their ranks, have seen an increase in multilingual writers and students.

Addressing the needs of multilingual students and writers deserves special attention, as these writers may
experience a variety of differences between writing in their first languages and in English. In fact, the
landscape and functions of various parts of writing--linguistics, audience, and rhetorical appeals, to name a
few--vary across languages and cultures. While certain expectations exist in the academic sphere--for
example, the way rhetorical appeals are incorporated within a position argument--different cultural practices
and assumptions may require different processes for those writing from the perspective of multiple languages
128 4 · Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal

       or cultures. Understanding academic literacies can be challenging enough for students entrenched in the
       typical American classroom, and space should be carved out for those coming from different outlooks,
       particularly multilingual writers.

       Multilingual writers have much to offer to classrooms and readers' literary experiences. In the past, languages
       have been viewed as occupying separate spaces in a multilingual writer's mind. It is commonly accepted that
       multilingual authors switch between the linguistic and cultural norms of each of their languages. But separate
       languages are also cohesive, allowing authors to draw on a wide variety of inventory from a different language
       as they compose, thus enhancing their writing.

      The Storyteller's Purpose: The Truth of the Human Experience

       Consider adding multilingual elements to your writing if you are a multilingual author. Language can create a
       mood and atmosphere for your readers, helping communicate cultural and linguistic individualities. You
       might add narration or dialogue in a language other than English to the story of your personal turning point if
       it makes sense within the narrative. For example, you might use dialogue to convey a young woman's
       conversation with her Mexican grandmother:

       "Te amo, nieta," she whispered gently.

       This can be a more powerful use of language and culture than simply stating that the grandmother spoke in
       Spanish, allowing the reader to experience the culture through language. Or a character may ask a question or
       make a statement in another language, allowing the reader to understand through the context of surrounding
       narration or dialogue:

       "Vous avez des livres de Dickens?" the woman inquired. "Yes," I responded, "we have several books by
       Dickens."

       Alternatively, consider sharing your own thoughts in another language, retaining traces of that language's
       structure and grammar. Reflection Trailblazer: Sandra Cisneros does this in Spanish, and Nigerian author
       Chimamanda Ngozi-Adichie (b. 1977) does this in Igbo. Both serve as models of how to incorporate another
       language into writing. In addition, some professional authors write in the language of the country they live in.
       For example, Irish playwright, poet, and novelist Samuel Beckett (1906-1989) lived in France and wrote in
       both French and English. American author Jhumpa Lahiri (b. 1967), who was born in London to Indian
       parents, lived for years in Italy and has written in Italian as well as her native English.

      Publish Your Work

       Publishing your personal writing is the next step you may want to take. In addition to your campus literary
       magazine, the following journals accept undergraduate creative work and are often looking for submissions.

         · The Allegheny Review (https://openstax.org/r/thealleghneyreview)
         · Creative Nonfiction (https://openstax.org/r/creativenonfiction)
         · Inquiries Journal (https://openstax.org/r/inquiriesjournal)
         · International Journal of Undergraduate Research & Creative Activities (https://openstax.org/r/

             undergraduateresearch)

     4.9 Portfolio: Filtered Memories

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Reflect on the composition process.
         · Reflect on how the composition process affects your writing.
         · Use composition for learning, critical thinking, and communicating in various rhetorical contexts.

       As part of this course, you are creating a portfolio of your compositions to show your development as a writer.
       As you add to this portfolio, you assess your growth as a writer. The portfolio of your work allows you not only

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                             4.9 · Portfolio: Filtered Memories 129

to have a record of your compositions but also to reflect on those compositions and the process involved in
writing them. In this section, you will write a reflection on the process you followed in writing your turning-
point story, including revision and editing. Consider your original intention when creating your essay and how
close your final composition comes to fulfilling that intention.

Reflective Task

Answer the following questions before writing several paragraphs reflecting on the personal turning point you
wrote about in this chapter. Consider both the process and the outcome of the writing assignment.

  · Why did you choose the turning-point moment or event that you did?
  · Which part of the writing process came the most naturally? Which was the most difficult?
  · Which parts of the composition do you think are the strongest? Why?
  · Which parts of the composition would you still like to improve?
  · How did you develop your voice as a narrator as you wrote?
  · If you were to write another turning-point story, what would you do differently? (Consider topic,

      organization, structure, point of view, and voice.)
  · How did your story change through the revision and peer-editing processes? Name at least two changes

      you made, and reflect on how they made the piece stronger.
  · What did you learn about yourself, both as a writer and as a person, from this exercise?
130 4 · Further Reading

Further Reading

The following titles are good examples of essays, memoirs, and poems that tell personal stories.
Akbar, Kaveh. "How I Found Poetry in Childhood Prayer: In the Presence of the Long Faultless Tongue of God."

   Literary Hub, 12 Sept. 2017, https://lithub.com/kaveh-akbar-how-i-found-poetry-in-childhood-prayer/.
Angelou, Maya. I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. Random House, 1969.
Anzaldúa, Gloria. Borderlands / La Frontera: The New Mestiza. 4th ed., Aunt Lute Books, 2012.
Baldwin, James. Notes of a Native Son. 1955. Beacon Press, 2012.
Beasley, Sandra. Don't Kill the Birthday Girl: Tales from an Allergic Life. Crown, 2011.
Bryson, Bill. I'm a Stranger Here Myself: Notes on Returning to America after 20 Years Away. Broadway Books,

    1999.
Lamott, Anne. Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life. Pantheon Books, 1994.
McCourt, Frank. Angela's Ashes. Scribner, 1996.
O'Brien, Tim. The Things They Carried. Houghton Mifflin, 1990.
Pausch, Randy. The Last Lecture. With Jeffrey Zaslow, Hyperion, 2008.
Schutz, Samantha. I Don't Want to Be Crazy. Scholastic, 2006.
Walls, Jeanette. The Glass Castle: A Memoir. Scribner, 2006.
Woodson, Jacqueline. Brown Girl Dreaming. Nancy Paulsen Books, 2014.

Works Cited

Abrams, Shane. EmpoWord: A Student-Centered Anthology and Handbook for College Writers. Portland State
    U, 2018, https://pdx.pressbooks.pub/empoword/.

Belcher, Diane, and Alan Hirvela, editors. Linking Literacies: Perspectives on L2 Reading-Writing Connections.
    U of Michigan P, 2001.

Coates, Ta-Nehisi. "Ta-Nehisi Coates on the Writing Process." Interview by Martha Teichner. YouTube,
    uploaded by CBS Sunday Morning, 5 Nov. 2017, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z1bOLOmix1Y.

Dickens, Charles. The Pickwick Papers. Chapman & Hall, 1836. Project Gutenberg, https://www.gutenberg.org/
    files/580/580-h/580-h.htm.

Ferris, Dana R. Teaching College Writing to Diverse Student Populations. U of Michigan P, 2009.
Guptill, Amy. Writing in College: From Competence to Excellence. Open SUNY, 2016,

    https://milneopentextbooks.org/writing-in-college-from-competence-to-excellence/.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. "The Haunted Mind." Twice-Told Tales, American Stationers, 1837. Project Gutenberg,

    https://www.gutenberg.org/files/9209/9209-h/9209-h.htm.
Malcolm X. "Literacy behind Bars." The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Ballantine, 1964. Northern Local School

   District, https://www.nlsd.k12.oh.us/userfiles/63/Classes/4521/
    malcolm%20x%20-%20literacy%20behind%20bars.pdf.
Twain, Mark. Life on the Mississippi. James R. Osgood, 1883. Project Gutenberg, http://www.gutenberg.org/
    files/245/old/orig245-h/245-h.htm.

Access for free at openstax.org.
Compelling Story Profile: Telling a Rich and 5

FIGURE 5.1 Writer Gay Talese (b. 1932) revolutionized both journalism and profile writing. His piece "Frank Sinatra
Has a Cold" appeared in Esquire magazine's April 1966 issue and was among the earliest and most influential
examples of the "new journalism" movement of the 1960s and '70s. A key element of the movement was
journalists' use of literary techniques in longer pieces of media writing, aiming to get at "truth" rather than simply
providing facts. Because Sinatra (shown here in a 1960 photo) refused interview requests, Talese built the profile
entirely from field observations and interviews with others. (credit: 20th Century Fox/Wikimedia Commons, Public
Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

5.1 Profiles as Inspiration
5.2 Profile Trailblazer: Veronica Chambers
5.3 Glance at Genre: Subject, Angle, Background, and Description
5.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Remembering John Lewis" by Carla D. Hayden
5.5 Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject
5.6 Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency
5.7 Evaluation: Text as Personal Introduction
5.8 Spotlight on ... Profiling a Cultural Artifact
5.9 Portfolio: Subject as a Reflection of Self
INTRODUCTION This chapter explores the process of profile writing. Writers compose these articles or
essays to present some essential insight about the subject to the audience; subjects can span a wide variety of
132 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

       topics, including individuals, groups, places, and events. A good profile tells one clear, overarching story,
       chosen from other possible stories about the subject.
       Although the central purpose of a profile is to convey a sense of the subject's significance, a profile may have a
       more specific goal. Profile writers may simply want to inform audiences about their subjects, or they may aim
       to inspire audiences with the examples their subjects provide, highlighting something overlooked or
       underappreciated about them. In all cases, though, the writer's goal is to share a crucial insight about the
       subject with the audience.
       Profiles lie on a spectrum between two related forms: informal interviews and formal biographies. Like
       interviews, profiles usually depend on direct conversations with living people. Like biographies, they make use
       of other sources of information about the subject. Profiles such as those published in popular magazines are
       usually longer and more focused than interviews but considerably shorter than biographies. The material in
       this chapter will help you develop a profile that will show a new perspective on a subject of your choosing to
       inform and inspire your readers.

     5.1 Profiles as Inspiration

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify characteristics of profile writing.
         · Explain how the profile genre has developed.
       Beginning with its first issue in 1925, The New Yorker magazine has run a regular feature called "Profiles." The
       earliest of this series of biographical sketches combined the elements still in use for profiles today: anecdotes
       (brief stories), interview data, descriptions of the subject and their surroundings, and researched information
       to provide background and context. In the early 1950s, then senator John F. Kennedy (1917-1963) had an idea
       to develop a similar article about U.S. senators who had shown moral courage in the face of opposition. He
       asked one of his speechwriters, Ted Sorensen (1928-2010), to research examples of senators who had
       displayed this quality. As he researched, Sorensen found so much information that he suggested Kennedy
       write a book about these individuals.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      5.1 · Profiles as Inspiration 133

FIGURE 5.2 Cover of Profiles in Courage (credit: "First edition front cover of Profiles in Courage" by Unknown
Author/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
The 1956 volume, titled Profiles in Courage, spotlights eight senators who took unpopular stances against
majority consensus; subjects range from John Quincy Adams (1767-1848) to Robert A. Taft (1889-1953).
Many of the profiled senators lost political power as a result of their actions. The John F. Kennedy Library
Foundation later established the Profile in Courage Award, given to "a public official (or officials) at the federal,
state, or local level whose actions demonstrate the qualities of politically courageous leadership" ("About the
Award (https://openstax.org/r/abouttheaward)"). Kennedy's book established a connection between the profile
genre and the idea of courage, and other writers have continued drawing on this connection.
One such writer is Veronica Chambers, this chapter's trailblazer. In her book Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary
People Who Rose Up against Tyranny and Injustice, Chambers includes profiles of individuals who displayed
uncommon and often unpopular courage. Although profile pieces do not always focus on courageous people as
subjects, that particular focus can provide a strong angle--a viewpoint or lens--for profile writing. Like
Kennedy and Chambers, profile writers often communicate admiration for some attribute that their subject
displays, whether courage or another quality that might provide an example to others.
Although other types of writing can inspire readers to develop admirable qualities, profiles do so particularly
well. They are generally short enough to read in one sitting and strongly focus on one main idea for readers to
absorb. They are compelling because they combine elements of both storytelling and reporting. Profiles of
people who embody certain ideals or principles can provide models for readers to become better at living up to
those principles.
134 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

     5.2 Trailblazer

     Profile Trailblazer: Veronica Chambers

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
         · Determine how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
         · Comment on the interplay among author, subject, and audience.

                                                            "There is
                                                               not a
                                                               story

                                                            where the
                                                           oppressor

                                                               wins
                                                             forever."

           FIGURE 5.3 In her profiling work, Veronica Chambers (https://openstax.org/r/
           veronicachampers) highlights ordinary heroes such as civil rights activist Fannie
           Lou Hamer, shown here as the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party delegate
           at the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey, August
           1964. (credit: "Fannie Lou Hamer, Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
           delegate, at the Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey,
           August 1964" by Leffler, Warren K.,/Library of Congress Prints and Photographs
           Division, Public Domain)

       You may know Veronica Chambers (b. 1970) from having read Mama's Girl, her 1996 memoir about being
       raised in Brooklyn by her mother, who had immigrated with her from Panama. You may have seen one of the
       many books that Chambers has coauthored, such as Yes, Chef with Marcus Samuelsson, published in 2013;
       Make It Messy, also with Marcus Samuelsson, published in 2015; or Thirty two (32) Yolks, with Eric Ripert,

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                      5.2 · Trailblazer 135

published in 2016. Building on these successes, Chambers--who has served as senior editor at several major
publications, including Glamour, Newsweek, and the New York Times Magazine--has recently focused on
developing an array of young adult books highlighting the voices and histories of marginalized people, mainly
Black women.

In the expanded paperback edition of Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary People Who Rose Up against Tyranny and
Injustice, published in 2020, Chambers delves into the profile genre, covering a variety of well-known and
influential subjects dating from as early as 1429 to the present day. While many of her subjects are Black
American women, such as civil rights activist Fannie Lou Hamer (1917-1977) and Georgia politician Stacey
Abrams (b. 1973), the collection includes people from around the world and from different cultures, among
them Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi (1869-1948), German industrialist Oskar Schindler (1908-1974), and
South African singer Miriam Makeba (1932-2008). In every chapter, Chambers uses the profile genre to
highlight one key aspect of each of her subjects' lives.

Paying Attention to the Subject's Voice

Profiles aim to help readers better understand their subject by focusing on one major idea. When the subject is
a person, readers can better understand that person by reading their spoken or written words. Chambers uses
this technique throughout her book. In the first chapter, Chambers tells the story of French heroine Joan of Arc
(c. 1412-1431), centering on the idea that individuals are born for a purpose. Readers can better understand
Joan of Arc's singlemindedness because of the chapter's epigraph (quotation provided at the beginning of a
written piece that indicates how readers should approach the text), attributed to the subject: "I am not afraid....
I was born to do this" (Chambers, Resist 9). The profile itself offers an additional direct quote: "All battles are
first won or lost in the mind"(10). Other chapters, such as those profiling Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei
(1564-1642) and former South African president Nelson Mandela (1918-2013), also begin with the subject's
words in an epigraph or employ both strategies--epigraph plus direct quotes within the profile. (You may
choose to use either or both of these strategies in your profile as well.)

Recognizing the Author's Voice

Profile writers may choose to include themselves in the piece, referring to their own experiences and
interactions with the subject. In this collection, Chambers instead speaks in her own voice in the "resist
lesson" at the end of each chapter. These "resist lessons" distill each profile's focus into a short phrase, such as
"We must speak for the voiceless" (the lesson for the profile of Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata,
1879-1919) and "Honor the hands that harvest your crops" (the lesson for the combined profile of American
labor leaders Dolores Huerta (b. 1930) and Cesar Chavez, 1927-1993).

Negotiating among Author's Voice, Subject's Voice, and Genre Expectations

The profile genre enjoys considerable variety. While Chambers does not include her own experiences in this
collection, other writers do insert themselves into the profiles they write. Yet even without first-person
commentary, Chambers clearly communicates her opinions of the subjects with her word choices and "resist
lessons." Either choice--including the author directly in the text or not--can be appropriate, depending on the
rhetorical situation.

Discussion Questions

1. Now that you have read the information provided in the chapter thus far, what do you think are the
    differences between a profile and a memoir or biography?

2. Why might you include or exclude your own voice or experiences in the profile you write?

3. Given that many of her subjects are historical figures, how do you think Chambers found the information
    for the profiles included in her book? How would research on someone who lived in the past differ from
    research on a living person?
136 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

       4. How is the profile genre uniquely suited to showcase the idea of courage or some other admirable trait?

       5. What profiles have you encountered that have inspired you? How have they done so? If you haven't read any
            inspiring profiles, what subjects--people, places, or events--would you like to see profiled? Why?

     5.3 Glance at Genre: Subject, Angle, Background, and Description

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify elements of the profile genre.
         · Identify research methods for writing profiles.

       Profile writing are articles or essays in which the writer focuses on a specific trait or behavior that reveals
       something essential about the subject. Much profile material comes from interviews either with the subject or
       with people who know about the subject. However, interviews may not always be part of a profile, for profile
       writers also draw on other sources of information. In creating profiles, writers usually combine the techniques
       of narrative, or storytelling, and reporting, or including information that answers the questions of who, what,
       when, where, why, and how.

      Potential Profile Subjects and Angles

       You can find profile subjects everywhere. The purpose of a profile is to give readers an insight into something
       fundamental about the subject, whether that subject is a person, a social group, a building, a piece of art, a
       public space, or a cultural tradition. Writers of profiles often conduct several types of research, including
       interviews and field observations, as well as consult related published sources. A profile usually reveals one
       aspect of the subject to the audience; this focus is called an angle. To decide which angle to take, profile
       writers look for patterns in their research, then consider their audience when making choices about both the
       angle and the tone, or attitude toward the subject.

      Defining Terms and Writing in the Genre

       These terms, or genre elements, are frequently used in profile writing. The following definitions apply
       specifically to the ways in which the terms are used in this genre.

         · Anecdotes: brief stories about specific moments that offer insights into the profile subject.
         · Background information: key to understanding the profile's significance. Background information

             includes biographical data and other information about the history of the profile subject. It often helps
             establish context as well.
         · Chronological order: information or a narrative presented in time order, from earliest to most recent.
         · Context: the situation or circumstances that surround a profile subject. Situating profile subjects within
             their contexts can offer deeper insights about them.
         · Factual information: accurate and verifiable data and other material gathered from research.
         · Field notes: information gathered and recorded by observing the profile subject within a particular
             environment.
         · Location: places relevant to the profile subject. For a person, location might include birthplace, place of
             residence, or place where events occurred.
         · Narrative structure: text organized as narratives, or stories, weaving research into the story as applicable.
         · Quotation: words spoken or written by the subject or from interviews about the subject.
         · Reporting structure: structure that relays factual information and answers who, what, when, where, why,
             and how questions.
         · Show and tell: descriptive and narrative techniques to help readers imagine the subject combined with
             reporting techniques to relay factual information.
         · Spatial structure: used in profiles of buildings, artworks, and public spaces. This structure reflects a
             "tour" of the space or image.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                         5.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Remembering John Lewis" by Carla D. Hayden 137

  · Thick description: combination of sensory perceptions to create a vivid image for readers.
  · Tone: the writer's attitude toward the subject. For example, tone can be admiring, grateful, sarcastic,

      disparaging, angry, respectful, gracious, neutral, and so on.
  · Topical structure: structure that focuses on several specific topics within the profile.

5.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Remembering John Lewis" by Carla D.
Hayden

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Determine and articulate how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
  · Analyze and evaluate relationships between ideas and patterns of organization in the profile genre.

Introduction

FIGURE 5.4 John Lewis, 2006 (credit: "Rep. John Lewis (D-GA)" by United States House of Representatives/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
138 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

public domain t

                                                      end public domain t

                 end public domain t

FIGURE 5.5 Carla D. Hayden, 2020 (credit: "Librarian of Congress Carla Hayden, 2020" by Shawn Miller/Library of
Congress Life/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
Just two days after the death of politician and civil rights icon John Lewis (1940-2020), Librarian of Congress
Carla D. Hayden (b. 1952) published the following profile on the Library of Congress blog. As you will learn
from the annotations, she uses a variety of profile genre elements in her piece. While reading Hayden's profile
of Lewis, consider how you might use some of her strategies in your own work.

        LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS
The Power of "Good Trouble"

Aannngoletaatnd Choice of Subject. Hayden signals her profile's angle in the title, linking Lewis's signature phrase "good
trouble" with the idea of power. Additionally, important dates--deaths, current events, or anniversaries of such
happenings--often provide the incentive for writing profiles.end annotat

      Few people that you meet truly rouse the best in you. They are walking heroes, living historymakers. Their
      words and deeds have a thunderous impact on your soul. Congressman John Robert Lewis was such a person
      for me. I join the world in mourning the passing of this civil rights legend.
Wanrnitoetar'ts Voice. Hayden chooses to insert her own voice and experience to connect with her readers. She also
expands on the theme of "power" introduced in the title, using words and phrases such as heroes, historymakers,
thunderous impact, and legend.end annotat
Taonnoe.taTthe words she uses to describe Lewis indicate a tone of respect and admiration.end annotat
      The son of a sharecropper growing up in rural Alabama, he said as a little boy he was in constant fear because
      of signs that said "no colored boys, no colored girls." His parents and grandparents used to tell him "don't get in
      trouble." Nevertheless, as a young man he was inspired to activism by the Montgomery Bus Boycott that started
      when Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                  5.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Remembering John Lewis" by Carla D. Hayden 139

Santrnuocttautre. This paragraph features a chronological structure, beginning with Lewis's childhood and creating a
timeline from there to the beginning of his activism.end annotat

                 Tanhneomtaetand Background. This paragraph also introduces the idea of "trouble," which drove Lewis's ideas about how

                 to behave. Thus, it provides necessary background information for the points that follow, giving context for Lewis's
public domaincattchphrase of "good trouble."end annotat

This  past  December, the Library of Congress     opened an extensive exhibition,        "Rosa   Parks:  In  Her  Own Words,"      domain  t
                         end public domain t               end public domain t                                         end public

where the congressman spoke. "Rosa Parks inspired us to get in trouble. And I've been getting in trouble ever

since," said Lewis. "She inspired us to find a way, to get in the way, to get in what I call good trouble, necessary

trouble."   Over  the  years,  he  was  able  to  meet and work with   Rosa  Parks  who  taught  him  about  the  philosophy  and
                                                  end public domain t

discipline of non-violence. "She kept on saying to each one of us, you too can do something," he said. "And for

people if you see something that is not right, not fair, not just, do something. We cannot afford to be quiet." You can

hear Lewis himself discuss the legacy of Parks (https://openstax.org/r/legacyofparks).

Tanhneomtaet, Quotations, Audience. This paragraph continues the theme of "trouble," redefining the idea now in Lewis's
terms. The paragraph also continues the theme of power. This paragraph focuses almost entirely on quoted material
from Lewis, giving readers a direct connection to his voice. The embedded video allows readers to see and hear
Lewis speaking, reinforcing this strategy. Lastly, Hayden refers to an event at the Library of Congress; this event is
relevant to readers of the Library of Congress blog.end annotat

      During the exhibition opening, John Lewis told how he was inspired by Rosa Parks to write to Dr. Martin Luther
      King Jr. He was given a round trip bus ticket to Montgomery to meet with Dr. King and upon meeting him was
      nicknamed, "The Boy from Troy."

Laoncnaotiaotn. Hayden places Lewis in different locations; the mention of a location-specific nickname personalizes him
further. Hayden also places Lewis at pivotal civil rights events.end annotat

Aanundoietantce. This final placement of Lewis in the Library of Congress on several occasions is an effective choice to
connect with readers of the Library of Congress blog.end annotat

      He risked his life countless times by organizing voter registration drives, sit-ins at lunch counters and was
      beaten and arrested for challenging the injustice of Jim Crow segregation in the South. While still a young man,
      John Lewis was already a nationally recognized leader and was named one of the Big Six leaders of the Civil
      Rights Movement. He was also the chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), and his
      papers and interviews from this time are held at the Library of Congress. At the age of 23, he was a keynote
      speaker at the historic March on Washington in 1963.

Fananctoutatl Information, Background, and Context. This paragraph offers a series of facts to back Hayden's points. It
also provides more background and context for Lewis's later political efforts. This information is common
knowledge, repeated in a variety of credible sources. Hayden takes care to note that Lewis's papers are housed at
the Library of Congress, a relevant detail for her audience.end annotat

      On March 7, 1965, John Lewis led more than 600 peaceful protestors across the Edmund Pettus Bridge in
      Selma to demonstrate the need for voting rights in the state of Alabama. They were greeted by brutal attacks by
      Alabama State Troopers that became known as "Bloody Sunday."

Aannneoctdaotte and Context. This paragraph offers a brief anecdote about a defining moment of Lewis's life, thus
strengthening the power of the story and communicating the context of Lewis's early activism.end annotat

      Despite numerous arrests and physical injuries, John Lewis remained a devoted advocate of the philosophy of
      nonviolence. He was elected to the Atlanta City Council and then the representative of Georgia's Fifth
      Congressional District. He stuck to Rosa Parks' advice to never be quiet and to continue getting into "good
      trouble."
140 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

Aannngoletaatnd Secondary Research. This paragraph continues the writer's angle of "good trouble" and offers
information from secondary sources.end annotat

public domain t  The congressman was a frequent guest at the Library of Congress. His generous spirit touched everyone he met
                 in the halls of the Library--whether it was reading his graphic novel "March" or speaking at public events--his
                 gentle temperament kept you at ease. His graphic novel allowed him to continue to connect with a new
                 generation of young readers in the hope of inspiring them the way Rosa Parks had inspired him.

Aannngoleta, tContext, and Field Research.eInndthpiusbplaicradgoremanpadhinp, uHtbalyicdednomimapinliet s that part oefnLdepwuisb'lsicpdoowmeraicnatme from his
generosity and gentle temperament. She also shows readers that Lewis understood his work in the context of

Parks's achievements and that he hoped to provide the same context for activists who followed him. Instead of

providing direct quotes, Hayden offers details that come from field research.end annotat

                 In November, John Lewis celebrated the AIDS Memorial Quilt collection arriving at the Library of Congress. His
                 message of peaceful resolve, perseverance and care still rings loud. "In the height of the civil rights movement,
                 we spoke of love," Lewis said. "On one occasion Dr. King said to some of us, just love everybody. Love them who
                 fail to love you, just love. Just love a little hell out of everybody."

Qanunootteadt Material and Field Research. Using Lewis's own words supports both his commitment to nonviolence and
Dr. King's playfulness with language. Hayden was likely present at the event when Lewis spoke; videos of and
articles about the event corroborate her report.end annotat

                 The world mourns. But we also celebrate a great warrior and fighter of injustice. Let us remember his story and
                 listen to the words he passionately shared for more than a half a century. Congressman John Robert Lewis
                 embodies the best in all of us. Let his legacy and spirit live on. I offer my prayers and condolences to his family
                 and to the grateful people of his district in Georgia.

Tanhneomtaetand Angle. Hayden ends by reconnecting to the themes that run through the profile. In returning to these
themes, Hayden confirms and completes the angle of this profile.end annotat

Discussion Questions

1. How does the title both focus the scope and signal the angle of this blog post?

2. How effective is Hayden's angle in this piece? Provide evidence for your assessment.

3. In what ways might Hayden, as librarian of Congress, have developed this profile further or differently?

4. How might you revise this piece to fit into a "profiles in courage" collection targeted at a more general
    audience?

5. How do the first and last paragraphs work differently from the other paragraphs in the text? How do
    Hayden's choices for these paragraphs affect the cohesiveness of the profile she has written?

5.5 Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Plan a research calendar.
  · Conduct primary research, including field observations and interviews.
  · Conduct secondary research, drawing on credible academic and popular sources.
  · Compose an email that meets professional standards of the genre.
  · Synthesize research findings using elements of the profile genre to create a written profile.
  · Give and receive constructive feedback in peer review exercises.
  · Revise a draft in response to feedback.

Now that you are familiar with the structure and content of profiles, you are ready to write one of your own.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                        5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 141

This section will show you how to apply the ideas and genre elements presented earlier in this chapter to
develop your profile essay.

Summary of Assignment: A Profile in Courage or Other Admirable Trait

For this assignment, you will develop an essay that profiles the courage--or another admirable aspect--of
someone or something associated with your college campus. You will create a profile of a person, group, place,
or event that exemplifies the admirable aspect as you define it. For your profile, you will conduct the specific
kinds of research done by profile writers: interviews, field research, and secondary research from credible
sources.

Once you have compiled your research, you will decide on the focus and angle of your piece, then plan and
develop your draft. You will also participate in peer review to receive guidance for any needed revisions.
Throughout the process, you will focus on developing an essay that shows readers how your subject
exemplifies the admirable trait you have chosen.

Another Lens. Another option for this assignment is a group writing project for your class or smaller groups
within the class. Your instructor will decide whether the project will be completed by the whole class or smaller
groups. With your peers, you will write a collaborative profile in courage of your class or group as a whole,
showing how you all exemplify courage together. All students will contribute anecdotes about courage from
their own lives in addition to conducting all other research on which profiles are based. The class or group will
then work together to organize, draft, revise, edit, and proofread the collective composition.

Defining the Admirable Trait

Before beginning your profile, choose the admirable trait on which you will focus, and then create your own
definition of it. This definition will help you select your subject and focus your research. Consider including
the definition in your final product as well.

First, to decide on the trait, follow these steps:

  · Set a timer for five minutes. During that time, write or record a comprehensive list of traits you admire in
      other people. Include a wide range of possibilities, such as "humor," "generosity," "patience," and so on. To
      generate a robust list, think also of the people you admire, and then pinpoint the attributes you admire
      about them.

  · Consider all of the traits you have listed, and select one to focus on for this project.

Next, use one or more of the following methods to begin defining the aspect of the subject that you admire:

  · Think about the admirable trait you have chosen, and write down a few words or phrases that you
      associate with it.

  · Assemble a collage of images that make you think of the admirable trait.
  · Write brief notes about moments when you have personally shown the trait you are focusing on--or about

      times you have seen others exhibit this trait.

Looking at all of these notes, write your personal definition of the admirable trait. Your draft definition will
probably evolve as you develop your profile. If so, great! That means you have been thinking more about the
idea. Here is a sample definition of an admirable trait: Kindness is grace in action; it shows itself when people
are willing to truly listen to others and to understand the world from another vantage point. People embody
kindness when they choose to respond gently rather than angrily or when they help others without
complaining.

Choosing a Subject

Now that you have a working definition of the trait you are using to focus your profile, you can choose your
subject. Members of the campus community are usually willing subjects: professors, librarians, resident
assistants, alumni, staff, and coaches, to name a few. You might also consider buildings, public spaces, or
142 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

       public art on campus. In addition, the local community may contain potential subjects--for example, business
       owners, city administrators, and other local individuals, groups, or events peripherally associated with your
       school. Also consider discussing your project with an archivist if one is available on campus or in your
       community; these specialist librarians always have interesting subjects to recommend for research. Follow
       these steps to choose a subject:

         · Jot down notes about intriguing buildings, public spaces, pieces of public art, people, events, and groups
             on or near campus.

         · Do a quick online search--perhaps on the campus website--to see what information is available about
             several potential subjects that most intrigue you. Remember that this research is simply to narrow your
             options; you will conduct more careful and thorough research after making your final choice.

         · Having gathered preliminary information, think about which potential subject best connects to the
             definition of the admirable trait you have developed. Also, think about which subject most interests you.

       Now weigh the factors you have considered here, and choose the subject you would most like to pursue. If you
       are having trouble choosing between two subjects, discuss your options with your instructor or with someone
       in the campus writing center. Once you have chosen a subject, you can plan your research. You will need to
       schedule interviews, field observations, and time for secondary research before you begin organizing your
       findings and drafting your paper.

       FIGURE 5.6 Carmichael Library, University of Montevallo, April 19, 2007. Professor Art Scott Stephens speaks to
       research students at the Prints and Poems program. (credit: "Prints and Poems 2007" by carmichaellibrary/flickr,
       CC BY 2.0)

      Preparing to Write: Conducting Research

       Profile writers learn as much about their subjects as possible. Be sure to take advantage of all available sources
       of information, and follow up on new leads wherever you find them. After completing your research, you will
       be able to refine your angle and draft your piece. As you gather your research, keep your target audience in
       mind, and look for details about your subject that will interest them. For example, Carla D. Hayden included
       information about events in which John Lewis participated at the Library of Congress. These details would
       interest Library of Congress blog readers, the audience for this piece.
       You will need to complete three kinds of research for your profile: interviews, field research and secondary
       research; see The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources and The Research Process: How to
       Create Sources. These types of research are outlined in Table 5.1 for efficient planning and discussed in detail
       below.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                        5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 143

                                                         Plan Your Research Calendar
 Interviews

   · If you can speak to your subject, find their contact information.
   · If you cannot speak directly to your subject, make a list of professionals with knowledge about your subject,

       and decide which person to contact first. One or two interviews should provide enough information for this
       assignment.
   · In either case, compose a professional email (see below) to respectfully ask for a brief phone call, video
       conference, or in-person meeting. Send these emails as soon as you have chosen your subject so that you
       have time to schedule the interview before you begin drafting.

 Field Research
   · If your subject is a person, send a professional email (see below) to ask when you might observe them doing
       their job.
   · If your subject is not a person, decide when to be in the space to make your field notes. Be sure to obtain any
       needed permission to be in the space.
   · In both cases, set aside 30 minutes to an hour to make your field notes, using thick description (explained
       below).

 Secondary Research
   · Set aside time for several research sessions to find credible information about your subject. Refer to Chapters
       Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating,
       and Documenting Sources for research guidance.
   · If you have trouble finding the information you need, contact one of your research librarians; they would be
       happy to help.

TABLE 5.1 Research Planning Calendar

Professional Email Standards

Before you begin to do research, you will need to contact people via email about setting up interviews or
gathering other necessary information. To come across as a credible researcher, follow professional email
protocol when contacting subjects for interviews or other information. Subjects will take you and your
requests far more seriously when you follow the protocols in Table 5.2.

                                                                Professional Email
 Take care to use professional email etiquette when contacting potential interview subjects.

TABLE 5.2 Email Protocols
144 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

                                                      Professional Email

· Subject Line. Your subject line, like an essay title,

should represent your main point.

· Salutation. Open with a polite greeting; use the       Subject: Interview Request
   person's title or honorific (such as Mr., Ms., Mrs.,

or Dr.).

· Introduction. Introduce yourself to the person.        Dear Dr. Kamau,
   Your name will appear in the signature line; here,

offer information that shows the relationship you

   have to the request.                                  I am a student in Dr. Liu's first-year composition class,
· Statement of Purpose. State your purpose               and I am researching the English Language Institute (ELI)
                                                         on campus in order to write a profile on tenacity in
   clearly.

                                                         relation to the ELI.

                                                         I am writing to ask for a brief interview with you to find
                                                         out more about the ELI.

· Statement of Request. Make a polite request.           Would you have 15 minutes within the next week to
                                                         speak with me by phone or videoconference?

                                                         I hope to hear from you soon.

· Next Steps. Say what you would like to happen          Thank you for considering this request.
   next.                                                 [Best, Regards, Sincerely, Yours]
                                                         Sylvia Varela
· Closing. Include a polite closing line, use a
   professional complimentary close, and type your
   full name.

TABLE 5.2 Email Protocols

Interviews

Talking with your subject--or a professional who knows a great deal about your subject--is often the best place
to start your research. Interviews generally fall into the category of primary research, or research you collect
directly for yourself. Try to interview your profile subject directly if the subject is a person. You also may find
interviews with or about your subject that journalists have completed and published, though these would not
be primary research. If you are unable to interview your subject directly, try to interview someone who has
credible information about your subject; such interviews would be primary research as well. People who know,
live, and work with your subject can provide additional, helpful background information. Try to set up a few
short interviews with these people to deepen your insights.

The easiest way to conduct an interview is to schedule a brief, informal conversation in a comfortable setting.
For a successful interview, have questions prepared and be ready to take notes as you talk. Following in Table
5.3 are sample questions you might ask. To add to this list, think about your preliminary research as well as
the definition of the admirable trait you are using for your profile.

Note that you will need to cite any interviews you conduct, both within the text and in the Works Cited list. The
Works Cited entry for an interview will read as follows:

[Last name of interviewee], [First name of interviewee]. Personal interview. Day Month (abbreviated) Year.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                    5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 145

                                       Interview Planning Worksheet

If you are interviewing your subject:

· What have you been doing or thinking about        If you are interviewing someone about your subject:
   recently?
                                                      · How did you learn about this subject?
· What about your work/hobby/area of focus is most    · What is the most fascinating part about this
   interesting to you?
                                                          subject for you?
· What aspect of your work/hobby/area of focus has    · What should people know about this subject that
   surprised you?
                                                          may be overlooked?
· What do you wish people knew about your work/       · How might you define [the admirable trait]?
   hobby/area of focus?                               · Do you see the idea of [the admirable trait] relating

· How might you define [the admirable trait]?             to this subject? If so, how?
· How do you see the idea of [the admirable trait]    · As I was preparing for this interview, I learned

   relating to your work/hobby/area of focus?             <WOL>. Could you tell me more about that?
· As I was preparing for this interview, I learned

   <WOL>. Could you tell me more about that?

TABLE 5.3 Interview planning worksheet

Thick Description

Another form of primary research is field observation. If at all possible, observe your subject in their
element--watch them (with permission!) during their workday, spend an extended period of time in a related
space, or watch available videos of your subject. In all cases, take thorough and detailed notes to create a thick
description, or a careful record of every sensory detail you can capture--smells, sounds, sights, textures,
physical sensations, and perhaps tastes. This thick description can provide meaningful details to illuminate
the points in your piece. Meticulously record all sensory information about your subject and their setting,
writing in-depth notes about what you see, smell, hear, feel, and taste. Remember to use words that express
size, shape, color, texture, and sound. If you are taking notes on a person, describe their clothing, gestures, and
physical characteristics. At the same time, take note of the interview setting. If the interview takes place in a
neutral space, the setting can provide a backdrop for the profile. If the interview setting is a person's room or
apartment, record the details that tell the most about your subject's special interests. If you are not used to
taking these kinds of notes, practice doing so by following the steps in Table 5.4.

                                              Practice Field Notes and Thick Description

 Practice creating field notes with a peer. Take about 10 minutes to record as much sensory information as
 possible.

   · What do you hear, close by and farther away?
   · What do you feel? Are there specific textures in your surroundings?
   · What do you smell? What seems to be the source of the smells?
   · Can you taste anything?
   · What do you see? Describe the space as well as your peer (without judgment).

 When the 10 minutes are up, discuss the experience with your peer. Use these techniques to enliven the points
 you make in your profile.

TABLE 5.4 Field notes and thick description guide

You will also need to cite your field notes, both within the text and in the Works Cited list. The Works Cited
146 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

entry for the field notes should be arranged according to this model:

[Your last name], [Your first name]. Field notes. [Name of the department you are affiliated with], [Name of your
university], Day Month (abbreviated) Year. Raw data.

Secondary Research and Other Written and Published Information

Profile writers supplement their primary research findings through secondary research, or research that
others have completed and published. Ensure that any supplemental information you use comes from
credible sources; these include peer-reviewed journals for academic sources and well-established, highly
regarded organizations for public, nonacademic ones. Keep careful records of this research so that you can cite
each source appropriately. Use the tools available from the Modern Language Association
(https://openstax.org/r/modernlanguage) and in Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and
Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources for guidance in researching and
managing source material. For more details on citing sources, see MLA Documentation and Format and APA
Documentation and Format.

Additionally, ask your subject for their résumé and any writing samples they may have developed. While this
type of research may not be available about your subject, as many ordinary people have not published
anything, find and read any existing publications by or about your subject. Additionally, you can focus your
secondary research on information related to your subject rather than about your subject specifically. For
example, Carla D. Hayden, in writing the profile of John Lewis, could have researched Bloody Sunday more
generally, or she could have found secondary research about the AIDS quilt to which she refers. To see how
authors can use such secondary research, read the sample of student work later in this section as well as the
blog post in Spotlight on . . . Profiling a Cultural Artifact.

Synthesizing Research

After you have completed your research, the next step is to synthesize it, or put it all together. You can simplify
this task by filling in a graphic organizer such as Table 5.5 with your findings and potential angles you might
take in your profile.

Source                            Synthesizing: Putting Your Research Together  Potential Angle
                                              Element

List your     List the elements you can draw from the                  List potential angles you could take
sources by    sources--quotations, anecdotes, facts, background        relating to the information in the
type:         information, contextual information:                     other columns:

Interview(s)

Field
observation
location and
date

Sources from
secondary
research

TABLE 5.5 Synthesizing table

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                        5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 147

      Quick Launch: Consider the Angle

After completing and synthesizing your research, consider your information carefully to decide on the most
compelling angle and supporting information for your audience. While your general angle is the idea of the
admirable trait in relation to your subject, aim to develop a personal insight within that focus. Brainstorm
different points you can make about the trait that may surprise and engage your audience. Review the table
you completed for synthesizing information, and then complete a web diagram such as Figure 5.7 with
possible ideas.

          FIGURE 5.7 Planning web (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
After considering your notes and the completed web, decide which angle will work best. To help you make that
decision, think about the information you have gathered so far as well as potential audience appeal. Review the
model texts in this chapter to determine how each presents a unique angle on its subject.

     Drafting: Finalizing and Supporting Your Angle

Remember that the writing process is recursive, meaning you will move back and forth among the steps in the
process multiple times rather than progress through each step only once. For example, you may decide to
conduct a bit more research while you are drafting or after you have received feedback from peer review. To
include this new research, you may need to rearrange the structure of your draft. As you draft, keep focused on
your angle at all times. Losing focus and including irrelevant material may weaken your profile and cause
readers to lose interest in the subject.
Organization
As discussed in Glance at Genre: Subject, Angle, Background, and Description, profiles can be organized in
several ways: chronologically, spatially, or topically. Review the information you inserted in reponse to Table
5.1, along with your admirable trait definition, to decide which organizational strategy would work best for
your piece. Then use the following sections to organize the introduction, body, and conclusion of your work.
When organizing your draft, think about where to place each piece of information to convey your points most
effectively. Rather than using a strict chronological structure throughout your draft, you may find your piece is
more effective if you begin with a topical structure and then provide some information chronologically.
Introduction and Thesis
Like introductions in most of the writing you do, the profile introduction establishes some background and
148 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

       context for readers to understand your main point. Think about what readers need to know in order to
       appreciate your angle, and include that information in the introduction. Some writers prefer to compose their
       introductions first, whereas others wait until after they have developed a draft of the body. Whichever strategy
       you use, be sure that the introduction engages readers so that they want to continue reading. Refer to the
       sample texts in this chapter for models of introductory texts.

       Remember, too, that your thesis should appear as the last sentence, or close to the end, of the introduction. For
       the profile, your thesis would be a sentence or two explaining your angle. For example:

         · [Name of subject] showed [the admirable trait] not only in [doing something that shows the trait] but even
             more so by refusing to [accept or participate in something].

         · [Name of subject] plays a unique part in the [history, life, culture] of [place, group] because [reason for
             angle].

       Try one of these models, or a variation of it, as the first draft of your thesis.

       Body Paragraphs

       Each body paragraph should support the angle you have taken, advancing your thesis, or main point. For
       suggestions on developing body paragraphs in narrative writing, see Literacy Narrative: Building Bridges,
       Bridging Gaps and Memoir or Personal Narrative: Learning Lessons from the Personal. For each paragraph,
       synthesize details--examples, anecdotes, quotations, location, background information, or descriptions of
       events--from more than one source to support your angle. By including all of these elements, necessary
       explanations, and a combination of narrative and reporting, you will create the strongest possible profile piece.
       See the section See the section Spotlight on . . . Profiling a Cultural Artifact to explore examples of how these
       elements can work in the paragraphs of a blog post profiling a cultural artifact. In each paragraph, consider
       drawing on the following:

         · Show and Tell. In balancing between interviews and biographies, profile writers use both narrative and
             reporting techniques--that is, they both show and tell readers information about the subject. As you read
             your notes, decide which elements you will use to show readers something about your subject and which
             elements you will simply report.

         · Quoted Material. If your subject has said something in a memorable way, present their words directly to
             readers. Doing so increases your readers' sense of the subject's voice.

         · Anecdotes. Very brief scenarios or stories about something your subject has done, or about the subject
             itself, contribute to readers' understanding. Often, anecdotes reflect field research, showing the subject
             "in action" or reflecting what others think about the subject. For example, Carla D. Hayden relates
             anecdotes about John Lewis's actions leading 600 protesters in Selma, Alabama.

         · Background Information. You may have one or more paragraphs in which you present background
             information--but only information that is relevant to the profile. If you highlight an individual's success or
             their contributions to society or a cause, then that person's humble beginnings may be relevant as a
             contrast. Hayden mentions Lewis's impoverished youth for this reason. Including background information
             helps readers place the subject in time and within their culture.

         · Location. Placing your subject in a setting, in either the past or the present, helps readers understand and
             visualize the subject in a particular context. Be sure to include location in at least one body paragraph.

       The sample texts in this chapter provide models for you to use when developing your draft. Use a graphic
       organizer like Table 5.6 to identify the following profile genre elements in one or more of the model texts
       featured in this chapter: Annotated Sample Reading, the student sample in this section, or Spotlight on ...
       Profiling a Cultural Artifact. Remember that single paragraphs often synthesize more than one type of
       information and use more than one strategy.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 149

               Strategies Used in This Chapter's Sample Texts              Example of the Strategy That You
                                                                          Found in One or More Sample Texts
 Draw the reader in with a brief, compelling description of the subject.
 Offer quoted material.
 Connect to both current and historical contexts.
 Offer background information.
 Use narrative, or storytelling, techniques.
 Use reporting techniques, providing supporting facts and answering
 questions of who, what, when, where, why, and how.
 Provide a brief anecdote.
 Offer "thick description" from field notes.
 Synthesize information from multiple sources within a paragraph.
TABLE 5.6 Strategy table

Additionally, tone, a writer's attitude toward their subject, is particularly important in profiles because it
conveys authenticity to readers. If you praise a subject but your tone or attitude reflects detachment or lack of
interest, readers will notice the discrepancy. Hayden's attitude toward her subject, John Lewis, is one of
respect and admiration. If you are writing about someone courageous, then your tone will probably be similar
to hers. Remember, though, that you are the narrator, and thus you set the tone. If you insert quotations by
people who don't think as you do, make sure that doing so suits your purpose. By including information in the
areas covered above and maintaining a consistent and appropriate tone, you will have the basis of a strong and
engaging profile.

Conclusion

The conclusion is your opportunity to pull all the points of the essay together. Many writers like to restate the
main point they have sustained throughout the essay in the conclusion. Another strong move for the
conclusion is to tell readers the exigency of the piece--in other words, why the information is important and
why they should care about it. After your introduction and body are complete, read through your draft; this
process will often give you a sense of what still needs to be said in the conclusion. Refer to the sample texts in
this chapter for models of conclusion paragraphs.

Review Your Draft

After you have written a rough first draft, including the introduction and conclusion, read the entire piece
three times:

  · Revise. Read once for the big picture to judge whether you have enough content and whether the content
      is arranged in a way that makes sense. Revise your work as needed.

  · Edit. Read a second time for mid-level concerns such as sentence variety, word choice, and consistent use
      of tenses: Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency. Think about whether you need to break some sentences
      apart or combine some sentences for smoother flow. Follow the chronology of your profile to ensure that
      the narration stays in the present or past tense and that events are clearly set in time. Read your
      composition aloud to see whether you overuse some words. Edit your work as needed.

  · Proofread. After editing, read through a third time with an eye on small details to proofread your work.
150 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

      Change spelling or punctuation as needed to meet the expectations of the rhetorical situation. Check that
      you have formatted according to the required style guide, or standards of writing, such as Modern
      Language Association (MLA) or American Psychological Association (APA) style.

Revisit these three steps after you have received feedback from the peer review exercise that follows. If you
have access to a campus writing center, you may consult with tutors there for support at any stage of your
writing process.

     Peer Review: Written Responses

After you have developed a solid draft, you are ready to receive feedback from your peers. To prepare for peer
review, reread the assignment prompt in Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject and the
assessment rubric in Evaluation: Text as Personal Introduction. Then, read your peer's entire profile before
giving feedback. In your feedback, strive to be both clear and kind--clearly state the strengths and weaknesses
of the text in the most supportive way possible. If you need guidance, use the model sentences in Table 5.7 to
structure your feedback.

                                                 Peer Review Feedback Model Sentences

   · These three aspects of your draft work well: ________, ________, and ________.
   · You might consider strengthening your draft ________ by doing these things: ________, ________, and

       ________.
   · As you revise your work, I suggest addressing these three areas: ________, ________, and ________.

TABLE 5.7 Feedback sentences

After reading your peer's profile all the way through, use Table 5.8 to provide thoughtful and detailed feedback.

Date                                                     Review of [peer]
                                                      by [insert your name]

 Profile Genre Element                                                Feedback for Your Peer
 Subject
                                  What interests you about your peer's subject? What information could your
 Angle                            peer provide to deepen that interest?

 Structure                        What angle has your peer taken in this draft? What suggestions do you have
 Paragraph Focus (anecdote,       for refining the angle?
 quotes, facts, background, and
 context)                         How has your peer organized the profile? If you would recommend a different
TABLE 5.8 Peer review guide       structure, what would you recommend, and why?

                                  Has your peer included an array of genre elements in the paragraphs? How
                                  could your peer strengthen this aspect of the work?

Access for free at openstax.org.
                               5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 151

 Tone, Tense, and Description  Is your peer's tone, or written attitude, appropriate for the profile? Why or
                               why not? What suggestions do you have for strengthening or changing the
 Research                      tone?
 Audience                      Are verb tenses consistent? If not, how might your peer adjust them?
 Additional Comments           How might your peer show readers aspects of the subject as well as tell
TABLE 5.8 Peer review guide    about them?

                               How does your peer's draft show evidence of
                                 · interview research?
                                 · field research and thick description?
                                 · credible secondary research? How can you tell that the secondary
                                     research is credible?

                               What suggestions do you have for your peer to connect better with the
                               intended audience?

                               In what other ways might your peer strengthen the draft?

     Revising: Incorporating Written Responses

After you have received feedback from your peer(s), read it carefully. If you have received feedback from more
than one peer, strongly consider addressing comments on which they agree. If you have received comments
encouraging you to make revision, editing, and proofreading changes, prioritize revision--making major
changes in content, structure, and organization. You may need to add, delete, or rearrange information or the
way in which you present the material. You may rearrange information within paragraphs or add topic
sentences if needed. Much of the feedback your peers give you based on the form above will probably fit into
the category of revision.

Evaluate Yourself

Another way to approach revision is to compare and contrast your work against the rubric for the assignment
in Evaluation: Text as Personal Introduction, which guides you through the process of evaluating your work
using the standards given in the assignment rubric.

                                                   Use the Rubric to Improve Your Draft

   · Review the benchmarks for "Skillful" Critical Language Awareness, and then make notes on your draft in
       response to the following questions:
        Have you carefully proofread your work to check especially for issues of subject-verb consistency?
        Look at your sentence structures. Do you have sentences of different lengths and complexities in your
           text? Where might you improve the sentence variety throughout your draft?
        Do you meet or challenge conventional expectations in rhetorically challenging ways?

TABLE 5.9 Revision guide
152 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

                                                          Use the Rubric to Improve Your Draft

           · Review the benchmarks for "Skillful" Clarity and Coherence, and then answer the following questions:
               How might you revise the structure of your draft even more effectively? Should you consider reordering
                   any elements or information?
               Review your body paragraphs. Do you have a good balance of anecdotes, quotations, location, thick
                   description, and background? If you have overused or omitted any of these elements, revise accordingly,
                   making sure that ideas flow smoothly.
               Where could you strengthen the use of interview research and field notes? Do you need to gather
                   additional material?
               Where could your secondary research better support the points you make throughout the draft? Do you
                   need to gather additional secondary research?
               Do you include elements of narrative, or storytelling, that help readers imagine the spaces or actions you
                   cover? Where could you strengthen the narrative?
               Do you include elements of reporting, or relaying information to readers? Where does this strategy need
                   strengthening?
               Have you used appropriate transitions to ensure coherence and connect ideas?
               Do all your points support your thesis?

           · Review the benchmarks for "Skillful" Rhetorical Choices, and then answer the following questions:
               Think again about your subject choice. You should probably not consider changing your subject at this
                   stage of your project, but do think about this question: Are you presenting the subject in the best light to
                   appeal to your audience?
               Think again about your angle. Do you need to refine or amend your angle to better connect with your
                   audience?
               Read your piece out loud to check the tone. Do you need to shift the tone to better reach your audience?
               Read your piece all the way through, noting places that do not hold your interest as strongly as others.
                   What can you do to make those places more compelling for your reader?

         Use your notes from this worksheet to revise, edit, and proofread your work.

       TABLE 5.9 Revision guide

       Revised Draft Profile Sample

       This section provides one example of a revised profile draft written by a first-year college student. As you will
       read, the admirable quality that Houston Byrd focuses on in this essay is that his subject, a bricks-and-mortar
       video store, offers "a crucial and important service to its community." You will also see the ways in which Byrd
       both "shows and tells" readers about his subject, offering information drawn from each type of required
       research: interview, field observation, and secondary sources. Byrd has chosen to insert himself and his
       experiences of his subject fully into this profile. Review Glance at Genre: Subject, Angle, Background, and
       Description, and then read Byrd's essay to see how well he incorporates the narrative and reporting profile
       genre elements in his draft.

       After Byrd received peer feedback, he decided that his previous draft did not need much revision; he was
       happy with his structure, and the organization made sense to his readers. One peer suggested that Byrd insert
       topic sentences in each paragraph, but he ultimately decided not to do so because he thought his paragraphs
       held together well as written. As you revise your work in response to peer feedback, you may also choose to
       accept some suggestions while rejecting others.

       Byrd paid close attention to peer feedback indicating that his draft had many long, complicated sentences; in

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                               5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 153

   the draft below, the originals are noted after the edited sentences. He also acted on feedback about verb tense

   consistency. Furthermore, Byrd made proofreading changes, such as adding the MLA-required right header

   and changing the placement of some punctuation marks. As with all writing, this draft could be improved even

   more with further revision. After reading the essay, discuss with a peer the revision, editing, and proofreading

s  changes you would recommenudnidf eyroluinwe ere reading this draft for peer review.

   Heaven Is in Toad Frog Alleyunderelinde underlienned usnderlineend s

   underline

   The realm of physical     film,     if  not  already  dead,  is dying. More  so  than  decaying  cellulose,  the  entire  medium                            as
      end usnderline                                              underline

   an art form is declining. According to The Guardian, DVD and Blu-Ray sales were down this past holiday over

   30% each (Sweney).        Some      say  that  streaming     services  and  on-demand  viewing   are  the  culprits.  Whatever  the
         end usnderline

   case, the answer is not so simple, and the notion is very alarming. The decrease in relevance of physical media

   is  no     secret.  Mass  closures  of video   rental  powerhouses     such  as  Blockbuster  Video   and  Movie  Gallery  began                            at
                                       end s

   the turn of the decade.

   Tanhneootraigt inal sentence read: Iutnidsenrolinsecret that physical media has been on the decline, especially with the mass
   closures of video rental powerhouses such as Blockbuster Video and Movie Gallery near the beginning of the
   decade.eTnhdisuenxdaemrlpinle demonstrates a pattern throughout the revised draft in which Byrd broke apart some of his
   longer sentences and improved their wording. Notice that he changes tense in the last sentence for a reason: the
   trend is happening now, but video rental stores began closing in the past.end annotat

   Though the memory lives on in millennial nostalgia, the world of physical movie sales is not completely
   irrelevant. Many of the large rental chains have since closed down, but beyond the major highways is an all-but-
   forgotten world of local video stores. In my home state, one store in particular, called Toad Frog Alley Videos,
   lives in that world, located in the small town of Cleveland, Alabama. I had the privilege of visiting the store and
   speaking with its owner, Kandy Little, about her experiences operating in a time when physical media is scarce.
   Through my visit and conversation, I have come to appreciate the importance of Toad Frog Alley Videos. I truly
   believe that the store provides a crucial and important service to its community, as well as highlights the nature
   of physical film and the need for preservation.

   Iannnthoitsaitntroductory paragraph, Byrd establishes the stakes for his profile subject, offering both background and                                          end annotat
   context for understanding the video store's importance to its community. He also makes some editing and
   proofreading changes to strengthen the draft and presents his main point, or thesis, here at the end of the
   introduction.

   Miles off of I-65, a major Alabama interstate, Toad Frog Alley stands, an almost well-kept secret. The idea of
   such a welcoming business being hidden saddened me--and still does--but in turn gave the illusion of
   adventure. Driving through winding county roads to get there, I could feel the world almost disappearing into
   unexplored territory.

   Oanringointatl: Tunhdereerlisnea moment, winding through country roads, where the world seems to disappear into unexplored
   territory.eBnydrduncodrerrelicnted the sentence to get rid of a "there is" construction, a dangling modifier, and inconsistent
   verb tenses.end annotat

   Suddenly, there were no street names, no lines on the pavement, and sometimes no pavement at all. At the end
   of one of these "not much of a road" roads stood Toad Frog Alley Videos.

   Banynrdotcahtanged the underlined verb from iusnetdnoedsurtluniandnededreslrienlfinonerdeaumndoerrelivnievid verb. He then changed it to the past tense to
   maintain consistency with the verbs he uses in relating his visit to the store.end annotat

   My first impression stepping inside was awe. Shelves lining the walls reached from floor to ceiling, each packed
   full of titles, perfectly alphabetized and separated by genre.

   Oanringointatl: Luinndinegrltinhe walls were shelves that reached from floor to ceiling. Each shelf was completely full of titles,
   which were perfectly alphabetized and separated by genre.eIndthuinsdcearslien,eByrd combined, rather than separated,
   sentences to avoid repetition, substitute more active verbs, and vary sentence structure.end annotat
154 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

Between the walls were standalone shelves, organized in the same fashion. I expected a kind of personal
collection, but I felt as if I had actually traveled back in time to the major rental stores of old (or rather of ten
years ago). To community members, the setup meant another option for Saturday night, but for a film lover like
me,

sunderulnindeerelinndOaenrusingnoidnteartll:infueoennrddmesrel,inaefilm lover,end uanndoetralitneunderline  underline  uenndderuslinndeeenrldiennusedndusenrdlienreline end usnderline
                                                                                                                                  underline eennddususnnddeerlrilninee
underline                                                         underline
                                                                                                                                underline
this place was heaven.                                            end s

end usnderIalnninntehoetabtody of his draft, Byrd advances his thesis, drawing on infoermndatusionndefrrolinmeeach of the required types of                                             end annotat

sources.

After my initial feelings, I was hit with a second wave, one that can only be described as abysmal. At the front of
the store was a counter, being worked by one employee. The register was clunky and archaic, which made

Oanringointatl: suonmdeertlhinineg that makesend uanndoetralitne

a public library look like the headquarters of Google. In the center of the store was a foldable table that read
"FOR SALE." On the table lay DVDs, either damaged or unwanted, strewn about with no rhyme or reason.

Oanringointatl: Tunhdeetralbinle was filled with DVDs, some damaged and some unwanted, strewn about with no rhyme or reason
like the rest of the store.end uanndoetralitne

Aside from me, there was only one patron, a middle-aged woman, shopping as if she had been there before but
did not know what she wanted. I started to become depressed. I was not sure exactly what I had imagined, but
I knew this place was nowhere close. I had convinced myself I was on a journey to find the "last great video
store," an oasis of film, flowing with patrons renting Milk and American Honey.

Oanringointatl: Iunddidernlointeknow what exactly I had imagined, but with my passion for physical film and rental stores alike, I
had convinced myself I was on a journey to find the "last great video store," an oasis of film, flowing with patrons
rentingeMunnidldkueanrnldindeerAlimneerican Honey.eTnhdisusnednetrelinncee is another example in which Byrd broke a longer sentence apart
and polished the wording.end annotat

Only when

Oanringointatl: Iutnwdearslinnoet untilend uanndoetralitne

I took a breath and began looking around was I able to see Toad Frog Valley for what the store

Oanringointatl: iutnednedrualinndeoetralitne

was. Every blank wall space featured posters, equally sporting Oscar winners and underground art-house films.

Tanhnisostaetntence provides a solid example of revising a "there were" or "there are" sentence construction; the original
read: Tunhdereerlwineere posters on every blank wall space, not just of each year's Oscar winner, but underground art-house
films as well.end uanndoetralitne

The endcaps of each standalone shelf were filled with top picks, recent releases, or staff choices.

Hanenreo,taBtyrd revises for varied word choice; the original read: tuonpdepricliknse, recent releases, or staff picks.end uanndoetralitne

A television in the corner softly played a film of the employee's choice. Toad Frog Alley

Oanringointatl: Tunhdiseernlidneuanndoetralitne

may not have been the perfect haven for cinephiles and collectors that I had hoped, but it showed an
undeniable element of care. The store was something of a museum, one that lets people borrow the items they
love. I left with a smile on my face and a movie in my hand.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                    5.5 · Writing Process: Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject 155

                    I want to believe that everyone has experienced a similar video store moment. If that were true, though, why
                    did so many close in the first place?

            Oanringointatl: Iunwdaenrtlitnoebelieve that if everyone could experience a moment of awe in a video store, then the demand

            would resurface, but if that were true, why did so many close in the first place?end uanndoetralitne

sunderline  end s                                                                                           underline

            end  s  Why  also  are  stores like Toad Frog    Alley           still  operating?  Back    in  2010,  when   rental  chains  were beginning       to
                                         end usnderline                                                                                    underline

                    close  doors  indefinitely,  many entertainment                 news sites noticed a trend.       Aus nmdoenernglindtehusenmdewrlainseThe  Hollywood
                                                      end usnderline                   underline underlineend

                    Reporter,  which  noted  that  over  35%  of             independent  video     stores  had    tanning  beds.  They reported the           trend,
                                                                                                                                     end usnderline

                    saying,  "[Independents]     use  every  niche           they   can  think  of  to  survive  and  be  respected in their  communities"
                                                                                                                              underline end   us nderline

                    (Bond). While tanning beds may look like the supplemental savior for many locally owned stores, this notion

            Hanenreo,taBtyrd defines the word this by inseerntidngsthe word notion.end annotat

                    is not necessarily the case, says Kandy Little. Kandy is the owner of Toad Frog Valley Video Store and has been
                    since 1995.

            Tanhneotteantse shifts to present when Kandy Little is discussed but returns to the past when Byrd relates her background.end annotat

                    Ironically, Kandy bought a tanning salon in hopes of opening a video store. At the time, there was a much higher
                    demand for rentals in almost every community, and Toad Frog Alley was no exception. Though she admits
                    tanning has increased over the years (with rentals, of course, declining), to Kandy, tanning was not the savior.
                    "[Toad Frog Alley Videos] is still open because I work it myself most of the time," she says. "No one else will
                    take care of your business as well as you do." With an inventory of over 5,000 films, Kandy believes that
                    physical media is important for her community. Local business is important for creating jobs and city revenue,
                    and Kandy provides both through her love of movies.

                    Even though Toad Frog Alley is doing well, the scarcity of rental stores is something to consider. In the digital
                    age, media is accessible to practically everyone. Streaming services such as Netflix and Hulu have made media
                    available for viewers without requiring them to leave their homes. For physical rentals,

            Oanringointatl: Aunsdfaerlainsephysical rentals go,end uanndoetralitne

                    nationwide kiosks called Redbox are set up in major grocery stores and pharmacies. In largely populated areas,
                    these services have contributed to the downfall of video stores. In small towns across the country, however,
                    many stores like Toad Frog Alley are still alive.

            Oanringointatl: Iunndlaerrgleinlye populated areas, these services have contributed to the downfall of video stores, but in rural
            America, many stores like Toad Frog Alley are still alive.eTnhdisurnedveisriloinneheightens the contrast between populated
            areas and small towns.end annotat

                    In 2018, the Harvard Political Review looked into why rural areas are struggling socioeconomically. The
                    research concluded that the problem comes from the inability to keep the attention of a younger generation.
                    The idea of the "American Dream" is largely accompanied by main streets, small towns, and mom-and-pop
                    shops. Unfortunately, countryside communities are suffering, despite featuring many of these elements.

            Oanringointatl: Tunhdouerglhintehe idea of the "American Dream" is largely accompanied by main streets, small towns, and mom-
            and-pop shops, rural communities have seen drastic population decreases even while holding many of these.eTnhdeunderline
            revision breaks the original sentence apart and makes stronger, clearer word choices.end annotat

                    Farming, a large majority of pastoral industry, has become increasingly mechanized with technological
                    advancement. On top of that, failing education and inadequate healthcare in underfunded areas have
                    contributed to population loss as well. Many young people are unwilling to live in rural America,

            Oanringointatl: iunntdheerslienerural areas,end uanndoetralitne

                    and thus jobs
156 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

            Danenleotteadt: ,uonnderolifntehe largest incentives in most communities,end uanndoetralitne

            have become scarce. The Review states that "ultimately, the only way citizens will be attracted to small towns

            is if the quality of life is attractive and sustainable... [but] the growing demand of the U.S. economy will continue

sunderline  drawing people toward... [a] quality of life often deemed synonymous with urban living" (Elkadi). This cycle
            leavesemndanusynrduerrallinseettings unappealing, not only to residents but alsuontdoebrulinsienesses like Interneent dprsoviders. In

            many cases, rural areas are deemed unprofitable for modern services. Descriptions so negative contribute to

            the lack of digital seurvnidceesrlianveailable to communities. Businesses                     endensd s

            end usnderline                    end usnderline

            Oanringointatl: Suntodreersleinned uanndoetralitne

            undesrluinceh as Toad Frog Alley thus providuenadenrelcineessaernydsusenrvdiceerlifnoer a town thatenmdausynhdaevrelilnitetle access to digital
                  content.

            All of these factors raise

            Oanringointatl: Tunhdiserraliinsesend uanndoetralitne

            a question: Is physical media doomed to a state of limbo in rural communities? Some believe film was meant to
            die, and should. Following the controversial shutdown of the "classic films" streaming service FilmStruck,
            Professor Katherine Groo shared a perspective in The Washington Post: "The collapse of FilmStruck might go
            some way toward reminding us of the fundamental virtuality [sic] of film and film spectatorship" (Groo). Groo
            goes so far as to ask "whether [FilmStruck's catalog listings] are the works we need to rescreen or urge others
            to discover." Groo does not lament the death of FilmStruck as film "erosion" or "erasure."

            Iannnthoetaotriginal, the previous sentence occurred later in the paragraph; Byrd moved it here in the revision to present
            the information in a way that made more sense for readers.end annotat

            She mentions different film archives, like the Library of Congress and Kanopy, doing open-access
            experimentation, but overlooks an important factor. Groo asserts that only the privileged are able to access a
            paid service, but she neglects rural areas and others that cannot access archives, paid or free.

            Danenleotteadt: Fuonrdpereloinpele like Kandy Little,end uanndoetralitne

            Toad Frog Alley remains important for the enjoyment and education of people in the town that film provides. As
            technology keeps progressing, archaic forms of media consumption are necessary for areas that do not yet
            have access to the new technologies. Kandy predicts this, and more, when asked about the digital age and the
            coexistence of physical and online media:

            Oanringointatl: Kunadnedrylipnreedicts this, and more, when I asked her how she felt about the digital age, and the coexistence of
            physical and online media:end uanndoetralitne

            "Studios are already giving exclusive rights to different cable companies. Once the avenues are spread out,
            customers will have to pay more for accessing media. The video store is here offering better prices and more
            media in one place." To her, the transition back into physical media is only a matter of time.

            As a proponent of physical media, I am thankful that Kandy and Toad Frog Alley exist. Though nothing is wrong
            with enjoying the luxuries of streaming, and digital film preservation is admirable, the market is becoming
            saturated. Saturated markets lead to higher prices and necessitate multiple subscriptions just to access
            desired films.

            Oanringointatl: Tunhdouerglhiniet is not wrong to enjoy the luxuries of streaming, and digital film preservation is admirable, the
            market is becoming saturated, which leads to higher prices and necessitates multiple subscriptions just to access
            desired films.end uanndoetralitne

            Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                               5.6 · Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency 157

   Though people in rural communities are still able to rent videos, they would be left behind in the case of film
   becoming solely digital. Video stores provide important business and atmosphere to communities. Even though
   digitizing film is more affordable and accessible to many people, it may not be what is best for both films and
   consumers.

s  Iannnthoetaotriginal, these sentences were combined with ,uanndde.relinnde uanndoetralitne

   underline          undeernlidneunderline

   endFosr those like me, with a passion for film, the only reciprocity for the love that video stores instill is to show love

   end usnindethrleinfeorm of support. As Kandy eloquently said at the end of our interview, "I really don't have a favorite film. I

   just love films."

   Iannnreofteartring a past event while he narrates in the present tense, Byrd uses the past tense.end annotat

                                                     Works Cited

   Bond, Paul. "Video Rental Stores' Bizarre Survival Strategy." The Hollywood Reporter, 14 Sept. 2010,
       www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/video-rental-stores-bizarre-survival-27851.

   Elkadi, Nina. "Keeping Rural America Alive." Harvard Political Review, 13 October 2018,
       https://web.archive.org/web/20181013151815/https://harvardpolitics.com/united-states/keeping-rural-
       america-alive/.

   Groo, Katherine. "FilmStruck Wasn't That Good for Movies. Don't Mourn Its Demise." The Washington Post, 3
       Dec. 2018, www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2018/12/03/filmstrucks-demise-could-be-good-movies/.

   Little, Kandy. Personal interview. 25 June 2019.

   Sweney, Mark. "`Christmas from Hell' Caps Bad Year for High Street DVD Sellers." The Guardian, 3 Jan. 2019,
       www.theguardian.com/business/2019/jan/03/christmas-from-hell-caps-bad-year-for-high-street-dvd-
       sellers.

   5.6 Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency

   LEARNING OUTCOMES
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:

     · Apply various editing strategies to a draft in progress.
     · Implement consistent use of verbs in a draft in progress.

   When you edit, you make changes at the sentence level: phrasing, grammar, mechanics, and wording. Read
   your paper aloud to check for needed editing. Alternately, you could have your device read the paper to you if it
   has that feature. As you read or listen, if you notice that something does not sound quite right, your draft
   probably needs editing at that point. Additionally, if your electronic draft shows blue underlining, check
   whether you should accept the changes suggested by your software. Once you have thoroughly reviewed each
   sentence in your draft, read aloud or listen to the entire piece again to see how it flows, making any additional
   needed changes as you go along.

   English Varieties and Verbs

   This section focuses on English verb tense consistency when editing. Every English speaker converses in one
   or more forms of the language. In the past, people have referred to these forms as dialects. Today, linguists
   more commonly call them English varieties. Every English variety uses verbs, as do most languages. Verbs are
   the words that express the action in a sentence. Their most distinguishing feature is that they change
   according to tense--that is, they take on different forms to express action that happened in the past, happens
   in the present, or will happen in the future.

   As you edit your profile, you will need to match the English variety you use to the expectations of your
   audience. If your instructor is your only reader, you will probably need to use an English variety appropriate for
158 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

       an academic setting. If the instructor has asked you to write a profile to appeal to another audience, think
       about how the English variety you choose might connect better with that audience.

       In every English variety, the form of the verb changes to indicate whether something is happening currently or
       has happened already. These changes that indicate time differences are called verb tenses. If an action or
       description occurs now or occurs regularly, in the present time, writers use the present tense. Conversely, if
       the action occurred in the past and no longer occurs, writers use the past tense.

       Present tense: She walks to class.
       Past tense: She walked to class yesterday.

       In simple sentences such as these, choosing a verb tense is fairly straightforward. The author decides when to
       place the event in time and chooses the corresponding verb form. Although people easily use different verb
       tenses every day, getting them right in writing can be tricky at times. Writers may accidentally change from
       past to present tense within a text--or even within the same sentence--for no particular reason. Consider these
       examples:

       Sentence 1: I lost a glove on my walk, but I fuindeirntlldiantueenr.derline
       Sentence 2: I lost a glove on my walk, but I fuonudnedreliintnldeatuenr.derline

       In Sentence 1, the verb lost places the action in the past; the present-tense verb find is not consistent with that
       pattern. The revision in Sentence 2 places all of the action in the same time frame: the past. Because changing
       the tense for no reason can confuse the audience, be sure to use the same verb tense throughout, whether
       events happen in the past or they happen in the present.

       However, you do need to change tenses to indicate a difference in time, and such differences occur often. This
       situation is why choosing verb tenses in writing can sometimes pose challenges for writers. If you are using the
       present tense in writing but you want to tell about something that happened in the past, you need to change
       tenses to make that time difference clear. Look at these sentences:

       Sentence 1: The artist uses bright colors in her paintings. She says that when she is a child, these colors
       attract her.
       Sentence 2: The artist uses bright colors in her paintings. She says that when she was a child, these colors
       attracted her.

       The writer is discussing the artist in the present tense, and the artist is speaking in the present tense. However,
       she is telling about her childhood, which took place in the past. Therefore, she and the writer use both past and
       present tense to make the time distinction clear. To put all events in the present tense would not make sense in
       such cases. Look at the verb tense consistency revisions Houston Byrd made to his essay in Focusing on the
       Angle of Your Subject. When he tells about his trip to the store, describes it, and refers to his interview with the
       owner, he generally uses--or has revised to use--the past tense, whereas most of the essay is written in the
       present tense.

       Proofreading

       Another type of editing is proofreading. When you proofread, you check for small details, such as typing
       mistakes, that need fixing. If your instructor has asked you to follow a given style guide, such as MLA or APA,
       make sure your draft is formatted according to those guidelines. If any words are underlined in red on your
       electronic document (indicating a misspelling), address those issues as you complete your draft. Lastly, read
       each sentence individually, starting at the bottom of the draft, to make sure your spelling and punctuation
       meet the requirements for the genre and audience.

       You may feel that you are not yet a strong enough writer to edit or proofread on your own. If so, take advantage
       of your instructor's office hours or your college's writing center for support in developing your work.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                   5.7 · Evaluation: Text as Personal Introduction 159

Practice with Verb Tense Consistency

Depending on your writing context, you may be asked to write mainly in either the past or the present tense.
For example, MLA style asks writers to refer to textual materials in the present tense, even though they have
already been written.

With a peer partner, practice choosing the most effective verb forms in the following sentences. Complete the
exercise twice--once for a text written mainly in the present tense, and once again for a text written mainly in
past tense. Because events happen at different times, you may have a combination of tenses.

1. Carla D. Hayden (writes, wrote) ________ about John Lewis's courageous stance against injustice when he
      (led, leads) the Selma protests.

2. People throughout the country (admire, admired) ________ John Lewis and (mourn, mourned) ________
      his death.

3. In 1995, Hayden (receives, received) ________ the Librarian of the Year Award, and in 2016, she (is, was)
     ________ listed by Fortune magazine as one of the world's 50 greatest leaders.

To check your draft for verb tense issues, read your profile aloud to a peer partner. If you notice that some
verbs are in the past tense and some are in the present, make them all one consistent tense throughout the
text--unless they indicate a change in time, which they often do. Making your verb tenses consistent will help
clarify your ideas for readers.

5.7 Evaluation: Text as Personal Introduction

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply profile genre conventions for structure, paragraphing, tone, and mechanics to a draft in progress.
  · Evaluate your text according to a given standard.

One way to think about a profile is this: you are personally introducing your subject to your readers. When
making introductions in everyday life, people generally highlight preferences that will help the people being
introduced relate more easily to one another. For example, you might mention a specific shared video game
interest when introducing gamers, or you could mention an appreciation for a particular musician shared by
the people being introduced. In a similar way, include information in your profile that will connect your subject
to your audience.

In addition to making a personal introduction, you are striving to meet the standards of the profile genre. The
following rubric will help you assess your use of interviews, field research, and secondary research. It will also
help you evaluate how well you have organized, written, and revised the draft. Lastly, the rubric will help you
determine whether your draft meets the criteria for the profile genre, including subject, angle, and tone. Aim to
revise your draft to meet the "Skillful" criteria for each area of focus.

Rubric

       Score  Critical Language    Clarity and Coherence                            Rhetorical
                  Awareness                                                          Choices
5
Skillful      The text always adheres to The text presents robust interview research, The subject, angle,

              the "Editing Focus" of this carefully noted field research, and both  tone, and content

              chapter--verb tense  credible and applicable secondary research. have been carefully

              consistency, as discussed in The profile reflects a thoughtful balance of chosen and remain

              Section 5.6--and employs a narrative and reporting techniques through consistent

              variety of sentence  which the subject is clearly depicted.           throughout. Mastery

TABLE 5.10
160 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

Score         Critical Language                       Clarity and Coherence                                  Rhetorical
                  Awareness                                                                                    Choices

              structures. The text also                                                               of these elements
                                                       Effective and appropriate transitions help     powerfully holds the
                                                                                                      interest of the target
              shows ample evidence of the                                                             audience
                                                       create a unified whole. Anecdotes,             throughout the
                                                                                                      piece.
              writer's intent to consciously
                                                       quotations, location, thick detail, and

              meet or challenge
                                                       background flow together seamlessly and

              conventional expectations in
                                                       create a full and engaging profile.

              rhetorically effective ways.

4             The text usually adheres to             The text presents strong interview and field    The subject, angle,
Accomplished  the "Editing Focus" of this             research and both credible and applicable       tone, and content
              chapter--verb tense                     secondary research. The profile usually         have been carefully
              consistency, as discussed in            reflects a thoughtful balance of narrative      chosen but may
              Section 5.6--and employs a              and reporting techniques through which the      not always be
              variety of sentence                     subject is depicted. Generally effective and    consistent. Control
              structures. The text also               appropriate transitions help create a unified   of these elements
              shows some evidence of                  whole. Some anecdotes, quotations,              generally holds the
              the writer's intent to                  location, thick detail, and background flow     interest of the
              consciously meet or                     together and create a generally engaging        target audience
              challenge conventional                  profile.                                        throughout the
              expectations in rhetorically                                                            piece.
              effective ways.

 3            The text generally adheres              The text presents fairly thorough interview     The subject, angle,
 Capable      to the "Editing Focus" of               research, competent field research, and         tone, and content
              this chapter--verb tense                reasonably credible and applicable              have been
TABLE 5.10    consistency, as discussed in            secondary research. The profile may reflect     inconsistently
              Section 5.6--and employs                a balance of narrative and reporting            chosen. The writer
              some variety in sentence                techniques through which the subject is         occasionally loses
              structures. The text also               depicted, but it may tend toward too much       focus in one or
              shows limited evidence of               reporting. Some effective and appropriate       more of these
              the writer's intent to                  transitions connect ideas, but more are         areas. Some
              consciously meet or                     needed for a unified whole. Some                control of these
              challenge conventional                  anecdotes, quotations, location, thick detail,  elements holds the
              expectations in rhetorically            and background create an inconsistently         interest of the
              effective ways.                         engaging profile.                               target audience in
                                                                                                      parts of the piece.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                           5.8 · Spotlight on ... Profiling a Cultural Artifact 161

      Score  Critical Language             Clarity and Coherence                            Rhetorical
                 Awareness                                                                   Choices
2
Developing   The text occasionally         The information is frequently disorganized       The subject, angle,
             adheres to the "Editing       and reflects a minimal, if any, overall plan.    tone, and content
1            Focus" of this chapter--verb  Research is haphazard and usually                do not appear well
Beginning    tense consistency, as         undocumented. The writer shows little or no      chosen. The writer
             discussed in Section          balance between narrative and reporting          frequently loses
             5.6--and employs little       techniques and included only a few of the        focus in one or
             variety in sentence           following: anecdotes, quotations, location,      more of these
             structures. The text also     thick detail, and background. Some               areas. The interest
             shows emerging evidence       transitions may create unity in parts, but in    of the target
             of the writer's intent to     general, the paper lacks effective and           audience would be
             consciously meet or           appropriate transitions. The uneven text         lost in many parts
             challenge conventional        ultimately creates a minimally clear profile.    of the piece.
             expectations in rhetorically
             effective ways.

             The text does not adhere to   The information is consistently disorganized     The subject, angle,
             the "Editing Focus" of this   and reflects minimal, if any, overall planning.  tone, and content
             chapter--verb tense           Research, if any, is haphazard and usually       appear poorly
             consistency, as discussed in  undocumented. The writer shows little or no      chosen if they are
             Section 5.6--and employs      balance between narrative and reporting          present at all. The
             little to no variety in       techniques and has included only one or two      draft lacks focus
             sentence structures. The      of the following: anecdotes, quotations,         and consequently
             text also shows little to no  location, thick detail, and background. The      holds little or no
             evidence of the writer's      paper lacks effective and appropriate            audience interest.
             intent to consciously meet    transitions and is, therefore, incoherent. The
             or challenge conventional     uneven text ultimately creates an unclear
             expectations in rhetorically  and unengaging profile.
             effective ways.
                                           .

TABLE 5.10

5.8 Spotlight on ... Profiling a Cultural Artifact

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read in the profile genre to understand how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and
      expectation.

  · Read one of a diverse range of texts, attending to relationships among ideas, patterns of organization, and
      interplay between verbal and nonverbal elements.

  · Analyze a composition in relation to a specific historical and cultural context.

If you would like to profile a subject other than a person, you may be unsure of how to make such a focus work.
This section features a profile of a cultural artifact and discusses how the elements of profile writing work
within the piece.

First, here is some background to help you better understand the blog post: On December 7, 1941, Japanese
fighter planes attacked the United States military base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, damaging or destroying
            162 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

                  more than a dozen ships and hundreds of airplanes. In direct response to this bombing and to fears that
                  Americans of Japanese descent might spy on U.S. military installations, all Japanese immigrants and Japanese
                  Americans living on America's West Coast--about 120,000 men, women, and children in all--were detained in
                  internment camps for the remainder of the war.
public domainAst you will read in the profile, people living in the camps created newspapers for fellow detainees; the subject
                 of this profile is the newspapers themselves. Author Mark Hartsell published his profile of the newspapers,
                 Journalism, behind Barbed Wire (https://openstax.org/r/barbedwire) , on the Library of Congress blog on May
                 5, 2017. Look at these notes to find out how profile genre elements can work when the writer focuses on a
                 cultural artifact such as these newspapers.

                                                                                                                                        end public domain t

                 FIGURE 5.8 Roy Takeno, editor of the Manzanar Free Press, reads the newspaper at the internment camp in
                 Manzanar, California, 1943. (credit: Ansel Adams/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
                 Aansnyootuatfind when you click on the link above to visit the blog post, Hartsell uses images to show his subject to
                 readers. Providing images can be a particularly strong choice for profiles of places or cultural artifacts.end annotat

                        For these journalists, the assignment was like no other: Create newspapers to tell the story of their own families
                        being forced from their homes, to chronicle the hardships and heartaches of life behind barbed wire for
                        Japanese-Americans held in World War II internment camps. "These are not normal times nor is this an
                       ordinary community," the editors of the Heart Mountain Sentinel wrote in their first issue. "There is confusion,
                        doubt and fear mingled together with hope and courage as this community goes about the task of rebuilding
                        many dear things that were crumbled as if by a giant hand." Today, the Library of Congress places online a rare
                       collection of newspapers that, like the Sentinel, were produced by Japanese-Americans interned at U.S.
                        government camps during the war. The collection includes more than 4,600 English- and Japanese-language
                        issues published in 13 camps and later microfilmed by the Library. "What we have the power to do is bring
                        these more to the public," said Malea Walker, a librarian in the Serial and Government Publications Division who
                        contributed to the project. "I think that's important, to bring it into the public eye to see, especially on the 75th
                        anniversary.... Seeing the people in the Japanese internment camps as people is an important story."
                 Aanltnhootuagth the blog places almost every sentence in its own "paragraph" for easier online readability, the first four

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                      5.8 · Spotlight on ... Profiling a Cultural Artifact 163

sections function as a cohesive opening paragraph as presented here. Notice how the author supports his points
with information synthesized from a variety of sources: quoted material from both the newspapers and one of the
project's curators, background, historical context, and other factual information.end annotat

                        Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed an
public domain t exeecnudtipvuebolricdedrotmhaatinatllowed the forcible removal of nearly 120,000 U.S. citizens and residents of Japanese

descent from their homes to government-run assembly and relocation camps across the West--desolate places

such as Manzanar in the shadow of the Sierras, Poston in the Arizona desert, Granada on the eastern Colorado

plains. There, housed in temporary barracks and surrounded by barbed wire and guard towers, the residents
built wartime communities, organizing governing bodies, farms, schools, libraries. They founded ennedwpspuabplicerdso, main t

too--publications that relayed official announcements, editorialized about important issues, reported camp

news, followed the exploits of Japanese-Americans in the U.S. military and recorded the daily activities of

residents for whom, even in confinement, life still went on. In the camps, residents lived and died, worked and

played, got married and had children. One couple got married at the Tanforan assembly center in California,

then shipped out to the Topaz camp in Utah the next day. Their first home as a married couple, the Topaz Times

noted, was a barracks behind barbed wire in the western Utah desert.

                       end public domain t                            end public domain t

Tanhnisostaetction offers additional background information and information from secondary research, woven with specific

details to help readers imagine the backdrop for the newspaper writing. Hartsell offers a brief overview of typical

content found in these newspapers; this description indicates that he has reviewed primary documents. The section

concludes with a brief anecdote to show the human face of the original camp newspaper audience.end annotat

The internees created their publications from scratch, right down to the names. The Tule Lake camp dubbed its
paper the Tulean Dispatch--a compromise between The Tulean and The Dusty Dispatch, two entries in its
name-the-newspaper contest. (The winners got a box of chocolates.) Most of the newspapers were simply
mimeographed or sometimes handwritten, but a few were formatted and printed like big-city dailies. The
Sentinel was printed by the town newspaper in nearby Cody, Wyoming, and eventually grew a circulation of
6,000.

Aanftneortcaotvering background and context, Hartsell turns to focus on his profile subject. He discusses specific details of
naming and producing the newspapers; he also includes information about the writers and their decisions regarding
newspaper content.end annotat

Many of the internees who edited and wrote for the camp newspapers had worked as journalists before the war.
They knew this job wouldn't be easy, requiring a delicate balance of covering news, keeping spirits up and
getting along with the administration. The papers, though not explicitly censored, sometimes hesitated to cover
controversial issues, such as strikes at Heart Mountain or Poston. Instead, many adopted editorial policies that
would serve as "a strong constructive force in the community," as a Poston Chronicle journalist later noted in an
oral history. They mostly cooperated with the administration, stopped rumors and played up stories that would
strengthen morale. Demonstrating loyalty to the U.S. was a frequent theme. The Sentinel mailed a copy of its
first issue to Roosevelt in the hope, the editors wrote, that he would "find in its pages the loyalty and progress
here at Heart Mountain." A Topaz Times editorial objected to segregated Army units but nevertheless urged
Japanese-American citizens to serve "to prove that the great majority of the group they represent are loyal."
"Our paper was always coming out with editorials supporting loyalty toward this country," the Poston journalist
said. "This rubbed some... the wrong way and every once in a while a delegation would come around to
protest."

Panenooptleatreading these newspapers in current times may be surprised that such newspapers often featured content
with a focus on loyalty to the United States. While Hartsell does not dig deeply into alternative views held by
internees, he does indicate that some disagreed with the emphasis on such content. Readers are often interested in
learning surprising or counterintuitive information about a profile subject.end annotat

... (section removed)
164 5 · Profile: Telling a Rich and Compelling Story

public domain t  As the war neared its end in 1945, the camps prepared for closure. Residents departed, populations shrank,
                 schools shuttered, community organizations dissolved, and newspapers signed off with "-30-," used by
                 journalists to mark a story's end. That Oct. 23, the Poston Chronicle published its final issue, reflecting on the
                 history it had both recorded and made. "For many weeks, the story of Poston has unfolded in the pages of the
                 Chronicle," the editors wrote. "It is the story of people who have made the best of a tragic situation; the story of
                 their frustrations, their anxieties, their heartaches--and their pleasures, for the story has its lighter moments.
                 Now Poston is finished; the story is ended. And we should be glad that this is so, for the story has a happy
                 ending. The time of anxiety and of waiting is over. Life begins again."

Hananrtostealtl closes with a chronological structure, concluding his piece with the closing of the internment camps and
their newspapers. He allows the voices of the editors to have the last word.end annotat

Publishing Your Profile                               end public domain t

Because your individual profile is about someone or something related to campus, once you have developed

your final draft, you may want to share your work with others at your school. Here are some suggestions:

Group Publication

One option for sharing your work is to create a class book that includes the profiles each student has written.
As an alternative, each class member might contribute their own autobiographical profile in which they
highlight a moment when they witnessed or enacted an admirable trait. When the individual pieces are
complete, class members will work in teams to collect, compile, introduce, and produce the essay collection.
The instructor or one of the class teams might compose an afterword to explain the project. The final project
could be housed in the campus archives or linked on the campus website.

Campus Newspaper

Another option is to work either individually or in a small group to build on your profile about someone or
something of interest to other students, faculty, or staff at your school. Check with the editor of your campus
newspaper to learn whether they have suggestions for a revised angle, if needed, and whether they would be
interested in publishing your completed profile.

5.9 Portfolio: Subject as a Reflection of Self

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Reflect on the development of composing processes.
  · Reflect on how those processes affect your final product.

As you develop a writing portfolio over the course of the semester, you will also reflect on your experience and
writing process for each project. This section guides you in reflecting on your experience as you developed
your profile.

Reflective Task

Take a few moments to jot down notes--by hand or electronically--in response to the following questions:

· What have you learned about yourself in researching and drafting this profile?
· What did you learn in your research that surprised you?
· What challenges did you face in gathering your primary research from interviews and field observations?
· What challenges did you face in gathering your secondary research from academic and other credible

   sources?
· Do you now think differently about the trait you focused on in your profile? If so, how has your

   understanding changed? If your thinking about that trait has not changed, how was it reinforced in this
   project?

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                             5.9 · Portfolio: Subject as a Reflection of Self 165

  · If you were to begin this project again, how would you approach it differently?
  · With whom would you like to share your finished project? Why?
  · What other audiences might be interested in this piece?

After reflecting on your writing process and experience, organize your thoughts thematically. For example, if
some parts of the process were more challenging for you and other parts were less so, you could organize your
reflection around those two ideas. Or you could separate your reflection into sections according to the parts of
the writing process that were familiar and the parts that were new to you in this project.

Once you have organized your notes into sections focusing on coherent themes, draft a professional email to
your instructor to report the insights you have gained from your reflection. Find out from your instructor
whether you should actually send the reflection via email or if you should attach it to your final profile
document instead.

Further Reading

With their signature blend of narrative and reporting, profiles can be found in all sorts of media, including
blogs, magazines, and podcasts. Once you start looking for profiles, you will find them everywhere. Here are
several places to find profile writing:

  · Esquire (https://openstax.org/r/esquire). This magazine routinely runs profile features.
  · Humans of New York (https://openstax.org/r/humansofnewyork). Originally a photography project, this

      blog presents photographs of, interviews with, and short stories about people who live in New York.
      Although the pieces are not all profiles, many of them meet the criteria for this genre.
  · The New Yorker (https://openstax.org/r/thenewyorker). This magazine still runs profiles in each issue.
  · This American Life (https://openstax.org/r/thisamericanlife). This weekly public radio program focuses on
      storytelling about compelling people.
166 5 · Works Cited

Works Cited

"About the Award." John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, National Archives, www.jfklibrary.org/
    events-and-awards/profile-in-courage-award/about-the-award.

Chambers, Veronica. "Rebel Commentary: Veronica Chambers on the Power of Individual Resistance."
   Interview by Rebecca Carroll. Gothamist, New York Public Radio, 19 Sept. 2018, gothamist.com/arts-
    entertainment/rebel-commentary-veronica-chambers-on-the-power-of-individual-resistance.

Chambers, Veronica. Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary People Who Rose Up against Tyranny and Injustice.
    Harper, 2020.

Glass, Ira. This American Life. WBEZ Chicago, www.thisamericanlife.org/.
Hartsell, Mark. "Journalism, behind Barbed Wire." Library of Congress Blog, Library of Congress, 5 May 2017,

    blogs.loc.gov/loc/2017/05/journalism-behind-barbed-wire/
Hayden, Carla D. "Remembering John Lewis: The Power of `Good Trouble.'" Library of Congress Blog, Library of

    Congress, 19 July 2020, blogs.loc.gov/loc/2020/07/remembering-john-lewis-the-power-of-good-trouble/.
Kennedy, John F. Profiles in Courage. Harper, 1956.
Stanton, Brandon. Humans of New York. www.humansofnewyork.com/.
Talese, Gay. "Frank Sinatra Has a Cold." Esquire, Hearst Magazine Media, 1 Apr. 1966, classic.esquire.com/

    article/1966/4/1/frank-sinatra-has-a-cold.

Access for free at openstax.org.
and Solutions Proposal: Writing About Problems 6

FIGURE 6.1 Mathematician Katherine Johnson (https://openstax.org/r/katherinejohnson) (1918-2020) was a NASA
employee. Her calculations of orbital mechanics led to the success of the first spaceflight and many others. One of
the first Black women hired at the agency, she stood out for her curiosity and desire to fully understand the work she
was assigned. She is best known for calculating the trajectory for the first moon landing. Given the problem of when
to launch, she proposed solving the problem by saying: "You tell me when you want it and where you want it to land,
and I'll do it backwards and tell you when to take off." Not only a mathematician, Johnson wrote or cowrote 26
research articles during her 33 years with the space program. She was made famous by Hidden Figures (2016), a
book later made into a film. (credit: "Katherine Johnson at NASA, in 1966" by NASA/Wikimedia Commons, Public
Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

6.1 Proposing Change: Thinking Critically About Problems and Solutions
6.2 Proposal Trailblazer: Atul Gawande
6.3 Glance at Genre: Features of Proposals
6.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn Krukowski
6.5 Writing Process: Creating a Proposal
6.6 Editing Focus: Subject-Verb Agreement
6.7 Evaluation: Conventions, Clarity, and Coherence
6.8 Spotlight on ... Technical Writing as a Career
6.9 Portfolio: Reflecting on Problems and Solutions
168 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

       INTRODUCTION You are likely familiar with the term proposal--people propose toasts to celebrate occasions
       and make marriage proposals. Businesses create proposals to describe the services they will provide and at
       what cost--from electricians, plumbers, and decorators to advertising firms, website designers, and caterers.
       Sometimes the proposals are for a specific project; sometimes they are general. In these types of real-world
       proposals, the problem being solved is straightforward, but often it is not stated directly: for example, someone
       needs an extra bathroom built in their house, a revision to their website, or food for a gathering, and the
       person needing a service will contact a provider.

       The purpose of the kind of proposal you will write in this chapter is to propose, or suggest, a solution to a
       problem, usually one whose solution is not straightforward. Proposals of this type call on writers to explain the
       problem so that readers understand it is real and needs a solution. Because these problems are often complex,
       they usually have more than one solution, and sometimes the writer will recommend several possible
       solutions. For example, imagine you are studying food science. You likely pay more attention to food than most
       people do, and perhaps you've noticed a lot of food being thrown away in a cafeteria on your campus. You
       believe it is important to reduce food waste. Solving this problem of wasted food will require investigation and
       research into what food is being thrown away; why students, faculty members, and employees are throwing it
       away; possible ways to reduce the amount of wasted food; and a recommendation to the people who can put
       your proposal--that is, your proposed solution-- into action. This is one example of the kind of problem you
       might write about in this chapter.

     6.1 Proposing Change: Thinking Critically About Problems and Solutions

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Ask critical-thinking questions about problems to explore an idea for a proposal.
         · Distinguish between fact and opinion.
         · Recognize and locate bias in reading and in yourself.

       As a proposal writer, you will offer factual evidence to show a problem exists and needs to be addressed. Then
       you will present and recommend one or more solutions, again providing evidence to show that your solution or
       solutions are viable. To accomplish this task, you'll need to think critically about problems and potential
       solutions, know the difference between fact and opinion, and identify bias.

      Adopting a Problem-Solving Mindset

       As you start thinking about a problem you would like to explore, gather information by reading, viewing, or
       talking with others. Is there a local problem you have noticed--perhaps you think your campus needs better
       transportation, more diverse food options, more mental health services, or a new student organization related
       to a cause you care about? Or is there a larger issue that is important to you, such as funding for public schools,
       better access to health care, or helping the environment?

       As you gather ideas, think critically about what you are learning. Asking questions like the ones below can help
       you get into a problem-solving mindset:

       Questions about Problems

         · What is/was the cause of the problem?
         · What is/was the effect of the problem?
         · What makes this problem a problem?

       Questions about Solutions

         · Have solutions to this problem been proposed in the past? What are they?
         · Why have the solutions proposed in the past succeeded or not succeeded in solving the problem?
         · Who can put the solutions into action?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                    6.1 · Proposing Change: Thinking Critically About Problems and Solutions 169

The proposal that appears in Annotated Student Sample of this chapter, written by student Shawn Krukowski,
takes on a large, complex problem: climate change. At the start of the project, Shawn thought about his topic in
terms of the questions above:

  · What is the cause of climate change?
  · What is the effect of climate change?
  · What makes climate change a problem?
  · What are some possible solutions to climate change?
  · What solutions to climate change have been tried in the past?
  · Why have the solutions tried in the past been unsuccessful in solving climate change?
  · Who can put the solutions into action?

In writing answers to these questions, Shawn identified what he needed to learn about climate change before
he began his reading and research.

Distinguishing Fact from Opinion

A proposal contains both fact and opinion. Proposal writers use facts as evidence to show that the problem
they are writing about is real. They use facts to show that the proposed solution can work. They give opinions
(based on evidence) when they recommend a solution to their audience and call them to action. See
Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence for more about facts and opinions.

It can sometimes be difficult to distinguish fact from opinion, allegations, and fake news. Social media
platforms, in particular, make it hard for many people to distinguish between sources that are credible and
those that are not. As a writer, you need to use a critical eye to examine what you read and see.

Facts are statements that can be proven or whose truth can be inferred. They are built on evidence and data.
The following are examples of factual statements:

  · The first mass-produced hybrid vehicle was the Toyota Prius, which was launched in Japan in 1997.
  · Americans born after 1996 are considered Generation Z.

Facts that use numbers are called statistics:

  · According to the Pew Research Center, 50 percent of Gen Z-ers aged 18-23 reported that they or someone
      in their household had lost a job or taken a pay cut in March 2020, the first month of the COVID-19
      pandemic.

  · The six-year graduation rate for full-time undergraduate students was 62 percent in 2018.

Opinions are statements of belief or value. Opinions form the basis of recommended solutions in proposals.
Below is an opinion that precedes a list of recommendations to raise the graduation rate:

  · The six-year graduation rate for full-time undergraduate students, which was 62% in 2018, can and
      should be improved by taking the following steps...

Recognizing Bias

Critical thinking and reading of information involve recognizing bias. Bias is commonly defined as a
preconceived opinion, or a prejudice, about something--a subject, an idea, a person, or a group of people, for
example. As a proposal writer, you will need to recognize bias in the information you read as you learn about
the problem and to recognize possible bias in your own thinking as well.

Bias in Sources

Some writing is intentionally biased and intended to persuade, such as editorials and opinion essays, also
called op-eds (because of their placement opposite the editorial page in print newspapers). Writing meant to
persuade is generally not used as source material in a proposal. Instead, seek out informative, neutral sources
that consider more than one aspect of a problem. Be aware, however, that even sources that seem impartial
170 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

       may contain some bias. Bias becomes a problem when a source that seems objective and trustworthy contains
       language and images intended to sway your opinion, or when a source downplays or ignores one or more
       aspects of a topic.
       The evidence you use to support the discussion of a problem or the worth of a solution should not be heavily
       biased. As you consider sources for your proposal, the following tips can help you spot bias and read critically:

         · Determine the purpose of the source. Is the writing intended to inform you or to persuade you?
         · Distinguish between fact and opinion. Mark facts and opinions when gathering information from the

             source.
         · Pay attention to the language and what the writer emphasizes. Does the language include inflammatory

             words or descriptions intended to sway readers? What do the title, introduction, and any headings tell you
             about the author's approach to the subject?
         · Research the author. Is the writer an impartial expert? Or is the writer known for being biased?
         · Read multiple sources on the topic. Learn whether the source is omitting or glossing over important
             information and credible views.
         · Look critically at the images and any media that support the writing. How do they reinforce positive or
             negative treatment of the subject?
       Bias in Yourself

       Most individuals bring what psychologists call cognitive bias to the interactions in their lives, whether with
       information or with other people. Cognitive bias refers to how humans' thinking patterns affect how they take
       in and process new information. As you research information for a proposal, also be aware of confirmation
       bias, which is the tendency to seek out and accept information that supports (or confirms) a belief you already
       have and to ignore or dismiss information that challenges that belief.
       For example, perhaps you believe strongly that the graduation rate at the college you attend is too low and that
       more students would graduate if the college provided more financial aid in the form of grants. With that belief,
       you would likely be more receptive to facts and statistics showing that students who receive financial aid in the
       form of grants, not loans, are more likely to graduate. However, if you believe that more students would
       graduate if they took advantage of the academic support services the college offers, then you would likely be
       more receptive to facts and statistics showing that students who work hard and use academic support services
       graduate in higher numbers.
       As you read about problems and solutions, the best way to guard against bias is to be aware that bias exists, to
       question what you read, and to challenge your own beliefs. You can learn more about bias, especially in
       language, in Spotlight on ... Bias in Language and Research.

     6.2 Trailblazer

     Proposal Trailblazer: Atul Gawande

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe a particular problem and a proposed solution.
         · Discuss the process of identifying a problem and proposing a solution.
         · Articulate how proposals to solve problems reach their intended audience.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                      6.2 · Trailblazer 171

                                                                       "What do you
                                                                          do when

                                                                      expertise is not
                                                                         enough?"

FIGURE 6.2 Atul Gawande (https://openstax.org/r/atulgawande)
thinks graphically about solving problems. (credit: "Sketched Book -
The Checklist Manifesto - How to Get Things Right" by Sacha Chua/
flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Medical Problem Solver

Born in New York City, surgeon and author Atul Gawande (b. 1965) graduated from Stanford University in
1987 with a degree in biology and political science. A Rhodes Scholarship enabled him to study at the
University of Oxford, where he earned a master's degree in philosophy, politics, and economics. Returning to
the United States from England, Gawande entered politics and worked for Al Gore's (b. 1948) presidential
campaign and later served as a health care adviser during the Clinton administration (1993-2001). Gawande
graduated from Harvard Medical School with an MD in 1995 and an MPH (master of public health) in 1999.
Among his main concerns and frequent topics of his written work have been patient care and medical ethics.

In the mid-2000s, Dr. Gawande came across a simple idea for improving medical care. Another physician,
Peter Pronovost (b. 1965), a critical care specialist, had identified a solution to the problem of patients in
intensive care units (ICUs) developing infections after having central intravenous lines inserted. The cause of
the problem was human error. Doctors knew the steps they needed to follow to prevent infection when they
inserted a central line, but some of them skipped at least one of the steps. When they did, the risk of a
dangerous infection increased, which in turn increased the likelihood of a poor outcome for the
patient--longer illness, additional surgery, or death.

Borrowing a method from airplane pilots, who must go through a checklist before being cleared for takeoff, Dr.
Pronovost proposed a similar solution for ICU doctors: a checklist of five things they needed to do when
inserting a central intravenous line. Dr. Pronovost ran an experiment in the ICU at the hospital where he
worked. Doctors were instructed to follow the steps on the checklist, and nurses who assisted during the
procedure were told to observe and speak up if a doctor skipped a step.

The checklist worked. The infection rate dropped dramatically, reducing ICU stays, saving lives, and saving
money. Dr. Pronovost began writing checklists for other ICU situations. These checklists were successful as
well in addressing particular problems.

Approached by the World Health Organization, Dr. Gawande worked with a team around the world to develop a
checklist to improve the safety of surgery. As a surgeon, he was well aware of complications that could occur as
a result of mistakes before, during, and after surgery. The team created a 19-point "safe surgery" checklist that
was tested at eight hospitals around the world, including one in the United States. The checklist worked
again--all eight hospitals saw the rate of significant postsurgical complications and deaths drop by an average
172 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

       of more than 35 percent, with no additional costs.
       The problem the two doctors identified is both simple and complex. The problem is not that doctors lack
       knowledge; the problem is that because the situations they encounter are often complicated and urgent,
       doctors do not always correctly apply what they know.
       The solution proposed by Dr. Gawande and Dr. Pronovost is similarly both simple and complex: to improve
       accuracy, use a checklist. However, other doctors needed to be convinced that a simple change like this would
       improve medical care. To persuade others, Gawande and Pronovost wrote articles for medical journals in
       which they presented the problem they studied, the methods they used, the results of their experiments, and
       the solution they recommended. Dr. Gawande then went on to apply the checklist solution to preventable
       problems in fields outside of medicine in his book The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right (2009),
       which became a best seller.

      Discussion Questions

       1. How did Drs. Pronovost and Gawande define the problems they were trying to solve?
       2. What evidence did Drs. Pronovost and Gawande use to support their proposed solutions?
       3. Who was the audience for the doctors' proposals? Why might some audience members be hesitant about

            accepting the checklist solution?
       4. Think about the relationship between doctors and nurses. Who has more authority in a medical setting?

            How might the doctors' and nurses' reactions to using the checklist differ?
       5. In what ways is the problem the doctors tackled both simple and complex?
       6. In what ways is the solution the doctors proposed both simple and complex?

     6.3 Glance at Genre: Features of Proposals

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Discuss the roles of purpose and audience in writing a proposal.
         · Define key features and characteristics of proposals.
       As you think about the problem for your proposal, it is important to understand the rhetorical situation, or the
       circumstance in which a writer communicates with an audience of readers, including your purpose, audience
       expectations, and the key elements of the proposal genre. The rhetorical situation and its relationship to
       writing your proposal is discussed more fully in Writing Process: Creating a Proposal.

      Defining Your Purpose

       Your purpose is your reason for writing. The broad purpose for most academic and real-world proposals is to
       offer a solution to a problem. You, the writer, are tasked with identifying a problem and recommending a
       solution. You may need to write a proposal for a research project in a sociology class, or you may need to write
       a business proposal for a marketing class or a business you've started. Many topics are suitable for a proposal
       in a college writing class. For example, some problems are local and can be acted on directly, such as
       improving access to mental health services on your campus, offering a new food delivery option to campus
       buildings, designating quiet study spaces in your library, or bringing a farmer's market to your campus. Others
       are large-scale, research-oriented proposals such as reducing automobile emissions, providing broadband
       Internet access nationwide, or reforming immigration policies in the United States. Read your assignment
       carefully, and be sure you know the requirements and the amount of flexibility you have.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                              6.3 · Glance at Genre: Features of Proposals 173

Tuning in to Audience Expectations

The audience for your writing consists of the people who will read it or who could read it. Are you writing for
your instructor? For your classmates? For students or administrators on your campus or people in your
community? Think about the action they can take to solve the problem. For example, if the problem you're
presenting is a lack of diverse food options on your campus, a proposal to other students would perhaps ask
students to join you in calling for change in dining options, whereas a proposal to administrators would
request specific changes.

Whoever your readers are, they expect you to do the following:

  · Address a specific, well-defined problem. As the writer, ensure that your readers know what the problem
      is and why it needs to be solved. Some problems are well-known, whereas others need to be explained.

  · Have an idea of what they already know. It is up to you as the writer to learn as much as possible about
      your audience. You need to know how receptive your audience may be to your suggestions and what they
      know about the problem you're proposing to solve. Their knowledge--or lack thereof--will require you to
      adjust your writing as needed. If readers are new to the problem, they expect you to provide the necessary
      background information. If they are knowledgeable about the problem, they expect you to cover
      background information quickly.

  · Provide reliable information. in the form of specific facts, statistics, and examples. Whether you present
      your own research or information from sources, readers expect you to have done your homework and
      present trustworthy information about the problem and the solution.

  · Structure your proposal in a logical way. Open with an introduction that tells readers the subject of the
      proposal, and follow with a logical structure.

  · Adopt an objective stance. Writing objectively means adopting a position and tone that are neutral and
      free from bias, personal feelings, and emotional language. In doing so, you show respect for your readers'
      knowledge and intelligence, and you build credibility and trust, or ethos, with your readers.

  · Tell them what you want them to do in response to your proposal. Do you want them to engage other
      members of the community? Build something? Contact their legislators? Although they may not do what
      you want, they are unlikely to act at all if you don't tell them what you would like them to do.

Exploring the Genre

A formal proposal may include the components addressed in Analytical Report: Writing from Facts. If you're
writing a business proposal (a document that proposes a transaction between a business and a client and also
spells out deliverables, a schedule, costs, and payment), you can find a full discussion in OpenStax's
forthcoming Business Communications text.

The following are key terms and characteristics of problem-solution proposals:

  · Abstract or executive summary: paragraph that summarizes the problem and recommended solution.
      The purpose is to present information in the most concise and economical way possible for your readers.

  · Audience: readers of a proposal or any piece of writing.
  · Bias: a preconceived opinion about something, such as a subject, an idea, a person, or a group of people.

      As a reader, be attentive to potential bias in sources; as a writer, be attentive to bias in yourself.
  · Body: main part of a proposal; appears between the introduction and the conclusion and

      recommendation. The body of a proposal consists of paragraphs that discuss the problem and present a
      solution or solutions.
  · Citation of sources: references in the text of a proposal to sources the writer has used as evidence. The
      sources are also listed, with full bibliographic information, at the end of the proposal. Citing sources is
      essential to avoid plagiarism.
  · Conclusion and recommendation: last part of a proposal. The conclusion restates the problem and
      recommends a solution. This paragraph often issues a call to action.
174 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

         · Critical thinking: ability to look beneath the surface of words and images to analyze, interpret, and
             evaluate.

         · Ethos: also known as ethical appeal; the sense that the writer or other authority is trustworthy and
             credible.

         · Evidence: statements of fact, statistics, examples, and expert opinion or knowledge that support the
             writer's points.

         · Facts: statements whose truth can be proven or verified.
         · Introduction: first part of a proposal, in which the writer introduces the problem to be addressed. Often,

             the thesis appears at the end of the introduction.
         · Objections: questions or opposition readers may have about a proposed solution. These also are known as

             counterclaims.
         · Objective stance: writing that is free from bias, personal feelings, and emotional language. An objective

             stance is especially important in a proposal.
         · Problem: central topic to be discussed in a proposal.
         · Purpose: reason for writing the proposal, usually to examine a problem and propose a solution.
         · Solution or solutions: proposed resolution or resolutions to the problem, the central topic of a proposal.
         · Statistics: factual statements that include numbers and often serve as evidence in a proposal.
         · Synthesis: making connections between ideas and combining them to arrive at an original conclusion.

             Synthesizing draws from others' opinions and ideas, facts, statistics, and the writer's information based on
             research or original thought.
         · Thesis: the main idea you will convey in your proposal and to which all paragraphs in the paper should
             relate.
         · Topic sentence: a sentence that states the main idea of each paragraph.

     6.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn
     Krukowski

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify the features common to proposals.
         · Analyze the organizational structure of a proposal and how writers develop ideas.
         · Articulate how writers use and cite evidence to build credibility.
         · Identify sources of evidence within a text and in source citations.

      Introduction

       FIGURE 6.3 Student author Shawn Krukowski (credit: "Reading in Tulane University Library New Orleans July
       2003" by Tulane Public Relations/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                              6.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn Krukowski 175

                 The proposal that follows was written by student Shawn Krukowski for a first-year composition course.
                 Shawn's assignment was to research a contemporary problem and propose one or more solutions. Deeply
                 concerned about climate change, Shawn chose to research ways to slow the process. In his proposal, he
                 recommends two solutions he thinks are most promising.
s

                           end s

end s

FIGURE 6.4 This U.S. Coast Guard photograph shows the flooding in New Iberia, Louisiana, after Hurricane Ike in
September 2008. Scientists attribute increased hurricane severity to climate change. (credit: "Hurricane Ike New
Iberia" by Coast Guard Jayhawk 6031/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

A Call to Action

      The earth's climate is changing. Although the climate has been changing slowly for the past 22,000 years, the
      rate of change has increased dramatically. Previously, natural climate changes occurred gradually, sometimes
      extending over thousands of years. Since the mid-20th century, however, climate change has accelerated
      exponentially, a result primarily of human activities, and is reaching a crisis level.

Critical as it is, however, climate change can be controlled. Thanks to current knowledge of science and existing
technologies, it is possible to respond effectively. Although many concerned citizens, companies, and
organizations in the private sector are taking action in their own spheres, other individuals, corporations, and
organizations are ignoring, or even denying, the problem. What is needed to slow climate change is unified
action in two key areas--mitigation and adaptation--spurred by government leadership in the United States and
a global commitment to addressing the problem immediately.

Ianntnrootdaut ction. The proposal opens with an overview of the problem and pivots to the solution in the second    end annotat
paragraph.

TanhneostisatStatement. The thesis statement in last sentence of the introduction previews the organization of the
proposal and the recommended solutions.end annotat

Problem: Negative Effects of Climate Change

Hanenaodtiantg. Centered, boldface headings mark major sections of the proposal.end annotat

Banondoyt.aTthe three paragraphs under this heading discuss the problem.end annotat

TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topics developed in the following paragraphs.end annotat
   176 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

   For the 4,000 years leading up to the Industrial Revolution, global temperatures remained relatively constant,
   with a few dips of less than 1°C. Previous climate change occurred so gradually that life forms were able to
   adapt to it. Some species became extinct, but others survived and thrived. In just the past 100 years, however,
   temperatures have risen by approximately the same amount that they rose over the previous 4,000 years.

s  Aanundoietantce. Without knowing for sure the extent of readers' knowledge of climate change, the writer provides

   background for them to understand the problem.end annotat

   The  rapid  increase  in  temperature  has  a  negative  global  impact.  First,  as  temperatures  rise, glaciers  and  polar
                                                                                                        end s

   ice are meeltnindgsat a faster rate; in fact, by the middle of this century, the Arctic Ocean is projected to be ice-free

   in summer. As a result, global sea levels are projected to rise from two to four feet by 2100 (U.S. Global Change

   Research Program [USGCRP], 2014a). If this rise actually does happen, many coastal ecosystems and human

   communities will disappear.

   Danisncoutasst ion of the Problem. The first main point of the problem is discussedeinndthsis paragraph.end annotat

   Santantoitsatitcs as Evidence. The writer provides specific numbers and cites the source in APA style.end annotat

   Tanrannostaittions. The writer uses transitions here (first, as a result, and second in the next paragraph) and elsewhere to
   make connections between ideas and to enable readers to follow them more easily. At the same time, the
   transitions give the proposal coherence.end annotat

   Second, weather of all types is becoming more extreme: heat waves are hotter, cold snaps are colder, and
   precipitation patterns are changing, causing longer droughts and increased flooding. Oceans are becoming
   more acidic as they increase their absorption of carbon dioxide. This change affects coral reefs and other
   marine life. Since the 1980s, hurricanes have increased in frequency, intensity, and duration. As shown in
   Figure 6.5, the 2020 hurricane season was the most active on record, with 30 named storms, a recording-
   breaking 11 storms hitting the U.S. coastline (compared to 9 in 1916), and 10 named storms in September--the
   highest monthly number on record. Together, these storms caused more than $40 billion in damage. Not only
   was this the fifth consecutive above-normal hurricane season, it was preceded by four consecutive above-
   normal years in 1998 to 2001 (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2020).

   Danisncoutasst ion of the Problem. The second main point of the problem is discussed in this paragraph.end annotat

   Vanisnuoatal tas Evidence. The writer refers to "Figure 6.4" in the text and places the figure below the paragraph.end annotat

   Access for free at openstax.org.
          6.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn Krukowski 177

s

   end s

          end s

   FIGURE 6.5 An overview of the 2020 hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean. From "Record-Breaking Atlantic
   Hurricane Season Draws to an End," NOAA National Weather Service. Copyright 2020 by the National Oceanic and
   Atmospheric Administration.

   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: Visual. The writer gives the figure a number, a title, an explanatory note, and a source
   citation. The source is also cited in the list of references.end annotat

   Solutions: Mitigation and Adaptation

   Hanenaodtiantg. The centered, boldface heading marks the start of the solutions section of the proposal.end annotat

   Banondoyt.aTthe eight paragraphs under this heading discuss the solutions given in the thesis statement.end annotat

   TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topics developed in the following paragraphs.end annotat

         To control the effects of climate change, immediate action in two key ways is needed: mitigation and
         adaptation. Mitigating climate change by reducing and stabilizing the carbon emissions that produce
         greenhouse gases is the only long-term way to avoid a disastrous future. In addition, adaptation is imperative to
         allow ecosystems, food systems, and development to become more sustainable.

         Mitigation and adaptation will not happen on their own; action on such a vast scale will require governments
         around the globe to take initiatives. The United States needs to cooperate with other nations and assume a
         leadership role in fighting climate change.

   Oanbnjeoctatitve Stance. The writer presents evidence (facts, statistics, and examples) in neutral, unemotional language,
   which builds credibility, or ethos, with readers.end annotat

   Mitigation

   Hanenaodtiantg. The flush-left, boldface heading marks the first subsection of the solutions.end annotat

   TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the solution developed in the following paragraphs.end annotat
   178 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

   The first challenge is to reduce the flow of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. The Union of Concerned

   Scientists (2020) warns that "net zero" carbon emissions--meaning that no more carbon enters the

   atmosphere than is removed--needs to be reached by 2050 or sooner. As shown in Figure 6.6, reducing carbon

   emissions will require a massive effort, given the skyrocketing rate of increase of greenhouse gases since 1900

s  (USGCRP, 2014b).                                                                                  end s

   Sanynothtaetsis. In this paragraph, the writer synthesizes factual evidence from two sources and cites them in APA style.end annotat

   Vanisnuoatal tas Evidence. The writer refers to "Figure 6.5" in the text and places the figure below the paragraph.end annotat

   end s
       end s

   FIGURE 6.6 Increases in carbon by the burning of fossil fuels since 1900. From "Our Changing Climate," National
   Climate Assessment (https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/2/). Copyright 2014 by the U.S. Global Change
   Research Program.
   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: Visual. The writer gives the figure a number, a title, an explanatory note, and a source
   citation. The source is also cited in the list of references.end annotat

         Significant national policy changes must be made and must include multiple approaches; here are two areas of
         concern:
   Panrensoetanttation of Solutions. For clarity, the writer numbers the two items to be discussed.end annotat
         1. Transportation systems. In the United States in 2018, more than one-quarter--28.2 percent--of emissions
         resulted from the consumption of fossil fuels for transportation. More than half of these emissions came from
         passenger cars, light-duty trucks, sport utility vehicles, and minivans (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
         [EPA], 2020). Priorities for mitigation should include using fuels that emit less carbon; improving fuel efficiency;
         and reducing the need for travel through urban planning, telecommuting and videoconferencing, and biking and
         pedestrian initiatives.
   Santantoitsatitcs as Evidence. The writer provides specific numbers and cites the source in APA style.end annotat
   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: Group Author. The parenthetical citation gives the group's name, an abbreviation to
   be used in subsequent citations, and the year of publication.end annotat

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                        6.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn Krukowski 179

   Curtailing travel has a demonstrable effect. Scientists have recorded a dramatic drop in emissions during

   government-imposed travel and business restrictions in 2020. Intended to slow the spread of COVID-19, these

   restrictions also decreased air pollution significantly. For example, during the first six weeks of restrictions in

   the San Francisco Bay area, traffic was reduced by about 45 percent, and emissions were roughly a quarter

s  lower than the previous six weeks. Similar findings were observed around the globe, wenitdhsreductions of up to 80

   percent (Bourzac, 2020).

   Santantoitsatitcs as Evidence. The writer provides specific numbers and cites the source in APA style.end annotat

                                        end s

   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: One Author. The parenthetical citatioenndgisves the author's name and the year of  end annotat

   publication.end s                           end s

   2. Energy production. The second-largest source of emissions is the use of fossil fuels to produce energy,

   primarily electricity, which accounted for 26.9 percent of U.S. emissions (EPA, 2020). Fossil fuels can be
   replaced by solar, weinndd, shydro, and geothermal sources. Solar voltaic systems have the potential to become the

   least expensive energy in the world (Green America, 2020). Solar sources should be complemented by wind

   power, which tends to increase at night when the sun is absent. According to the Copenhagen Consensus, the

   most effective way to combat climate change is to increase investment in green research and development

   (Lomborg, 2020). Notable are successes in the countries of Morocco and The Gambia, both of which have

   committed to investing in national programs to limit emissions primarily by generating electricity from

   renewable sources (Mulvaney, 2019).

   Sanynothtaetsis. The writer develops the paragraph by synthesizing evidence from four sources and cites them in APA    end annotat
   style.

   A second way to move toward net zero is to actively remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Forests and
   oceans are so-called "sinks" that collect and store carbon (EPA, 2020). Tropical forests that once made up 12
   percent of global land masses now cover only 5 percent, and the loss of these tropical forest sinks has caused
   16 to 19 percent of greenhouse gas emissions (Green America, 2020). Worldwide reforestation is vital and
   demands both commitment and funding on a global scale. New technologies also allow "direct air capture,"
   which filers carbon from the air, and "carbon capture," which prevents it from leaving smokestacks.

   All of these technologies should be governmentally supported and even mandated, where appropriate.

   Sanynothtaetsis. The writer develops the paragraph by synthesizing evidence from two sources and cites them in APA     end annotat
   style.

   Adaptation

   Hanenaodtiantg. The flush-left, boldface heading marks the second subsection of the solutions.end annotat

   TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the solution developed in the following paragraphs.end annotat

   Historically, civilizations have adapted to climate changes, sometimes successfully, sometimes not. Our
   modern civilization is largely the result of climate stability over the past 12,000 years. However, as the climate
   changes, humans must learn to adapt on a national, community, and individual level in many areas. While each
   country sets its own laws and regulations, certain principles apply worldwide.

   1. Infrastructure. Buildings--residential, commercial, and industrial--produce about 33 percent of greenhouse
   gas emissions worldwide (Biello, 2007). Stricter standards for new construction, plus incentives for investing in
   insulation and other improvements to existing structures, are needed. Development in high-risk areas needs to
   be discouraged. Improved roads and transportation systems would help reduce fuel use. Incentives for
   decreasing energy consumption are needed to reduce rising demands for power.

   Santantoitsatitcs as Evidence. The writer provides specific numbers and cites the source in APA style.end annotat

   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: One Author. The parenthetical citation gives the author's name and the year of     end annotat
   180 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

   publication.

   2. Food waste. More than 30 percent of the food produced in the United States is never consumed, and food

   waste causes 44 gigatons of carbon emissions a year (Green America, 2020). In a landfill, the nutrients in

   wasted food never return to the soil; instead, methane, a greenhouse gas, is produced. High-income countries

s  such as the United States need to address wasteful processing and distribution systems. Low-income

   countries, on the other hand, need an infrastructure that supports proper food storage and handling. Educating

         consumers also must be a priority.

                                                                                                                               end s
   Santantoitsatitcs asenEdvisdence. The writer provides specific numbers and cites the source in APA style.end annotat

   SanoenunordctasetCitation in APeAndStsyle: Group Author. The parenthetical citation gives the group's name and the year of         end annota

   publication.

   3. Consumerism. People living in consumer nations have become accustomed to abundance. Many purchases
                                                                                                               end s

   are nonessential yet consume fossil fuels to manufacture, package, market, and ship products. During World
   War II, the U.S. government promoted the slogan "Use It Up, Wear It Out, Make It Do, or Do Without." This
   attitude was widely accepted because people recognized a common purpose in the war effort. A similar shift in
   mindset is needed today.

   Adaptation is not only possible but also economically advantageous. One case study is Walmart, which is the
   world's largest company by revenue. According to Dearn (2020), the company announced a plan to reduce its
   global emissions to zero by 2040. Among the goals is powering its facilities with 100 percent renewable energy
   and using electric vehicles with zero emissions. As of 2020, about 29 percent of its energy is from renewable
   sources. Although the 2040 goal applies to Walmart facilities only, plans are underway to reduce indirect
   emissions, such as those from its supply chain. According to CEO Doug McMillon, the company's commitment is
   to "becoming a regenerative company--one that works to restore, renew and replenish in addition to preserving
   our planet, and encourages others to do the same" (Dearn, 2020). In addition to encouraging other
   corporations, these goals present a challenge to the government to take action on climate change.

   Eanxnteontadted Example as Evidence. The writer indicates where borrowed information from the source begins and
   ends, and cites the source in APA style.end annotat

   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: One Author. The parenthetical citation gives only the year of publication because the
   author's name is cited in the sentence.end annotat

   Objections to Taking Action

   Hanenaodtiantg. The centered, boldface heading marks the start of the writer's discussion of potential objections to the
   proposed solutions.end annotat

   Banondoyt.aTthe writer devotes two paragraphs to objections.end annotat

   TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topics developed in the following paragraphs.end annotat

   Despite scientific evidence, some people and groups deny that climate change is real or, if they admit it exists,
   insist it is not a valid concern. Those who think climate change is not a problem point to Earth's millennia-long
   history of changing climate as evidence that life has always persisted. However, their claims do not consider the
   difference between "then" and "now." Most of the change predates human civilization, which has benefited
   from thousands of years of stable climate. The rapid change since the Industrial Revolution is unprecedented in
   human history.

   Those who deny climate change or its dangers seek primarily to relax or remove pollution standards and
   regulations in order to protect, or maximize profit from, their industries. To date, their lobbying has been
   successful. For example, the world's fossil-fuel industry received $5.3 trillion in 2015 alone, while the U.S.
   wind-energy industry received $12.3 billion in subsidies between 2000 and 2020 (Green America, 2020).

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                  6.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Slowing Climate Change" by Shawn Krukowski 181

   Santantoitsatitcs as Evidence. The writer provides specific numbers and cites the source in APA style.end annotat

   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: Group Author. The parenthetical citation gives the group's name and the year of                end annota
   publication.

s  Conclusion and Recommendation

   Hanenaodtiantg. The centered, boldface heading marks the start of the conclusion and recommendation.end annotat

   Canonnoctlautsion and Recommendation. The proposal concludes ewnitdhsa restatement of the proposed solutions and a call
   to action.end annotat

   Greenhouse gases can be reduced to acceptable levels; the technology already exists. But that technology
                                                                                                                               end s

   cannot function without strong governmental policies prioritizing the environment, coupled with serious
   investment in research and development of climate-friendly technologies.

   The United States government must place its full support behind efforts to reduce greenhouse gasses and
   mitigate climate change. Rejoining the Paris Agreement is a good first step, but it is not enough. Citizens must
   demand that their elected officials at the local, state, and national levels accept responsibility to take action on
   both mitigation and adaptation. Without full governmental support, good intentions fall short of reaching net-
   zero emissions and cannot achieve the adaptation in attitude and lifestyle necessary for public compliance.
   There is no alternative to accepting this reality. Addressing climate change is too important to remain optional.

                                                            References

   Biello, D. (2007, May 25). Combatting climate change: Farming out global warming solutions. Scientific American.
       https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/combating-climate-change-farming-forestry/

   Bourzac, K. (2020, September 25). COVID-19 lockdowns had strange effects on air pollution across the globe.
      Chemical & Engineering News. https://cen.acs.org/environment/atmospheric-chemistry/COVID-19-lockdowns-
       had-strange-effects-on-air-pollution-across-the-globe/98/i37

   Dearn, G. (2020, September 21). Walmart said it will eliminate its carbon footprint by 2040 -- but not for its supply
      chain, which makes up the bulk of its emissions. Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/walmart-
       targets-zero-carbon-emissions-2040-not-suppliers-2020-9

   Green America (2020). Top 10 solutions to reverse climate change. https://www.greenamerica.org/climate-
       change-100-reasons-hope/top-10-solutions-reverse-climate-change.

   Lomborg, B. (2020, July 17). The alarm about climate change is blinding us to sensible solutions. The Globe and
      Mail. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-the-alarm-about-climate-change-is-blinding-us-to-
       sensible-solutions/

   Mulvaney, K. (2019, September 19). Climate change report card: These countries are reaching targets. National
      Geographic. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/2019/09/climate-change-report-card-
       co2-emissions/

   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2020, November 24). Record-breaking Atlantic hurricane season
       draws to an end. https://www.noaa.gov/media-release/record-breaking-atlantic-hurricane-season-draws-to-end

   Union of Concerned Scientists (2020). Climate solutions. https://www.ucsusa.org/climate/solutions

   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2020). Sources of greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
       https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions

   U.S. Global Change Research Program (2014a). Melting ice. National Climate Assessment.
       https://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/our-changing-climate/melting-ice

   U.S. Global Change Research Program (2014b). Our changing climate. National Climate Assessment.
182 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

           https://nca2014.globalchange.gov/highlights/report-findings/our-changing-climate#tab1-images

       Ranenfeorteant ces Page in APA Style. All sources cited in the text of the report--and only those sources--are listed in
       alphabetical order with full publication information. See the Handbook for more on APA documentation style.end annotat

       The following link takes you to another model of an annotated sample paper (https://openstax.org/r/
       annotatedsamplepaper) on solutions to animal testing posted by the University of Arizona's Global Campus
       Writing Center.

      Discussion Questions

       1. How is the proposal organized? Make an informal outline of the main points.

       2. Identify types of evidence that the writer uses in the text of the proposal, such as statements of fact,
            statistics, examples, and visuals. What are the sources of his evidence? Are the sources credible and
            reliable?

       3. Analyze the writer's stance. Is he objective? Does he reveal bias? Give examples of objectivity and/or bias
            that you see.

       4. Climate change is a broad topic for a proposal of this length. In fact, Shawn Krukowski's instructor
            suggested that he narrow it. What advice would you give about narrowing the topic?

       5. Discuss the proposal in terms of its purpose and audience. What is the purpose of the proposal? What
            action does Shawn want readers to take after reading it? How effective is his call to action?

       6. What are three strengths of the proposal? What are three weaknesses?

     6.5 Writing Process: Creating a Proposal

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Describe the elements of the rhetorical situation for your proposal.
         · Apply prewriting strategies to discover a problem to write about.
         · Gather and synthesize information from appropriate sources.
         · Draft a thesis statement and create an organizational plan.
         · Compose a proposal that develops your ideas and integrates evidence from sources.
         · Implement strategies for drafting, peer reviewing, and revising.

       Sometimes writing a paper comes easily, but more often writers work hard to generate ideas and evidence,
       organize their thoughts, draft, and revise. Experienced writers do their work in multiple steps, and most
       engage in a recursive process that involves thinking and rethinking, writing and rewriting, and repeating
       steps multiple times as their ideas develop and sharpen. In broad strokes, most writers go through the
       following steps to achieve a polished piece of writing:

         · Planning and Organization. Your proposal will come together more easily if you spend time at the start
             considering the rhetorical situation, understanding your assignment, gathering ideas and evidence,
             drafting a thesis statement, and creating an organizational plan.

         · Drafting. When you have a good grasp of the problem and solution you are going to write about and how
             you will organize your proposal, you are ready to draft.

         · Review. With a first draft in hand, make time to get feedback from others. Depending on the structure of
             your class, you may receive feedback from your instructor or your classmates. You can also work with a
             tutor in the writing center on your campus, or you can ask someone else you trust, such as a friend,
             roommate, or family member, to read your writing critically and give honest feedback.

         · Revising. After reviewing feedback from your readers, plan to revise. Focus on their comments: Is your

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                  6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 183

      thesis clear? Do you need to make organizational changes to the proposal? Do you need to explain or
      connect your ideas more clearly?

Considering the Rhetorical Situation

Like other kinds of writing projects, a proposal starts with assessing the rhetorical situation--the
circumstance in which a writer communicates with an audience of readers about a subject. As a proposal
writer, you make choices based on the purpose for your writing, the audience who will read it, the genre, and
the expectations of the community and culture in which you are working. The brainstorming questions in
Table 6.1 can help you begin:

     Rhetorical       Brainstorming Questions                                                           Your
Situation Element                                                                                   Responses

Topic                 What do you want to know more about? What requirements do you have? Do
                      you need to do research?
Are you free to
choose your own
problem and
solution to write
about, or is your
topic specified?

Purpose               Is the purpose to examine a problem and explain possible solutions? Or is it
                      to recommend a specific solution?
What is the purpose
of the proposal?

Audience              Who is your primary audience--your instructor? Your classmates? Other
Who will read your    students or administrators on your campus? People in your community? How
writing?              will you shape your writing to connect most effectively with this audience?
                      Do you need to consider secondary audiences, such as people outside of
Presentation          class? If so, who are those readers?
In what format
should you prepare    Should you prepare a written proposal or use another medium? Should you
your proposal?        include visuals and other media along with text, such as figures, charts,
                      graphs, photographs, audio, or video? What other presentation requirements
                      do you need to be aware of?

Context               What problems in your city, county, state, area, nation, or the world need a
                      solution? What current events or new information might relate to the
How do the time       problem? Is your college or university relevant to the problem?
period and location
affect decisions you
make about your
proposal?

TABLE 6.1 Brainstorming Questions about the Rhetorical Situation
184 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

     Rhetorical                                         Brainstorming Questions              Your
Situation Element                                                                        Responses

Culture and         How will you show awareness of your community's social and cultural
Community           expectations in your writing?

What social or
cultural
assumptions do you
or your audience
have?

TABLE 6.1 Brainstorming Questions about the Rhetorical Situation

Summary of Assignment

Write a proposal that discusses a problem you want to learn more about and that recommends a solution. The
problem you choose must be a current problem, even though it may have been a problem for many years. The
problem must also affect many people, and it must have an actual solution or solutions that you can learn
about through research. In other words, the problem cannot be unique to you, and the solution you
recommend cannot be one you only imagine; both the problem and the solution must be grounded in reality.

One way to get ideas about a problem to write about is to read a high-quality newspaper, website, or social
media account for a week. Read widely on whatever platform you choose so that you learn what people are
saying, what a newspaper's editorial board is taking a stand on, what opinion writers are making cases for in
op-eds, and what community members are commenting on. You'll begin to get a handle on problems in your
community or state that people care about. If you read a paper or website with a national or international
audience, you'll learn about problems that affect people in other places.

You will need to consult and cite at least five reliable sources. They can be scholarly, but they do not have to be.
They must be credible, trustworthy, and unbiased. Possible sources include articles from reputable
newspapers, magazines, and academic and professional journals; reputable websites; government sources;
and visual sources. Depending on your topic, you may want to conduct a survey, an interview, or an
experiment. See Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and Annotated Bibliography:
Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources for information about creating and finding sources. Your
proposal can include a visual or media source if it provides appropriate, relevant evidence.

Another Lens. Another way to approach a proposal assignment is to consider problems that affect you directly
and affect others. Perhaps you are concerned about running up student loan debt. Or perhaps you worry about
how to pay your rent while earning minimum wage. These concerns are valid and affect many college students
around the United States. Another way is to think about problems that affect others. Perhaps students in your
class or on your campus have backgrounds and experiences that differ from yours--what problems or
challenges might they have encountered during their time in college that you don't know about?

As you think about the purpose and audience for your proposal, think again about the rhetorical situation,
specifically about the audience you want to reach and the mode of presentation best suited to them and your
purpose. For example, say you're dissatisfied with the process for electing student leaders on your campus. If
your purpose is to identify the problems in the process and propose a change, then your audience would
include other students, the group or committee that oversees student elections, and perhaps others. To reach
other students who might also be dissatisfied, you might write an article, editorial, or letter for the campus
newspaper, social media page, or website, depending on how students on your campus get news. In addition,
you might organize a meeting of other students to get their input on the problem. To reach the decision

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                 6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 185

makers, which may include elected students, faculty, and administrators, you might need to prepare an oral
presentation and a slide deck.
Below in Figure 6.7 are three slides from Shawn Krukowski's proposal that he adapted for a presentation: the
title slide, a slide on one aspect of the problem, and a slide introducing one of the proposed solutions.

      FIGURE 6.7 Presentation Slides (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

      Quick Launch: Finding a Problem to Write About

A proposal must address a real-life problem and present one or more workable solutions. Usually, problems
worth writing about are not easily solved; if they were, they would no longer be considered problems. Indeed,
problems in proposals are often complex, and solutions are often complicated and involve trade-offs.
Sometimes people disagree about whether the problem is a problem at all and whether any proposed solutions
are viable solutions.
Exploring a Problem
One way to generate ideas about a problem is to brainstorm. To explore a topic for your proposal, use a graphic
organizer like Table 6.2 to write responses to the following statements and questions:
186 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

                                  Exploring Questions                   Your Responses

What problem am I interested in learning about?

How do I know this is a problem?

What are a few examples of the problem?

What causes the problem?

Who is affected by the problem?

What are some negative effects of the problem?

Why should the problem be solved?

What are the potential consequences of the problem if nothing is done?

What are some realistic solutions to the problem?

TABLE 6.2 Exploration Questions

For example, perhaps you're considering a career in information technology, and you're taking an IT class. You
might be interested in exploring the problem of data breaches. A data breach is a real-world problem with
possible solutions, so it passes the first test of being an actual problem with possible solutions. Your responses
to the questions above might look something like those in Table 6.3:

      Exploring                                                     Sample Responses
      Questions
                    Data breaches
A problem I'm
interested in       In my class, we're spending a lot of time on data security and breaches. Also, data breaches
learning more       are in the news almost constantly, and a Google search turns up many that don't make the
about is...         news.
                    I've heard about people getting their information stolen. I've heard about foreign
How I know data     governments, like Russia, stealing national security information and trying to interfere in
breaches are a      recent elections. In my class, I'm learning about businesses that have customer and
problem...          employee information stolen.
                    Hackers have a variety of methods to break into websites, to get people to click on links,
What are a few      and to lure people to give out information.
examples of data    Individual people, businesses, utility companies, schools and universities, governments
breaches?           (local, state, and national)--pretty much anyone can be affected.

What causes data
breaches?

Who is affected by
data breaches?

TABLE 6.3 Exploration Questions on Data Breaches

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                  6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 187

      Exploring                                                       Sample Responses
      Questions
                      Identity theft, financial theft, national security, power shutdowns, and election
What are some         interference. Data breaches cause chaos and cost a lot of money.
negative effects of
data breaches?        People need the personal, financial, and medical information they share with businesses
                      and other organizations to remain private. Businesses and organizations need to keep their
Why should the        operations secure. Governments need to keep national security secrets from getting into
problem of data       the hands of people who want to harm them.
breaches be
solved?               People will continue to be victims of identity theft and all that goes with it, including losing
                      money, and they will lose trust in institutions they used to trust, like banks, hospitals, and
What are the          the government.
potential
consequences of       Increased security for individuals, like two-factor authentication, stronger passwords, and
data breaches if      education to avoid getting scammed. For companies and governments, stronger
nothing is done?      protections on websites. I need to learn more.

What are some
realistic solutions
to data breaches?

TABLE 6.3 Exploration Questions on Data Breaches

Narrowing and Focusing

Many problems for a proposal can be too broad to tackle in a single paper. For example, the sample above
reveals that data breaches are indeed a problem but that several aspects can be explored. If you tried to cover
all the aspects, you would be left writing general paragraphs with little specific information. The topic needs to
be narrowed and focused.

The data breaches example above could be narrowed to the following problems--and possibly even more. Note
that the questions start to zero in on possible solutions, too. In your own writing, as you brainstorm, try placing
subtopics you discover into their own categories and asking more questions, as shown in Table 6.4.

Narrowing a                                       Focusing Questions
  Problem

Problem: Hackers get  What tactics do hackers use? What do they steal? What do they do with what they steal?
into computer         How successful are they? How can hacking be stopped or reduced?
systems and steal
information.

Problem: Data         What happens to people when their information is stolen? In what ways is their
breaches harm         information used? What should people do when they discover their information has been
individuals.          stolen? Are there steps they can take to protect their information?

TABLE 6.4 Focusing on a Topic
188 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

     Narrowing a                                                   Focusing Questions
        Problem
                    What happens to businesses, organizations, and medical systems when hackers break in?
Problem: Data       What kind of information is stolen? How is the information used? What do businesses,
breaches harm       organizations, and medical systems do, or what should they do, when they know about a
businesses,         breach? How can data breaches be prevented?
organizations, and
medical systems.    What happens to governments when hackers break into their systems? What kind of
                    information is stolen? How is the information used? What should governments do when
Problem: Data       they know about a breach? How can data breaches be prevented?
breaches harm
governments.

TABLE 6.4 Focusing on a Topic

Sample Proposal Topics

The following broad topics are potentially suitable as a start for a proposal. Choose one of these or one of your
own, and ask the exploring questions. Then look at your responses, and ask focusing questions. Continue to
focus until you have a specific problem that you can discuss in sufficient depth and offer a concrete solution or
solutions.

  · Health fields: cost of medical and dental care for uninsured people, management of chronic conditions
      and diseases, infection control, vaccinations, access to mental health care, drug use and addiction, sports
      injuries, workplace safety

  · Education: gaps in academic achievement, curriculum, recruitment and retention of staff and/or
      students, buildings and grounds, graduation rates, cocurricular activities

  · Environment: forest management and fires, hurricanes and other extreme storms, water and air
      pollution, sustainable development, invasive species, waste management, recycling and composting,
      community gardening

  · Engineering and computer science: robotics, vehicles and transportation, digital divide, online privacy,
      misinformation and misbehavior on social media, video games

  · Business and manufacturing: quality improvement, process improvement, cost control, communication,
      social media, pay equity, fundraising, sourcing of materials, net-zero energy processes, workplace safety

  · Policy and politics: public institutions, such as public schools, libraries, transportation systems, and
      parks; taxes, fees, and services; donations to political campaigns; healthcare, such as Medicare and
      Medicaid; social security; unemployment insurance; services for active military and veterans;
      immigration policy

  · Society and culture: social media and free speech; inequality in housing, employment, education, and
      more; cancel culture; bullying; wealth and poverty; support for the arts; athletes and sports; disparities
      related to race, sex, gender identity and expression, age, and/or ability

Gathering Information

Proposals are rooted in information and evidence; therefore, most proposal assignments require you to
conduct research. Depending on your assignment, you may need to do formal research, an activity that
involves finding sources and evaluating them for reliability, reading them carefully and taking notes, and citing
all words you quote and ideas you borrow. See Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and
Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources for detailed instruction on
conducting research. If you are proposing a solution to a problem in your local community or on your campus,
you may need to conduct primary research as well, such as a survey or interviews with people who live or work
there.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                 6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 189

Whether you conduct in-depth research or do background reading, keep track of the ideas that come to you
and the information you learn. You can write or dictate notes using an app on your phone or computer, or you
can jot notes in a journal if you prefer pen and paper. Then, when you are ready to begin to organize what you
have learned, you will have a record of your thoughts and information. Always track the source of the
information you gather, whether from your reading or a person you interviewed, so that you can return to that
source if you need more information and can credit the source in your paper.

Kinds of Evidence

You will use evidence to demonstrate that the problem is real and worthy of being solved and that your
recommended solution is workable. Choose evidence for your proposal that is rooted in facts. In addition,
choose evidence that best supports the angle you take on your topic and meets your instructor's requirements.
Cite all evidence you use from a source. Consider the following kinds of evidence and examples of each:

  · Definition: an explanation of a key word, idea, or concept.

     The Personal Data Notification & Protection Act of 2017 defines a security breach as "a compromise of the
     security, confidentiality, or integrity of, or the loss of, computerized data that results in... (i) the
     unauthorized acquisition of sensitive personally identifiable information; or (ii) access to sensitive
     personally identifiable information that is for an unauthorized purpose, or in excess of authorization."

  · Example: an illustration of an idea or concept.

     Every month, university staff members receive a fake phishing email from the IT department. The goal is
     to train employees of the university to be critical readers of every email they receive.

  · Expert opinion: a statement by a professional whose opinion is respected in the field.

     In The Sixth Extinction, science writer Elizabeth Kolbert observes that humans are making the choice
     about "which evolutionary pathways will remain and open and which will be forever closed" (268).

  · Fact: information that is true and can be proven correct or accurate. Statements of fact are built on
      evidence and data.

     In March and April of 2020, 43 states in the United States issued orders directing residents to stay home
     except for essential activities.

  · Interview: a person-to-person, phone, or remote conversation that involves an interviewer posing
      questions to another person or group of people.

     During an interview, I asked about parents' decisions to vaccinate their children. One pediatrician said,
     "The majority of parents see the benefits of immunizations for their children and for public health. For
     those who don't, I talk to them and try to understand why they feel the way they do."

  · Quotation: the exact words of an author or speaker.

     According to the Federal Aviation Administration, SpaceX was required to conduct a "comprehensive
     review of the company's safety culture, operational decision-making, and process discipline," in addition
     to investigating the crash of its prototype spacecraft (Chang).

  · Statistics: numerical fact or item of data.

     According to the Environmental Protection Agency, more than 40 million tons of food waste were
     generated in 2017, comprising 15.2% of all trash sent to landfills (DeSilver).

  · Survey: a structured interview in which respondents are all asked the same questions and their answers
      are tabulated and interpreted. Surveys reveal attitudes, beliefs, or habits of the general public or segments
      of the population.
190 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

In a survey of adults conducted in July 2020, 64 percent of respondents said that social media have a
mostly negative effect on American society (Auxier).

· Visuals and other media: graphs, figures, tables, photographs, diagrams, charts, maps, videos, audio

                       recordings, etc.                                           end s
s

              Thesis and Organization

Drafting a Thesis                                       end s

When you have a solid grasp of the problem and solution, try drafting a thesis. A thesis is the main idea that
you will convey in your proposal and to which all the paragraphs in the paper should relate. In a proposal, you
will likely express this main idea in a thesis statement of one or two sentences toward the end of the
introduction.

For example, in the thesis statement Shawn Krukowski wrote for his proposal on climate change, he identifies
the problem and previews the solutions he presents:

What is needed to slow climate change is unified action in two key areas--mitigation and adaptation--spurred
by government leadership in the United States and a global commitment to addressing the problem
immediately.

Here is another example that identifies a problem and multiple solutions:

The number of women employed in the IT field is decreasing every year, a trend that can be changed with a
multifaceted approach that includes initiatives in middle schools, high schools, and colleges; active
recruitment; mentoring programs; and flexible work arrangements.

After you draft a thesis statement, ask these questions and revise it as needed:

· Is it engaging? A thesis for a proposal should pique readers' interest in the problem and possible solutions.
· Is it precise and specific? If you are interested in curbing the spread of invasive plant species, for example,

   your thesis should indicate which environment the plant or plants are invading and that you are proposing
   ways to stop the spread.

Organizing Your Ideas

A proposal has a recognizable shape, starting with an introduction, followed by discussions of the problem,
possible solutions, potential objections to the solutions, and a conclusion with a recommendation. A graphic
organizer like Table 6.5 can help you organize your ideas and evidence.

Proposal Section                                               Content                                             Your
                                                                                                                   Notes

Introduction (usually one                Draw readers in with an overview. Provide necessary background here
paragraph, but can be two)               or in the description of the problem, defining terms as needed.

                                         State the thesis.

Description of the Problem (one          Explain the problem, establishing it as a problem in need of a solution.
or more paragraphs)                      Develop the paragraph(s) with evidence.

TABLE 6.5 Proposal Organization

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                               6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 191

   Proposal Section                                             Content                                       Your
                                                                                                              Notes

   Possible Solution or Solutions Describe possible solutions, one at a time.

s  (one or more paragraphs)         Develop the paragraph(s) with evidence.

                                    Explain objections readers are likely to raise to the solutions given in
                                                                               underline
   Objections (one or more          the previous paragraph(s).
   paragraphs)
                                    Develop the paragraph(s) with evidence.
   Conclusion and                                          eennddusnderline
   Recommendations (one or
   more paragraphs)                 Conclude with a summary of the points and recommend a solution or a
                                    course of action.

   TABLE 6.5 Proposal Organization

   Drafting a Proposal

   With a tentative thesis, an organization plan, and evidence, you are ready to begin drafting your proposal. For
   this assignment, you will discuss a problem, present possible solutions, address objections to the solutions,
   and conclude with a recommendation.

   Introduction

   You may choose to write the introduction first, last, or midway through the drafting process. Whenever you
   choose to write it, use it to draw readers in. Make the proposal topic clear, and be concise. End the introduction
   with your thesis statement.

   Opening a proposal with an overview of your topic is a reliable strategy, as shown in the following student-
   written example on women working in IT. The thesis statement, which appeared earlier in this section, is
   underlined:

         People who work in the information technology (IT) field often start their careers fixing computers and other
         electronic devices for others. Through experience and education, an IT worker's career path can branch out to
         specialize in everything from programming new software to setting up and maintaining networks. The IT field is
         growing because of the constant development of technology, and the demand for employees also is growing.
         Yet the number of women employed in the IT field is decreasing every year, a trend that can be changed with a
         multifaceted approach that includes initiatives in middle schools, high schools, and colleges; active
         recruitment; mentoring programs; and flexible work arrangements.

   Body Paragraphs: Problem, Solutions, Objections

   The body paragraphs of your proposal should present the problem, the solution or solutions, and potential
   objections to the proposed solution(s). As you write these paragraphs, consider using the point, evidence, and
   analysis pattern:

     · The point is the central idea of the paragraph, usually given in a topic sentence stated in your own words at
         or toward beginning of the paragraph.

     · With the evidence you provide, you develop the paragraph and support the point given in the topic
         sentence. Include details, examples, quotations, paraphrases, and summaries from sources. In your
         sentences and paragraphs, synthesize the evidence you give by showing the connections between sources.
         See Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric and Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of
            192 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

                       Rhetoric with Evidence for more information on quoting, summarizing, paraphrasing, and synthesizing.
                   · The analysis comes at the end of the paragraph. In your own words, draw a conclusion about the evidence

                       you have provided and relate it to the topic sentence.

                 The paragraphs that follow show the point-evidence-analysis pattern in practice.
s

                 Body Paragraphs: Problem

                 Follow the introduction with a discussion of the problem. Using paragraph structure, define the problem and
                 discuss it, drawing on evidence from your sources. This paragraph (or paraegnradpshs) should answer these
                 questions: What is the problem? Why is this a problem? The following example, from the proposal on women
                 working in IT, answers the first question:

                        The information technology (IT) field is continuously expanding, with many more positions available than
                                             end s

                        workers to fill them. In fact, the pool of IT professionals was so small that in 2001, Congress raised the visa
                                                                                                                                                             end s

                        limit in an effort to fill the gap with employees from overseas (Varma, 2002). And yet the number of women
                        represented in the occupation is decreasing. From 1990 to 2020, the percentage of women in IT declined from
                        31 percent to 25 percent, even though women make up 47 percent of all employed adults in the United States.
                        According to White (2021), only 19 percent of women pursue a computer science major in college, compared to
                        27 percent in 1997. Of those women who graduated with a computer science degree, 38 percent are working in
                        the field compared to 56 percent of men, a statistic that indicates women are not staying in the field. Although
                        gender diversity supposedly is valued in the workplace, the underrepresentation of women in IT is clearly a
                        problem.

                 The writer then goes on to answer the second question: Why is this a problem? The writer discusses
                 stereotypes, lack of encouragement and role models, workplace culture, pay, and prospects for advancement
                 (not shown here).

                 Body Paragraphs: Solutions

                 After presenting and explaining the problem, use specific information from the sources you consulted to
                 present the solution or solutions you have discovered through your research. If you are proposing more than
                 one solution, present them one at a time, using headings as appropriate.

                 The solutions section will likely be the longest part of your proposal. Below are two paragraphs from the
                 proposal about women working in IT. Note how the first paragraph introduces the solutions and how the
                 second paragraph uses evidence to develop the first proposed solution. Also note the informative boldface
                 headings.

                        The following suggestions are ways to encourage women to enter IT and build their careers, with the eventual
                        goal of achieving gender balance in the field. The solutions discussed include encouraging interest in computer
                        technology among girls in middle school and high school, actively recruiting college-age women to study IT, and
                        within the field, mentoring women and expanding workplace flexibility to improve retention.

                        The National Center for Women & Information Technology (NCWIT) is an organization that encourages girls in
                        middle school and high school to explore their interest in IT. One program, the NCWIT's Aspirations in
                        Computing, supports women in high school by showing them that they can succeed in technology and
                        introducing them to other students with similar interests. The same program matches middle-school girls with
                        female high-school and college students and awards scholarships for computing and programming
                        competitions. In addition, internships and IT courses in middle school and high school provide opportunities to
                        learn what a career in IT entails, with or without a degree in IT. Opportunities like these give girls and women
                        support and a sense of belonging.

                 The paragraphs that follow (not shown here) continue the discussion of the possible solutions.

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                             6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 193

   Body Paragraphs: Objections

   Depending on the problem and solution, consider the objections readers may raise, and explain why your

   proposal is necessary and worthwhile. For example, the proposal on women in IT does not discuss objections

   because few people would object to the writer's proposal. Shawn Krukowski, however, in his proposal on

s  climate change, includes a section on objections to taking action. He focuses the discusseionnd son people who

   deny that climate change is a problem. Would you do the same? Consider whether this section of Shawn's

   proposal might have been steronndgser had he addressed objections to the solutions he proposed--mitigation and

   adaptation--instead of objections to the problem.         end s

                                end s

   Despite scientific evidence, some people and groups deny that climate change is real or, if they admit it exists,

   insist it is not a valid concern. Those who think climate change is not a problem point to Earth's millennia-long

   history of changing climate as evidence that life has always persisted. Most of the change, however, predates

   human civilization, which has benefited from thousands of years of stable climate. The rapid change since the

   Industrial Revolution is unprecedented in human history.

   Those who deny climate change or its dangers seek primarily to relax or remove pollution standards and
   regulations in order to protect, or maximize profit from, their industries. To date, their lobbying has been
   successful. For example, the world's fossil-fuel industry received $5.3 trillion in 2015 alone, while the U.S.
   wind-energy industry received $12.3 billion in subsidies between 2000 and 2020 (Green America, 2020).

   Conclusion and Recommendation

   The conclusion and recommendation section of your proposal is the part in which you interpret your findings
   and make a recommendation or give a call to action. At this point, focus on the solution that will best solve the
   problem, suggesting or summarizing specific actions.

   Below is the recommendation section from the proposal about women in IT. In the full conclusion (not shown
   here), the writer summarizes the main points of the proposal. In the recommendation paragraph that follows,
   the writer calls for specific actions:

         Many researchers have studied why few women choose IT as a career and why some decide to leave the field.
         Although the numbers cannot be improved immediately, the following changes in school and the workplace
         could recruit and retain more women in IT:

     · Include technology education courses and formal IT programs in middle- and high-school curricula to
         give girls and young women opportunities to develop an interest at an early age.

     · Develop internship and mentor programs in high schools and colleges to combat stereotyping and
         encourage women to enter the field.

     · Develop and encourage workplace mentor programs, flexible work options, and open communication for
         professional growth and retention.

         With time and effort, these actions may result in more women seeing themselves in long-term IT careers.

   References or Works Cited Page

   Including any data you gathered through primary research, such as a survey you created and administered,
   interviews you conducted, or observational notes you took, you must cite the sources you consulted. These
   sources appear in the text of your proposal and in a bibliography at the end. The paragraphs in the previous
   section, including Shawn Krukowski's proposal, use APA documentation style. For more on documenting
   sources, see Index and Guide to Documentation, MLA Documentation and Format, and APA Documentation
   and Format.

   Abstract or Executive Summary

   An abstract (or executive summary) summarizes your proposal. The purpose is to present information briefly
   194 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

   and economically so that readers can decide whether they want to read further. Include your main points, but
   not the evidence.

   Although an abstract or executive summary comes first in a proposal, it is advisable to write it after you have

   completed your proposal and are certain of your main points. The example below is the abstract from the

s  proposal about women in IT.

   The purpose of this proposal is to raise awareness of the small number of women working in the information

   technology (IT) field, to examine the factors that contribute to discouraging women from entering IT, and to

   propose ways to draw women into the field and retain them. Although the IT field is growing, the number of

   women employed within it remains low. Women may be reluctant to pursue a career in IT because of

   stereotypes, few role models, and lack of encouragement. Women who have already established a career in IT

   report leaving the field for these reasons, as well as family responsibilities and lack of advancement. There are

   several potential ways to raise the number of women in IT. Encouraging interest in computer technology among

   girls in middle  school  and      high  school,  recruiting  college-age  women  to  study  IT,  mentoring  young  professional
        end s

   women, and improving workplace flexibility will, over time, break down stereotypes and increase the number of

   women in the IT field.

        Peer Review: Getting Feedback from Readers

   With a complete draft in hand, you may engage in peer review with your classmates, giving feedback to each
   other about the strengths and weaknesses of your drafts. For peer review within a class, your instructor may
   provide a list of questions or a form for you to complete as you work together.

   Conferencing in Writing Groups

   Other people can provide feedback on your writing beside your classmates. If you have an on-campus writing
   center, it is well worth your time to make an online or in-person appointment with a tutor at any point in your
   writing process. You will get valuable comments and improve your ability to review your own writing.

   Another way to get fresh eyes on your writing is to ask a friend or family member to read your draft. To get
   useful feedback, provide a list of questions or a form such as the one shown in Table 6.6 for them to complete
   as they read.

                                           Question for Reviewer                                                       Comment
                                                                                                                            or

                                                                                                                      Suggestion

   Does the introduction interest you in the problem?

   Can you find the thesis statement? Underline it for the writer.

   Does the thesis state the problem and suggest that a solution will be proposed?

   Can you identify a paragraph or paragraphs that define and explain a problem?

   Can you identify a paragraph or paragraphs that propose one or more solutions to the problem?

   Does the writer address possible objections to the solution or solutions? If not, are there objections
   the writer should consider?

   Does each paragraph start with a point stated in the writer's own words, and does that point relate
   to the thesis? Mark paragraphs that don't have a clear point.

   TABLE 6.6 Peer Review Questions

   Access for free at openstax.org.
6.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Proposal 195

                                                     Question for Reviewer                         Comment
                                                                                                        or
 Does each paragraph support the main point of the paragraph with details and evidence, such as
 facts, statistics, or examples? Mark paragraphs that need more support and/or explanation.       Suggestion
 Does each paragraph end with analysis, in the writer's own words, that draws a conclusion? Mark
 paragraphs that need analysis.
 Is there a clear conclusion that makes a recommendation and connects to the thesis statement?
 Where do you get lost or confused? Mark anything that is unclear.
 Does the proposal flow from one point to the next?
 Does the essay have a clear, descriptive title?
TABLE 6.6 Peer Review Questions

Revising Your Proposal

A strong college paper is rarely written in a single draft, so build in time to revise your work. Take time with
the comments you receive from your readers, and read your own work with a critical eye.

FIGURE 6.8 Whether you choose to do all your work on a computer or do some by hand, writing is nonetheless
recursive, and revising is a major part of the process. (credit: Geschäftsfrau sitzt am Laptop und schreibt auf
Notizblock mit Stift by Ivan Radic/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Responding to Reviewers' Feedback

When you receive feedback from readers--whether from your instructor, your classmates, a writing tutor, or
someone else--read each comment carefully to understand what the reader is communicating. Do your best
not to become defensive, and be open to suggestions for improvement. Remind yourself that your readers are
trying to help. As someone who hasn't thought about your proposal as much as you have, a new reader can
often see strengths and weaknesses that you cannot. Analyze each response, and decide whether acting on a
suggestion will make your writing better. Remember that you remain the author, and you make the final call on
your writing.

As you read, keep track of the comments your readers make. Pay special attention to strengths and
196 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

       weaknesses that more than one reader identifies. Use that information to improve later assignments as well as
       your proposal.

       Revising on Your Own

       The following revising strategies can help you read your draft critically and carefully:

         · Read your draft aloud. Read the entire text from the beginning slowly and carefully, marking spots that
             need revision. Reading in this way allows you to see areas that need clarification, explanation, or
             development that you may have missed when you wrote the first draft. You can also have someone read
             your draft aloud to you.

         · Make a paragraph outline. The most common unit of thought in writing is the paragraph, a group of
             sentences set off from other groups because they focus on a single idea. Writing a paragraph outline
             creates a map of your whole paper that can help you determine whether the organization is effective or
             needs changing. Number each paragraph and write a phrase describing its topic or focus. Check that each
             paragraph has a topic sentence that states the main idea of the paragraph.

         · Test your evidence. Check whether each piece of evidence is factual and supports the main idea of the
             paragraph. Check that each piece of evidence is introduced, woven into your sentences, and cited.

         · Listen for your voice. In most college papers, your language should sound like a real person. If your
             instructor requires a formal style for the assignment, the language should be objective and in third-
             person point of view.

         · Let go if you need to. View change as good. Learn to let go of words, sentences, paragraphs, and maybe
             even your entire first draft. Sometimes the best way to revise is to start fresh. The knowledge you have
             built in writing a first draft will serve you well if you need to start over.

         · Create a new file for each revision. Each time you revise a draft, save the new version with a new file
             name so that you don't lose your previous work. That way, you can return to an earlier version of your draft
             if you are not happy with the revision.

         · Edit and proofread. When you are satisfied with the overall shape of your paper, reread it once again to
             check for sentence-level errors in grammar, punctuation, spelling, and source citations.

      Taking It Public: Publishing or Presenting Your Proposal

       Publishing is a final step in the writing process. You may want to consider publishing your full proposal in your
       campus newspaper (or rewriting it as a letter to the editor) if your topic is related to your school. Or you may
       want to present it to an organization or committee on campus that can help you make your solution a reality. If
       your topic is related to the community in which you live, consider submitting your proposal to the local
       newspaper or presenting it at a city council meeting. (Note that if you decide to present your proposal orally,
       you'll need to figure out in advance the procedure for speaking or getting on a meeting agenda.) If your topic is
       more general and involves substantial research, consider submitting your proposal to one of these journals
       that publish undergraduate research work in all fields:

         · American Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/americanjournalofugreasearch)
         · Midwest Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/midwestjournalugreasearch)
         · PURSUE Undergraduate Research Journal (https://openstax.org/r/pursuejournalugreasearch)

     6.6 Editing Focus: Subject-Verb Agreement

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify subjects and verbs in sentences.
         · Distinguish between subjects and verbs that agree and those that do not.

       Readers of formal documents such as proposals expect writers to be aware of the conventions of grammar and
       punctuation. One such convention is subject-verb agreement.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                             6.6 · Editing Focus: Subject-Verb Agreement 197

The subject of a sentence names something. The predicate contains the verb, which expresses an action, an
occurrence, or a state of being. The subject and verb in a sentence must agree. In standard English,
"agreement" means that a singular subject must have a singular verb (The buunsdeeldenroalduivnubeelnseediunendrflididvneeoreumlibnilneuutneds)earlnindea
plural subject must have a plural verb (The buunsdeesrelldiennoadeuvubelneiendudefnirdvldieoneumrebliilnneeuutneds)e.rHlionweever, some English dialects omit
the -s ending for singular verbs or use a singular verb with a plural subject: The munadneeadrnlsoidknueeubfnolnerddhudeenroldupineb. rePllerinouepnedretryliunnederline
taxesewdnoadusubrlnaeidsueenrdldielneanresdltindyeouarb.le underline
Subject-verb agreement gets tricky in several sentence constructions, which are described below. To check for
subject-verb agreement in your writing, proofread your final draft by finding each subject and verb. Then use
the following questions to test whether the subject and verb agree. For more on subject-verb agreement, see
Verbs.
Is the subject compound? Two or more subjects joined by and take a plural verb in most sentences:

      Bunasdkeertlibnaell and wrestlingeadnrodeuemubnlneyddufdeanorvludoinebrrielteleinusenpdoerrtsli.ne
However, when the parts of the subject form a single idea or unit, the verb is singular:

      Runedebreliannes and riceeidnsoedmunubydlnefddaouveunorblrdiilneteerulmindeaelr.line
      Tuenndedrolilnlaerseidnsoedeunnubdolneuddgouehunrbldmilneeoreulnineydeeforlrinluench.
When compound subjects are joined by or or nor, the verb should agree with the word closest to it:
      Either your uncles or your munodtehrelrinerdneodmuubelnmedbueenrrldisneeyrenolidunrdegoruabnledmunodtherelri'nsegumbo recipe.
      Either your mother or your uncdleersleirdnneoedmuubelnmedbueenrrldieynenoredluinrdegoruabnledmunodtherelri'nsegumbo recipe.
Do other words come between the subject and verb? The verb must agree with the subject even when words
and phrases come between them:
      The purnidcereolnifndtehuensdeesrhlionees at all stores idsoeuunnbdbledeoluiuenvbdaleebrluein. deerline
      A suunidtcearslienecenodntuanindienrglinswe eaters, coats, and jackets wdoausbefnoleudundndoduienbrltehineuenstdrerelti.ne
Does the verb come before the subject? The subject and verb must agree even when the verb comes before
the subject:
      AdoreuebDunlnaedndudeineorldluaienbarelnleidnueJnudleiarnlinaewnadituinngdeartltihne restaurant?
      There wdoeurebeltenhudrendedodueuornblgdilnseeeeriunlnidntdheueenrlydianererdli,naell barking at the same time.
      In my pocket adroeueabnlwuednauddlnoleudrteblairlnneliednuetnwdoerpleinnes.end underline
Is the subject an indefinite pronoun, such as everyone? Indefinite pronouns do not refer to specific people or
things. Most indefinite pronouns take a singular verb, but not all.
The indefinite pronouns that take a singular verb include anybody, anyone, anything, each, either, everybody,
everyone, everything, neither, nobody, no one, nothing, one, somebody, someone, and something.
      Eunvedreyrolinneeeonndtuhnedteearmlinpdeoraucbtlieceusneadnleldrsldeinoauseobnle. underline
      Nuneditehrelrineoenfdthuenwdeidrelinreceivers fdeoeulsbelrenedaudndydoefuorbrllietnheuensdeearsloinneto end.
These indefinite pronouns take a plural verb: both, few, many, others, and several.
      Suenvdeerralilneonefdthuenadtehrlleitnees on the team cdoomubeleefnruodnmddoethurelbinlseeaumnedheriglihneschool.
      Bunotdheerwnlidndeunredceerilvineres hdoavuebeleenxducendldoleeunrbltilnseteuatnsd. erline
A few indefinite pronouns take a singular or plural verb depending on whether the word they refer to is
singular or plural. These include all, any, enough, more, most, none, and some. With these pronouns, use a
198 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

       singular or plural verb that fits the context of your sentence.
             Aunlldeonefrdtlhiunenesdeesrtluindents tdaokuebealnetdluednaodsuteborlnlieneuecnladsesrliinnsecience or math. (plural)
             Munodseteronlfidnheiusnwdoerklinidseoeounrbdigledinouaunlb.dl(eesriulningudeelarrli)ne

       Is the subject a collective noun? Collective nouns, such as audience, band, class, crowd, family, group, or
       team, can take a singular or a plural verb depending on the context. When group members act individually, use
       a plural verb. Writers often add the word members for clarity. When the group acts as a single unit, which is the
       most common construction, use a singular verb:

             The buannddeerrdlneiondhueeubalnerdsuensrledeinevdrelridnyoeTuhbulersudnadye. rline
             The union (members) still disagree on the contract terms.

      Practice Subject-Verb Agreement

       Select the correct verb to complete each sentence.
        1. Under the table ________ his slippers and socks. (is, are)
        2. The choir usually ________ in the auditorium. (meets, meet)
        3. Some of the actors ________ two roles. (performs, perform)
        4. Some of this song ________ familiar. (sounds, sound)
        5. Either my brother or my sisters ________ the keys to the truck. (has, have)
        6. ________ Whitney and her friend need a ride to the station? (does, do)
        7. The situation concerning the reports and their authors ________ under investigation. (is, are)
        8. Fifteen dollars and 40 cents ________ the amount of change she received. (is, are)

     6.7 Evaluation: Conventions, Clarity, and Coherence

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Evaluate and implement formal feedback on all aspects of your writing.
         · Reflect on another reader's response to the rhetorical choices you made as a writer.
       When you have revised and edited your proposal, ask a friend or classmate to read and evaluate the final draft
       using the following rubric, which is similar to one your instructor might use. The rubric is designed to be a
       critical review based on the instruction and suggestions given in this chapter. At the end of the rubric is a
       section for your reader to offer additional comments. Read feedback closely, reflecting on suggestions and
       asking any questions you have. Then read your paper again, implementing the feedback you find helpful to
       revise.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                          6.7 · Evaluation: Conventions, Clarity, and Coherence 199

Rubric

Narrowing a   Focusing Questions
  Problem

5             The text always adheres     The introduction sparks interest and       The proposal topic
Skillful      to the "Editing Focus" of   leads expertly to the thesis. Problem-     demonstrates a superior
              this chapter: subject-verb  and- solution paragraphs have a            understanding of purpose.
              agreement as discussed      central point and are developed fully;     The proposal itself shows
              in Section 6.6. The text    the recommendation is appropriate.         expert awareness of
              also shows ample            Evidence is integrated smoothly and        audience, context, and
              evidence of the writer's    skillfully into sentences; transitions     community expectations.
              intent to consciously       clearly connect ideas and evidence.        The presentation is highly
              meet or challenge           The language is consistently clear and     appropriate to the content.
              conventional                appropriate.                               The writer's voice is
              expectations in                                                        consistently objective and
              rhetorically effective                                                 trustworthy.
              ways.

4             The text usually adheres    The introduction sparks interest and       The proposal topic
Accomplished  to the "Editing Focus" of   leads smoothly to the thesis.              demonstrates
              this chapter: subject-verb  Problem-and- solution paragraphs           understanding of purpose.
              agreement as discussed      have a central point and are               The proposal itself shows
              in Section 6.6. The text    developed adequately; the                  awareness of audience,
              also shows some             recommendation is appropriate.             context, and community
              evidence of the writer's    Evidence is integrated smoothly into       expectations. The
              intent to consciously       most sentences; transitions make           presentation is appropriate
              meet or challenge           some connections among ideas and           to the content. The writer's
              conventional                evidence. The language is usually          voice is sufficiently
              expectations in             clear and appropriate.                     objective and trustworthy.
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

3             The text generally          The introduction is somewhat               The proposal topic
Capable       adheres to the "Editing     interesting; the transition to the         demonstrates some
              Focus" of this chapter:     thesis could be smoother. Problem-         understanding of purpose.
              subject-verb agreement      and-solution paragraphs have a             The proposal itself shows
              as discussed in Section     central point but are marginally           some awareness of
              6.6. The text also shows    developed; the recommendation is           audience, context, and
              limited evidence of the     fairly clear. Evidence is integrated into  community expectations.
              writer's intent to          sentences inconsistently; the              The presentation is mostly
              consciously meet or         connections among ideas and                appropriate to the content.
              challenge conventional      evidence are inconsistent. Language        The writer's voice strays
              expectations in             may be confusing or inappropriate at       occasionally from
              rhetorically effective      times.                                     objectivity and
              ways.                                                                  trustworthiness.

TABLE 6.7
200 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

Narrowing a  Focusing Questions
  Problem

2            The text occasionally                      The introduction may be mildly         The proposal topic
Developing   adheres to the "Editing                    interesting; the transition to the     demonstrates a weak
             Focus" of this chapter:                    thesis is lacking. Problem-and-        understanding of purpose.
             subject-verb agreement                     solution paragraphs often lack a       The proposal itself shows
             as discussed in Section                    central point and are poorly           minimal awareness of
             6.6. The text also shows                   developed; the recommendation is       audience, context, and
             emerging evidence of the                   weak. Evidence is poorly integrated    community expectations.
             writer's intent to                         into sentences, with few connections   The presentation is
             consciously meet or                        among ideas and evidence. The          somewhat appropriate to
             challenge conventional                     language is often confusing or         the content. The writer's
             expectations in                            inappropriate.                         voice is only occasionally
             rhetorically effective                                                            objective and trustworthy.
             ways.

1            The text does not adhere                   The introduction may be mildly         The proposal topic
Beginning    to the "Editing Focus" of                  interesting; no discernible thesis is  demonstrates little or no
             this chapter: subject-verb                 stated. Problem-and-solution           understanding of purpose.
             agreement as discussed                     paragraphs lack a central point and    The proposal itself shows
             in Section 6.6. The text                   are undeveloped; the                   little or no awareness of
             also shows little to no                    recommendation is either               audience, context, and
             evidence of the writer's                   inappropriate or absent. Evidence is   community expectations.
             intent to consciously                      not integrated into sentences; there   The presentation is
             meet or challenge                          are no clear connections among ideas   inappropriate to the
             conventional                               and the minimal amount of evidence     content. The writer's voice
             expectations in                            that is present. The language is       is neither objective nor
             rhetorically effective                     confusing or inappropriate.            trustworthy.
             ways.

TABLE 6.7

6.8 Spotlight on ... Technical Writing as a Career

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe technical writing as a career path.
  · Explore the field of technical writing in greater depth.

If you like science and technical fields and you like to write, you may want to explore technical writing as a
career path. Technical writers usually have a degree in English, journalism, or communication. Often, they
also have knowledge, college coursework, or a degree in a specialized field such as computer science,
engineering, medicine, biology, agriculture, and other technical fields, such as manufacturing, construction,
welding, and plumbing; however, companies will usually train technical writers on the subject needed and the
style in which the writers they employ need to write.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                      6.8 · Spotlight on ... Technical Writing as a Career 201

FIGURE 6.9 Technical writers create a variety of content, including texts such as detailed procedural guides and
various government publications. Though technical writers often face tight deadlines, they usually have flexibility in
their working environments. (credit: "Woman working behind computer" by Pxhere/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
Although the work varies depending on the industry, organization, and specific position, technical writers
typically perform the following tasks:

  · Create content. Technical writers create an array of documents, such as product information, operating
      and assembly instructions, "how-to" and "owner's" manuals, technical documentation, business
      proposals (solicited and unsolicited), lists of frequently asked questions (FAQs), grant proposals, and
      journal articles. (For more on how to write a business proposal, which contains specific sections that often
     are not included in an academic proposal paper, see the OpenStax Business Communications text.)

  · Research. Technical writers conduct research to gather the information they need to write accurate,
      professional, and helpful content.

  · Edit. Technical writers edit and standardize content prepared by other writers in their organization.
  · Adapt content for multiple platforms. Technical writers create paper-based and digital content, using

      text, graphics, images, sound, and video to be distributed across different platforms, including an
      organization's website and social media.
In addition, technical writers develop and use the following skills:
  · Writing. Technical writers spend extended periods of time in front of a computer writing complicated
      information in clear and concise language.
  · Audience awareness. Technical writers are highly aware of the audience for their writing. They plan,
      organize, and distribute the content they create with their readers, viewers, and users in mind.
  · Communication and collaboration. Technical writers typically work on teams and collaborate with
      technical experts, coworkers, and clients.
  · Problem-solving. Technical writers often need to figure out how something works in order to write
      documents their audience can understand.
  · Time management. Technical writers often work on multiple projects with tight deadlines. Setting
      priorities to keep projects on track is a key skill.
To learn more about technical writing as a career, including average pay, employment outlook, and more, see
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook (https://openstax.org/r/
occupationaloutlookhandbook). You can also read job descriptions and search for internship opportunities at
job sites such as Indeed, Monster, or Snagajob.
202 6 · Proposal: Writing About Problems and Solutions

     6.9 Portfolio: Reflecting on Problems and Solutions

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Reflect in writing on the development of your writing process.
         · Reflect in writing on how the writing process affected your work.
         · Reflect in writing on your objectivity as a writer.
       As you complete your proposal, think critically about your writing process. Reflect on what you created from
       the first steps of discovering ideas to the last steps of writing and editing the final draft.

      Reflecting on Your Proposal

       Respond to the following questions to reflect on your writing process for your proposal:
         · How did you choose the problem you wrote about? Did you have to narrow or expand it?
         · What methods did you use to gather ideas about the problem and possible solutions? What outside sources
             did you consult for information?
         · How did you settle on your thesis? Did you rewrite it multiple times?
         · What strategies did you use to organize the information for your proposal?
         · What strategies did you use to develop paragraphs? What difficulties, if any, did you encounter?
         · Were you satisfied with the recommendation(s) you made and how you ended the proposal?
         · How challenging was it for you to adopt an objective stance? How did you adapt your language as you
             drafted and revised your proposal?
         · How did input from peers and other readers affect your drafting and revising processes? What specific
             constructive criticism did you receive that helped you?
         · In what ways was this proposal easier or harder to write than other papers you have written?
         · What could you have done differently to make writing your proposal easier or more effective?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                        6 · Further Reading 203

Further Reading

These texts might be useful for you when writing proposals.

Ann, Lee, et al. "Research Proposal: The Association Between Serum Vitamin D Levels and Childhood Obesity."
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC, 1 May 2020, http://www.cdc.gov/rdc/data/b3/
    SampleProposal.pdf.

Johnson-Sheehan, Richard. Writing Proposals. Pearson, 2007.

Pinkert, Laurie A. "Writing Reports, Proposals, and Technical Documents." Purdue Online Writing Lab, Purdue
    University, https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/subject_specific_writing/professional_technical_writing/
    technical_reports_and_report_abstracts/reports_proposals_and_technical_papers.html.

RaiseMe. "Technical Writers: Salary, Career Path, Job Outlook, Education, and More." Raise.me,
    https://www.raise.me/careers/media-and-communication/technical-writers.

Skopinski, T. H., and Katherine G. Johnson. "Determination of Azimuth Angle at Burnout for Placing a Satellite
   Over a Selected Earth Position." NTRS--NASA Technical Reports Server, NASA, 1 Sept. 1960,
    http://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19980227091.

Works Cited

Gawande, Atul. The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right. Picador, 2009.

Shetterly, Margot Lee. Hidden Figures: The American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women
   Mathematicians Who Helped Win the Space Race. William Morrow, 2016.

Varma, Roli. "Women in Information Technology: A Case Study of Undergraduate Students in a Minority-
   Serving Institution." Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, vol. 22, no. 4, 2002, pp. 274-282.
    www.unm.edu/~varma/print/BSTS_Women%20in%20IT.pdf.

White, Sarah K. "Women in Tech Statistics: The Hard Truths of an Uphill Battle." CIO, IDG Communications, 8
    Mar. 2021, www.cio.com/article/3516012/women-in-tech-statistics-the-hard-truths-of-an-uphill-
    battle.html.
204 6 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Recommend It? Evaluation or Review: Would You 7

FIGURE 7.1 One of the most common types of reviews are film reviews. With their wide appeal, films are reviewed
by professional critics and everyday people alike. The influential critics Gene Siskel (1946-1999) and Roger Ebert
(1942-2013) would give "two thumbs up" to a film they both recommended, and the website Rotten Tomatoes
takes the reviews of moviegoers to label a film "rotten" for bad or "fresh" for good. (credit: "Game Design Expo
2011 Open House" by Vancouver Film School/ flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

7.1 Thumbs Up or Down?
7.2 Review Trailblazer: Michiko Kakutani
7.3 Glance at Genre: Criteria, Evidence, Evaluation
7.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Black Representation in Film" by Caelia Marshall
7.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment
7.6 Editing Focus: Quotations
7.7 Evaluation: Effect on Audience
7.8 Spotlight on ... Language and Culture
7.9 Portfolio: What the Arts Say About You
INTRODUCTION You have likely visited an unfamiliar city or neighborhood. When you aren't in familiar
surroundings, what do you do if you want to find something to eat or do for fun? You probably open your phone
and search on Yelp, TripAdvisor, Google, or another app or website dedicated to providing film reviews, or
critical appraisals. Even when closer to home, many people, whether looking for a unique local restaurant, a
206 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

       new hiking trail, or an auto mechanic, may base their decisions on online reviews.

       You may even have written a review of a product or service and posted it online yourself. In your review, you
       shared your evaluation--your overall thoughts on the strengths and weaknesses--of the customer service,
       atmosphere, prices, quality, and so on. You decided on a set of criteria, or characteristics that determine a
       positive experience, and made your evaluation of the business according to those criteria and your
       experiences with similar products or services. Ultimately, you used the evidence you gathered from your
       interaction with the product or service to make an evaluation, or judgment. Maybe you used a rating system to
       give five stars or used the phrase "would not recommend" to make your negative judgment clear.

       In performing these tasks, you engaged in the review genre, or form of writing, used to evaluate businesses,
       products, and art forms--including restaurants, health care, cell phones, cars, video games, books, films, and
       more. Throughout this chapter, you will learn about the characteristics of reviews and how to write them.

     7.1 Thumbs Up or Down?

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the role of the review genre in personal, professional, and academic contexts.
         · Articulate what differentiates the review genre from other genres.

       Developing evaluation skills can help you in everyday life. Just about anything you buy or use will require you
       to evaluate a range of choices based on criteria that are important to you. For example, writing a good paper or
       making a good presentation necessitates locating and evaluating sources. See Annotated Bibliography:
       Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources for more information. You also may be asked to evaluate the
       effectiveness of your courses at the end of the semester. Or you may be asked to evaluate the work of your
       peers to help them revise their compositions. In the professional world, you may be asked to evaluate solutions
       to problems, employees you supervise, and in some cases, even yourself. Evaluating effectively makes you not
       only a better consumer but also a better student, employee, and possible supervisor.

      Using Evidence to Make a Judgment

       When you review or evaluate something, the end result is your judgment about it. Should your readers see the
       film? Are the food and service good at the restaurant? Should you use this source in your essay? Does your
       employee deserve a raise? Making a clear judgment about the subject of your evaluation provides guidance for
       the actions that audience members may take on the basis of the information you provide.

       Ultimately, your judgment is your opinion. For example, it is expected that some people will love Avengers:
       Endgame (2019) and others will not. In fact, because some people may disagree with you, reviews provide a
       perfect opportunity to use evidence to defend your judgment. You are probably familiar with some ways in
       which reviewers present their judgments about their subjects. Reviews on Facebook, Google, and Yelp have a
       star rating system (the more stars the better). The film review site Rotten Tomatoes shows the percentage of
       reviewers that recommend the film. The review site The AV Club rates films and TV episodes by using an A-to-
       F grading scale.

       While it is important to present your overall judgment in a review, a simple "I liked it" or "I didn't like it" is not
       enough to help your audience make their own judgments. It is also important to explain why you arrived at the
       judgment you did. Think about some of the titles of reviews you have seen online. One might simply read
       "DIRTY!" about an experience staying in a hotel. Other reviews might present a thesis, or debatable main idea,
       as a title, such as Slate culture critic Willa Paskin's "In Its Immensely Satisfying Season Finale, Game of
       Thrones Became the Show It Had Always Tried Not to Be." In both examples, the title provides an overall
       reason for the author's judgment.

       Although a simple rating might be effective when reviewing a business, reviews of creative works such as films,
       TV shows, visual arts, and books are more complex. Critics --professional writers who review creative

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                      7.2 · Trailblazer 207

works--like Willa Paskin try to review their subjects and at the same time analyze their subjects' cultural
significance. In addition to providing an overall judgment, critics guide audiences on how to view and
understand a work within a larger cultural context. Critics provide this guidance by answering questions such
as these:

  · In what genre would I place this work? Why?
  · What has this work contributed to its genre that other works have not?
  · How does the creator (or creators) of this work show they understand the culture (audience) that will view

      the work?
  · How does this work reflect the time in which it was created?
People look to critics not only to judge the overall quality of a work but also to gain insights about it.
Other writing genres feature characteristics similar to the review genre, using criteria and evidence to analyze
and sometimes evaluate the effectiveness of written or visual text: Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of
Rhetoric, Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read, and Image Analysis: Writing About What You See.

7.2 Trailblazer

Review Trailblazer: Michiko Kakutani

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read for inquiry, learning, and critical thinking.
  · Make judgments about the role of credibility and bias in the review genre.
  · Identify characteristics of review writing, including evaluation criteria and attention to historical context.

FIGURE 7.2 Michiko Kakutani (https://openstax.org/           "Think about
r/MichikoKakutani) is the former New York Times        [reviewing] as a form of
chief book critic. (credit: "New York Times" by mike/
flickr, CC BY 2.0)                                      reporting . . . with the
                                                         addition of your . . .
                                                        carefully considered

                                                                opinion."

Consistently Objective

Born in New Haven, Connecticut, Michiko Kakutani (b. 1955) is an American author and a literary critic. She
graduated from Yale University in 1976 and began her career with The Washington Post as a reporter. She
208 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

       moved to Time magazine in 1977, then in 1979 began working for The New York Times, first as a reporter and
       then as a literary critic. She is probably best known for the position she held as chief book critic at The New
       York Times until her retirement in 2017. Highly respected--and often feared--as a critic, Kakutani won a
       Pulitzer Prize for criticism in 1998. Her book reviews for The New York Times were highly influential, with
       some reviews creating as much discussion and debate as the book being reviewed. American authors Jonathan
       Franzen (https://openstax.org/r/JonathanFranzen) (b. 1959) and Norman Mailer (https://openstax.org/r/
       NormanMailer) (1923-2007), for instance, feuded publicly with Kakutani after she published negative reviews
       of their works.

       Kakutani is also known as an author, having published two books since her retirement: The Death of Truth:
       Notes on Falsehood in the Age of Trump (2018) and Ex Libris: 100+ Books to Read and Reread (2020)--a
       collection of essays about books that have been influential and illuminating.

       One reason for Kakutani's effectiveness as a reviewer might be the air of mystery she maintained in the eyes of
       authors and publishers. Unafraid to say exactly what she thought about a literary work--and seemingly
       undaunted by the reactions of angry writers--she would praise an author for one book and pan the author's
       next one. Shunning industry events, she curried neither access nor favor with authors and publishers and
       rarely gave interviews. Her refusal to get too close to authors and publishers added to her credibility and
       objectivity, possibly allowing her more freedom to review books honestly.

       Instead of a simple thumbs-up or thumbs-down, Kakutani would make her evaluations clear in more subtle
       and comprehensive ways. For example, she referred to former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
       (FBI) James Comey (https://openstax.org/r/JamesComey)'s (b. 1960) book A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies, and
       Leadership (2018) as "absorbing" and the characters in Jamaican author Marlon James (https://openstax.org/r/
       MarlonJames)'s (b. 1970) book Black Leopard, Red Wolf (2019) as "compelling." Instead of a formula or
       template, Kakutani sought to read books as a reader, rather than a critic, would read and understand them. She
       tended to pick examples of what she liked and disliked and what she found notable about the book, without
       preconceived notions of what it "should" be. It might be fair to say that Kakutani's evaluation criteria were
       never clear-cut; more often they were implied rather than explicit. However, decades of experience imbued
       Kakutani with historical knowledge and genre expertise that have provided the backbone of her reviews.

      Discussion Questions

       1. How does Michiko Kakutani establish her credibility as a reviewer? In what ways does she demonstrate her
            knowledge of the subject she is reviewing?

       2. What evaluation criteria does Michiko Kakutani use to review a work?

       3. How does Michiko Kakutani avoid appearing biased? Do you think she is successful in her attempts?

       4. How would you respond to a writer who thought you reviewed their work unfairly?

     7.3 Glance at Genre: Criteria, Evidence, Evaluation

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify and define common characteristics, mediums, key terms, and features of the review genre.
         · Identify criteria and evidence to support reviews of different primary sources.

       Reviews vary in style and content according to the subject, the writer, and the medium. The following are
       characteristics most frequently found in reviews:

         · Focused subject: The subject of the review is specific and focuses on one item or idea. For example, a
             review of all Marvel Cinematic Universe movies could not be contained in the scope of a single essay or
             published review not only because of length but also because of the differences among them. Choosing

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                   7.3 · Glance at Genre: Criteria, Evidence, Evaluation 209

      one specific item to review--a single film or single topic across films, for instance--will allow you to provide
      a thorough evaluation of the subject.
  · Judgment or evaluation: Reviewers need to deliver a clear judgment or evaluation to share with readers
      their thoughts on the subject and why they would or would not recommend it. An evaluation can be direct
      and explicit, or it can be indirect and subtle.
  · Specific evidence: All reviews need specific evidence to support the evaluation. Typically, this evidence
      comes in the form of quotations and vivid descriptions from the primary source, or subject of the review.
      Reviewers often use secondary sources--works about the primary source-- to support their claims or
      provide context.
  · Context: Reviewers provide context, such as relevant historical or cultural background, current events, or
      short biographical sketches, that help readers understand both the primary source and the review.
  · Tone: Writers of effective reviews tend to maintain a professional, unbiased tone--attitude toward the
      subject. Although many reviewers try to avoid sarcasm and dismissiveness, you will find these elements
      present in professional reviews, especially those in which critics pan the primary source.

Key Terms

These are some key terms to know and use when writing a review:

  · Analysis: detailed examination of the parts of a whole or of the whole itself.
  · Connotation: implied feelings or thoughts associated with a word. Connotations can be positive or

      negative. Reviewers often use words with strong positive or negative connotations that support their praise
      or criticism. For example, a writer may refer to a small space positively as "cozy" instead of negatively as
      "cramped."
  · Criteria: standards by which something is judged. Reviewers generally make their evaluation criteria clear
      by listing and explaining what they are basing their review on. Each type of primary source has its set of
      standards, some or all of which reviewers address.
  · Critics: professional reviewer who typically publishes reviews in well-known publications.
  · Denotation: the literal or dictionary definition of a word.
  · Evaluation: judgment based on analysis.
  · Fandom: community of admirers who follow their favorite works and discuss them online as a group.
  · Genre: broad category of artistic compositions that share similar characteristics such as form, subject
      matter, or style. For example, horror, suspense, and drama are common film and literary genres. Hip hop
      and reggae are common music genres.
  · Medium: way in which a work is created or delivered (DVD, streaming, book, vinyl, etc.). Works can appear
      in more than one medium.
  · Mode: sensory method through which a person interacts with a work. Modes include linguistic, visual,
      audio, spatial, and gestural.
  · Primary Sources: in the context of reviewing, the original work or item being reviewed, whether a film,
      book, performance, business, or product. In the context of research, primary sources are items of
      firsthand, or original, evidence, such as interviews, court records, diaries, letters, surveys, or photographs.
  · Recap: summary of an individual episode of a television series.
  · Review: genre that evaluates performances, exhibitions, works of art (books, movies, visual arts), services,
      and products
  · Secondary source: source that contains the analysis or synthesis of someone else, such as opinion pieces,
      newspaper and magazine articles, and academic journal articles.
  · Subgenre: category within a genre. For example, subgenres of drama include various types of drama:
      courtroom drama, historical/costume drama, and family drama.

Establishing Criteria

All reviewers and readers alike rely on evidence to support an evaluation. When you review a primary source,
210 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

the evidence you use depends on the subject of your evaluation, your audience, and how your audience will use
your evaluation. You will need to determine the criteria on which to base your evaluation. In some cases, you
will also need to consider the genre and subgenre of your subject to determine evaluation criteria. In your
review, you will need to clarify your evaluation criteria and the way in which specific evidence related to those
criteria have led you to your judgment. Table 7.1 illustrates evaluation criteria in four different primary source
types.

        Smartphone                Academic Source              Film                       Employment

       Camera quality Author's credentials                     Writing/script Punctuality

       Battery life        Publication's reputation            Acting     Ability to meet goals

       Screen resolution Sources cited                         Special effects Ability to work on a team

       Screen size         Timeliness of research (up to date) Sound/music Communication skills

       Durability          Relevance to subject                Directing  Professional development

       Phone reception Quality of writing                      Subject    Competence in subject area

TABLE 7.1 Evaluation criteria across subjects

Even within the same subject, however, evaluation criteria may differ according to the genre and subgenre of
the film. Audiences have different expectations for a horror movie than they do for a romantic comedy, for
example. For your subject, select the evaluation criteria on the basis of your knowledge of audience
expectations. Table 7.2 shows how the evaluation criteria might be different in film reviews of different genres.

                   Horror                              Action        Romantic Comedy                Drama
                                                               Jokes
Makeup                                  Special effects        Conflict/resolution        Script/writing
                                                               Chemistry between main
Cinematography                          Stunt work             characters                 Acting

Type of horror depicted (jump scares,   Pace of story          Satisfaction/happy ending  Accuracy/believability
gore, etc.)                                                                               of plot

Music                                   Relatability of                                   Scenery/setting/
                                        "hero"                                            costumes

TABLE 7.2 Evaluation criteria across film genres

Providing Objective Evidence

You will use your established evaluation criteria to gather specific evidence to support your judgment.
Remember, too, that criteria are fluid; no reviewer will always use the same criteria for all works, even those in
the same genre or subgenre.

Whether or not the criteria are unique to the particular task, a reviewer must look closely at the subject and
note specific details from the primary source or sources. If you are evaluating a product, look at the product
specifications and evaluate product performance according to them, noting details as evidence. When
evaluating a film, select either quotations from the dialogue or detailed, vivid descriptions of scenes. If you are
evaluating an employee's performance, observe the employee performing their job and take notes. These are
examples of primary source evidence: raw information you have gathered and will analyze to make a

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                      7.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Black Representation in Film" by Caelia Marshall 211

judgment.

Gathering evidence is a process that requires you to look closely at your subject. If you are reviewing a film,
you certainly will have to view the film several times, focusing on only one or two elements of the evaluation
criteria at a time. If you are evaluating an employee, you might have to observe that employee on several
occasions and in a variety of situations to gather enough evidence to complete your evaluation. If you are
evaluating a written argument, you might have to reread the text several times and annotate or highlight key
evidence. It is better to gather more evidence than you think you need and choose the best examples rather
than try to base your evaluation on insufficient or irrelevant evidence.

Modes of Reviews

Not all reviews have to be written; sometimes a video or an audio review can be more engaging than a written
review. YouTube has become a popular destination for project reviews, creating minor celebrities out of
popular reviewers. However, a written review of a movie might work well because the reviewer can provide just
enough information to avoid spoiling the movie, whereas some reviews require more visual interaction to
understand.

Take reviewer Doug DeMuro (https://openstax.org/r/DougDeMuro)'s popular YouTube channel. DeMuro reviews
cars--everything from sports cars to sedans to vintage cars. Car buyers need to interact with a car to want to
buy it, and YouTube provides the next best thing by giving viewers an up-close look.

Technology is another popular type of review on YouTube. YouTube creators like Marques Brownlee
(https://openstax.org/r/MarquesBrownlee) discuss rumors about the next Apple iPhone or Samsung Galaxy
and provide unboxing videos to record their reactions to the latest phones and laptops. Like DeMuro's viewers,
Brownlee's audience can get up close to the product. Seeing a phone in Brownlee's hands helps audience
members imagine it in their hands.

On the other hand, reviews don't always need to be about products you can touch, as Paul Lucas
(https://openstax.org/r/PaulLucas) demonstrates on his YouTube channel "Wingin' It!" Lucas reviews travel
experiences (mainly airlines and sometimes trains), evaluating the service of airlines around the world and in
various ticket classes.

What do these reviews have in common? First, they are all in the video medium. YouTube's medium is video; a
podcast's medium is audio. They also share a mode. YouTube's mode is viewing or watching; a podcast's mode
is listening.

These examples all use the genre conventions of reviews discussed in this chapter. The reviewers present a
clear evaluation: should you buy this car, phone, or airline ticket? They base their evaluation on evidence that
fits a set of evaluation criteria. Doug DeMuro might evaluate a family sedan on the basis of seating, trunk
storage, and ride comfort. Marques Brownlee might judge a phone on the basis of battery life, design, and
camera quality. Paul Lucas might grade an airline on service, schedules, and seat comfort. While the product
or service being reviewed might be different, all three reviewers use similar frameworks.

7.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Black Representation in Film" by Caelia
Marshall

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Recognize key terms and features of review writing.
  · Explain how conventions of the review genre are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
  · Analyze relationships between ideas and patterns of organization in written texts.

Introduction

In her essay "The Black Experience: What We See and Hear in Film," Caelia Marshall reviews Rear Window
212 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

(1954), Number 37 (2018), and Black Panther (2018), looking at them through the context of representation of
Black people in film. She uses some traditional film-review criteria but focuses primarily on the films' social
and historical contexts. Marshall presents her judgment and provides specific evidence from primary and
secondary sources.

s                                                                                   end s

                                     end s

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

What  We       end s  What        We  Hear

          See and

send s The global film industry, worth nearly $50 billion dollars (Watson), is a powerhouse of social influence, affecting

people's perceptions, ideologies, values, and language on both conscious and subconscious levels. Phrases such

as "Winter is coming" infiltrate the modern lexicon in areas of public life ranging from advertising to politics.

Problematically, however, highly popular and influential shows like the HBO series Game of Thrones lack diversity,

unapologetically perpetuating the dominant White cultural narrative. For the most part, audiences catapult shows

that portray such skewed narratives to popularity, failing to notice or care about the lack of diversity. Through both

production and consumption, the lack of diversity that exists in the entertainment industry works as an arm of

oppression, complicit in keeping Black characters and Black stories hidden from view. This lack of representation

of Black people and culture in film and television is more dangerous than the stereotypical racist representations

of mammies, servants, and criminals in the past because it allows audiences to dismiss Black experiences

entirely, making these audience members less empathetic to diverse points of view.

Panunrpotoaste. Marshall achieves two important objectives for the opening paragraph of her essay: getting her audience's
attention and presenting her thesis. Marshall begins with an important statistic (the film industry is worth nearly $50
billion globally) and uses a specific example of a popular expression from a television show with which the audience
is likely familiar ("Winter is coming" from the HBO series Game of Thrones) to illustrate the power and widespread
influence of film and TV on American culture.end annotat

Tanhneostisa.t Marshall then points out the lack of diversity in Game of Thrones and in film and TV more generally that
leads to her thesis: This lack of diversity is harmful to society ("This lack of representation of Black people and
culture . . . diverse points of view.").end annotat

Like many movies of the early and mid-20th century, director Alfred Hitchcock's film Rear Window (1954) lacks
authentic Black characters.

Canrintoetraiat. Marshall elaborates on her evaluation criteria: the lack of authentic Black characters.end annotat

In Rear Window, the Black experience is evident only when the presumably White female babysitter character
talks for a few brief seconds to the police chief, whose children she watches, from an off-screen position using
slurred, stereotypical southern Black dialect, with incorrect grammar. Dr. James Ivy calls this interjection the
"audio version of blackface."

Blackface is an American theatrical minstrel practice that dates to the mid to late 1800s, in which White
traveling musicians painted their faces black and for comic effect mimicked the singing and dancing of slaves.

Danenfiontiattion of Terms. Marshall clarifies the terms she uses; "audio version of blackface" is taken from a secondary
source, whereas "mammy" reflects Marshall's own interpretation.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
   7.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Black Representation in Film" by Caelia Marshall 213

   In this scene, the babysitter responds to her White male employer in the voice of the stereotypical mammy--a

   Black nursemaid who took care of White children, particularly in the south. Hitchcock appears to offer the

   scene as comic relief, expecting audiences to laugh during a tense confrontation between protagonist L. B.

   Jefferies and the police chief. The fact that Hitchcock calls upon this stereotypical minstrel tradition to create a

s  moment of comedy illustrates the inherent racism of a script that uses the Black experience as a punch line

   rather than attempts to reflect the Black experience as it is. Somehow, Hitchcock manages both to exclude

   Black people from his film and to make use of Black stereotypes. However, as insidious as Hitchcock's choice to

   call upon this stereotype for comic effect may be, it is not as dangerous as his execnldussion of Black characters.
   This exclusion has the effect of erasing the authentic Black experience altogether, making it meaningless within

   the discourse of popular culture. Yet Hitchcock himself was rewarded for his efforts, earning critical praise and

   AcademeyndAws ard nominations for his masterful ability to create suesnpdensse in this film, regardless of his shoddy
   characterization of racial issues in 1950s America.

   Eanvnidoetantce. In this paragraph, Marshall highlights another specific example of the lack of diversity in film. With this
   example, she goes into more detail to illustrate the harmful stereotyping and exclusion of Black characters.end annotat

   While some may argue that as a Wenhditse filmmaker Hitchcock does not have a responsibility to reflect the Black
   experience accurately in his films, their argument falls apart with Hitchcock's use of "audio blackface."
   Hitchcock accepts the responsibility of including the Black perspective, but he fails in his presentation, and the
   film suffers for it when Hitchcock goes for a laugh at the expense of the Black community. Instead of elevating
   Black culture and experiences through his use of Black characters, he portrays their point of view as invalid and
   perpetuates their oppression. Hitchcock doesn't just ignore the existence of Black people, he uses them to
   promote a racist agenda.

   Aandndorteastsing a Counterclaim. Marshall admits some people might argue that Hitchcock is not writing a social drama
   and thus accept his exclusion of Black characters. But she then counters this opinion.end annotat

   This moral failure becomes clear when Rear Window is contrasted with its counterpart Number 37, a remake of
   the original as envisioned by South African writer and director Nosipho Dumisa. In Number 37, the disabled
   spectator, Randal, is confined to his apartment in a notoriously dangerous area of post-apartheid South Africa
   when he notices a criminal murder a cop. He descends into a voyeuristic frenzy as he uses the crime to figure
   out how to resolve his debt to a former gang mate. By adding layers of violence, an African setting, and the
   inclusion of a paralyzed Black protagonist, Dumisa creates a film that transcends the plot to comment on the
   social narrative of poor Black people following the end of apartheid in South Africa.

   Tanhneostisa.t This paragraph introduces the film Number 37 to illustrate the thesis that underrepresentation of Black
   people in film is harmful to society.end annotat

   Eanvnidoetantce. Marshall briefly summarizes plot events so that readers unfamiliar with the film know something about
   the plot and how it differs from Hitchcock's Rear Window. She also provides information about the main character
   and setting but indicates that these are not her focus, as she mentions that the film "transcends" plot. The
   implication is that it transcends certain other film criteria as well.end annotat

   While both Hitchcock's Jefferies and Dumisa's Randal make light of a murder, Randal's response is mired in his
   social situation as a Black man in South Africa, whereas Jefferies's response is mired in his social situation as a
   privileged White man in America. Dumisa's film reflects a cultural depth that Hitchcock compromises for a joke.
   She understands that "you can entertain while still teaching the audience something" (Obenson).

   Santrnuocttautre. Marshall uses this paragraph to contrast the original Rear Window with a remake of the film. Comparing      end annotat
   and contrasting similar works is an effective technique for illustrating a point when the purpose is to evaluate a
   work.

   Canrintoetraiat. As criteria for comparison, she chooses characters, plot elements, and most important here, social context.
   In her comparison, she uses a relevant secondary source, as she does in the paragraph that follows and introduces
   214 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

   Black Panther.end annotat

   Malian writer, filmmaker, and cultural theorist Manthia Diawara describes the "manner in which black

   spectators may . . . resist the persuasive elements of Hollywood narrative" as a "challenge to . . . spectatorship

   and the aesthetics of Afro-American independent cinema" (845). The 2018 movie Black Panther may be

s  understood as an answer to Diawara's challenge. Skillfully directed by African American screenwriter Ryan

   Coogler, Black Panther is an example of the aesthetic beauty and financial success that art can achieve when

   not only are Black characters cast but also when Black storylines are expressed by the peenodpsle who have had

   firsthand experiences.                                 end s

      end s
   Canrintoetraiat. Using a genre criterion of directing, Marshall notes director Coogler's "skill."endeanndnsotat

   Canrintoetraiat. eMnadrsshall praises the performance of American actor Chadwick Boseman (1976-2020).end annotat

   SanoncoiatlaCt ontext. She also quotes from a secondary source as an opportunity to respond to and engage with the
   scholar quoted.end annotat

   Black Panther chronicles the origin of the Marvel superhero Black Panther--played compellingly by Chadwick
   Boseman--who is descended from a line of black panthers living in the fictional African region of Wakanda.
   Wakanda is technologically advanced because of its rich store of a fictional metal called Vibranium. While the
   Wakandans have benefited from Vibranium, they have kept it from the outside world by cloaking their society in
   the stereotypical poverty expected of Africans by Western nations. In Black Panther, this reversal of the roles of
   the advanced and the underprivileged serves as a critique of the historical actions of Western nations.

   SanoncoiatlaCt ontext. In the paragraph above and the one that follows, the author focuses on social context. She wants  end annotat
   readers to see the possibilities in Black Panther when Black people's authentic stories are shown to a wider
   audience.

   Although mythological and thus fictional, the movie features many references to African American history and
   the African American experience: slavery and the slave trade, colonization, the exploitation of Africa, civil rights,
   Black militancy, systemic poverty, and the loss of Black men--especially fathers--to violence and incarceration.
   These topics are usually whitewashed or ignored in popular cinema because of their graphic and racially
   charged nature.

   Canonmoptaatrison to Other Films. Marshall broadens the scope of her statement by bringing in the problem as it relates
   to other films.end annotat

   However, because diverse audiences viewed and welcomed this film, the movie registered as valuable not only
   for the people it reflected but for non-Black people as well. This effect supports Dumisa's argument that Black
   art has the power both to entertain and to instruct when representation is not only present but authentic.

   The film reinvents the representation of Black people in American cinema through its characterization of Black
   superheroes. Although the villain of Black Panther, Erik Killmonger, is Black, the character is not the
   stereotypical Black criminal of movies past. Despite his last name and the negative connotation of monger, this
   intense and angry antihero, played by Michael B. Jordan, captures the sympathy of viewers.

   Canonnontoattation. Marshall explains Killmonger's name. Monger, meaning "vendor," has a negative connotation, implying
   dealing aggressively in an undesirable product.end annotat

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                             7.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Black Representation in Film" by Caelia Marshall 215

   While young, Killmonger loses his Black militant father who was living in the United States as a Wakandan

   emissary. Killmonger's anger and his fight against Wakanda represent an effort to take back what he views as

   his father's loss--the ability to arm poor Black people throughout the world in a fight for civil rights. Although his

   anger may be misguided, viewers are able to understand its source and empathize. If the Killmonger villain

s  were purely evil or unintelligent, he would have embodied the criminal stereotype who has appeared in a lot of

   movies. In this film, however, he becomes someone who cannot find a positive outlet for his Black rage,

   something that is relatable to many Black people today.

   Eanvnidoetantce Based on Criteria. Using specific details from the film, Marshall illustrates how Black Panther "reinvents
   the representation of Black people in American cinema." She describes Killmonger in detail and connectesntdhosse

   traits to her point that the character represents a villain whose motivations are relatable to the audience.end annotat

                                             end s

   When  the  Black  Panther,  T'Challa,  reclaims  Wakanda        from  Killmonger    ast  the  end  of  the  movie,  he  shows  his
                                                                                  end

   cousin  Killmonger  grace   by  inviting  him  back  into  the  Wakandan  community,          an  ideal  that  is  characteristic  of  the
                                                                               end s

   Black communal experience. T'Challa offers Killmonger a place in their society, which Killmonger rejects,

   lamenting, "Just bury me in the ocean with my ancestors who jumped ships, 'cause they knew death was better

   than bondage." Killmonger's frustration mirrors the modern-day frustration with the exploitation and

   degradation of Black people in all aspects of life. The incarceration of Black citizens, primarily men, is the

   simple answer to the complex problem that crime is often the manifestation of poverty, social oppression, and

   systemic racism, and even Wakanda is not immune from this problem. In this sense, Wakanda is not a utopia,

   but a working model of purposeful Black agency within the international community.

   Eanvnidoetantce. Marshall continues her analysis with more specific examples, this time quoting from her primary sources
   to illustrate her point.end annotat

   A systematic form of racism is perpetuated by producers and filmmakers intentionally distorting or excluding
   the Black experience from art. These racist intentions have the effect of teaching, or brainwashing, audiences
   to dismiss Black perspectives, thus contributing further to the racist structure of the film industry. When films
   leave out Black characters, they create a narrative reality in which Black people are not essential. This situation
   translates into a physical reality where Black experiences and stories are not seen as profitable or valid by the
   public.

   Canonnontoattation and denotation. Marshall uses words with strong connotations: short-sighted and narrow, when used
   in certain contexts (relating to a vision problem and to width). These words take on negative connotations when
   placed in a cultural context. So do words like brainwashing, which has negative connotations as opposed to a more
   positive or neutral word like teaching or instilling. Diverse, however, has positive connotations in this same context,
   despite its neutral denotation of "varied."end annotat

   However, when the short-sighted and narrowly representative Rear Window is contrasted with the diverse and
   highly successful Black Panther, the act of dismissing Black characters appears outdated and not economically
   necessary. Yet the practice of exclusion continues in many high-budget films because Hollywood is still
   controlled largely by the White male point of view. These male executives have a stake in producing films that
   support and facilitate the status quo of the perpetuation of a narrative that they can relate to. They have no
   reason to emphasize story lines that compete with or threaten their authority unless audiences become
   critically aware of the power of media to legitimize and delegitimize social groups. Audiences must "resist the
   persuasive elements of Hollywood narrative" (Diawara 845) with their pocketbooks.

   Canonnoctlautsion. Marshall ends with a rewording of her thesis, as well as a summary of her evidence. She issues a call to
   action through a quotation from one of her secondary sources.end annotat

                                                            Works Cited

   Diawara, M. "Black Spectatorship: Problems of Identification and Resistance." Screen, vol. 29, no. 4, Jan. 1988, pp.
       66-79, doi:10.1093/screen/29.4.66.
216 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

       Obenson, Tambay. "Alfred Hitchcock's `Rear Window' Has Been Remade as a South African Political Thriller."
           IndieWire, 19 Nov. 2018, www.indiewire.com/2018/11/number-37-south-africa-hitchcock-rear-
           window-120202152/#!.

       Watson, Amy. "Film Industry--Statistics and Facts." Statista, 10 Nov. 2020, www.statista.com/topics/964/film/.

       Canitnaottioatn: Marshall uses MLA style to document her sources.end annotat

      Discussion Questions

       1. What criteria does Caelia Marshall use to evaluate the films she reviews in her essay?

       2. How does Marshall provide background and context behind the films Rear Window and Black Panther?

       3. Why has Marshall chosen to focus on criteria other than those listed in Figure 7.3? Do you think her choice
            is effective? Why or why not?

       4. How does Marshall's use of secondary sources help support or hinder her review of the films she discusses?

       5. What are the advantages or disadvantages of films with characters to whom the audience can or cannot
            relate? Which do you prefer? Why?

     7.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Compose a review based on a thesis supported by analysis and evaluation.
         · Demonstrate the steps of the writing process: invention, drafting, revising, and editing.
         · Participate in the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
         · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.
         · Adapt composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

       Throughout this chapter, you have learned about the review genre. You have learned that reviews evaluate a
       variety of items. In addition to books, films, and TV shows, people look to reviews to buy cars, choose
       restaurants, hire plumbers, and more. In this section, you will have the opportunity to demonstrate your
       understanding of the review genre by composing your own review.

      Summary of Assignment: Review of Primary Media Source

       Write a review of a specific film, book, TV series, podcast, play, or video game that you think contributes
       something significant to the genre and to the culture at large. Show how the subject--the primary source--of
       your review illustrates something compelling or exceptional about a particular idea or theme common to the
       genre. For example, the CW series Crazy Ex-Girlfriend (2015-2019) is a romantic comedy that eschews and
       even satirizes traditional romantic comedy tropes such as the "grand gesture," doing something out of love for
       someone. Use specific evidence from your primary source to support a central idea, or thesis. In an essay of
       about 1,200 to 1,500 words, provide an overall judgment about your subject and support it with evidence from
       the primary source and from secondary sources if applicable. In addition, explore how your specific source
       has contributed something significant to its genre. In other words, why is this subject interesting, different, or
       worthy of analysis? Be sure to demonstrate awareness of your source's cultural and historical context as well.
       For example, if your review is about a romantic comedy, provide relevant information about the history,
       conventions, or expectations of that genre. Think about and explain the ways your topic adheres to or breaks
       from audience expectations.

       Another Lens 1. Create a three-to-five-minute podcast review of a specific film (https://openstax.org/r/film),
       book (https://openstax.org/r/book), TV series, album (https://openstax.org/r/album), podcast, play, or video
       game. How does the subject of your review illustrate something interesting or unique about a particular idea

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                      7.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment 217

 or theme common to the genre? Integrate specific evidence from the primary source and secondary sources, if
 applicable, to support a main idea, or thesis.

 To record your podcast review, use either a simple recording method, such as the voice memo app on your
 smartphone, or something more sophisticated, such as Garage Band or iMovie. To become more familiar with
 this genre of reviewing, listen to one or two of the examples linked above. Note how this genre is somewhat
 different from an academic essay. For example, the speaker's voice is more conversational and engages the
 audience auditorily by stressing particular words or syllables. In your review podcast, take advantage of the
 opportunity to present a more informal tone than you might use in an academic essay. Podcast hosts are often
 successful because of their personality and ability to connect with their audience. Draft a script for your review
 podcast that reflects your personality and use of language, rather than formal language. For example, use
 contractions, first- or second-person pronouns, and appropriate slang.

 Finally, to maximize the effect of your podcast, consider incorporating short clips from the subject of your
 review. Upload your podcast review to SoundCloud (https://openstax.org/r/SoundCloud) and share your review
 with the class. For more direction on public speaking, consult Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak.

 Another Lens 2. Instead of a straightforward review of a single primary source, review several sources in the
 same genre, as Caelia Marshall has done in her essay. Or compare a film to the book on which it is based and
 evaluate it. Select your sources from films, books, television programs, video games, or any other form of
 entertainment, focusing your review essay on a single area, such as social context, character development, or
 screenplay vs. original text. Choose other genre-specific evaluation criteria as well, and address them in your
 essay, as Marshall does. Use specific evidence from your primary sources and secondary sources, as needed, to
 support your main idea, or thesis. In other words, why is this source interesting, different, or worthy of
 analysis?

       Quick Launch: Developing Evaluative Criteria

 To write an effective review, you need clear and relevant evaluation criteria. To help you establish your review
 criteria, fill in a table similar to Table 7.3 by following these steps:

 1. Write the name of your primary source.
 2. In the left-hand column, write the genre category to which your topic belongs (horror, action, biography,

       etc.).
 3. Under the genre, brainstorm as many characteristics of the genre as you can.
 4. In the right-hand column, write "Examples."
 5. Brainstorm as much evidence from your primary source as you can think of.
 6. Create a second table called "Subgenre." For example, if your topic is a horror film, some possible

       subgenres might be "ghost horror," "monster horror," or "slasher horror." Add a colon after Subgenre, and
       write the subgenre type.
 7. Label the left-hand column "Subgenre Elements" and the right-hand column "How to Evaluate."
 8. In the Subgenre Elements column, brainstorm for as many characteristics of the subgenre as you can. You
       can use some relevant characteristics from step 3, but try to focus on unique characteristics of the
       subgenre. For example, what makes a horror film about a ghost, such as The Grudge (2020), different from
       a slasher horror film, such as The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (2003)?
 9. In the right-hand column, develop questions to assess characteristics.
10. Select three to five genre characteristics with the most evidence, and focus on them as you look closely at
       your primary sources. Take notes and gather evidence to support your evaluation.
218 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

                          Primary Source: The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (2003 Film)

Genre Characteristics: Horror                                    Examples

Script/plot: Scary story               Presented as a "true" story, scary ending

Characters: "Monster" or "thing" that  Leatherface, a masked killer who wields a chainsaw
kills

Characters: Victims, usually multiple Young people stranded on a road trip

Setting: Rural Texas                   Creepy locations with potential for violence

Special effects: (gore, jump scares,   Gore: blood and guts
etc.)

Sound effects: Screaming               Many victims and screaming from road trippers

Cinematography: "Gross" or "creepy"    Meat plant, creepy house
images

                                       Subgenre: Slasher Horror

Subgenre Elements                      How to Evaluate

One deranged killer                    Is the killer believable in the moment? Does the killer scare me?

One weapon characteristic to the killer Is the weapon creative? Does it fit the killer's character?

Killer with a backstory                Does the backstory tell me why the killer is deranged? Does it convince
                                       me it's the reason they kill?

Killer hunts the victims               Victims' terror should be convincing: realistic screaming, fear, etc.

Creepy images: setting, props, etc.    Are they realistic? How? How do the images add to the sense of fear?
need to be realistic

TABLE 7.3 Genre and subgenre evaluation criteria

Evaluation Criteria for The Texas Chainsaw Massacre:

The Killer (Leatherface): How effective is he at scaring the audience? How does he scare the audience
(backstory, appearance, weapon, etc.)?

Images/Setting: How do the filmmakers create a creepy setting? How does the setting add to the fear?

The Victims: How do they project fear (screaming, etc.)? How effective or convincing is their fear?

     Drafting: Thesis Statement, Analysis, and Supporting Examples

After you have selected a topic and decided on the evaluation criteria, spend some time looking closely at your
primary source (the film, TV show, book, etc. you have chosen to review). With these criteria in mind, view/
read/listen to your primary source. Take notes on how your selected evaluation criteria apply to your source.
When you come across strong and relevant examples, write down vivid, detailed descriptions of the scene and
quote applicable dialogue. By looking closely at your primary source and taking notes now, you will have solid
and specific examples to illustrate your points later when you draft your review.

Also, while you are looking closely at your primary source, think about the features that appeal to you. Is there

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                            7.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment 219

a character that is particularly interesting? Do you see an interesting viewpoint on a theme or idea? Is the
writing or the use of language interesting, different, or clever? How does it keep your attention or provide
something unexpected? The answers to these questions can lead you to your overall evaluation and thesis.

Thesis

Use a graphic organizer like Table 7.4 to plan your draft. Then, you will use the notes you took earlier to help
you brainstorm for the main points that support the thesis and provide specific, concrete evidence.

Primary                                     Title of work(s) being reviewed
Source

Angle of  Overall way you will organize your review: aspects of the source you will analyze or criteria on which
Analysis  you plan to focus.

          Example: female romantic-comedy leads.

Filters   Ways to narrow your focus, such as time, place, cultural context, comparison to similar sources.

          Examples: the female lead in Crazy Ex-Girlfriend versus other female romantic comedy leads or how
          the 1961 film version of A Raisin in the Sun depicts Lena Younger as a "tyrant."

Main      The idea you'll use to draft a working thesis; must be a debatable point about your topic.
Argument
          Example: Rebecca Bunch, the female lead in Crazy Ex-Girlfriend, is flawed and not virtuous. Her
          shortcomings make her character more engaging than traditional romantic-comedy female leads.

Thesis    One sentence (sometimes two) that clearly states your argument.

          Example: Although most romantic-comedy female leads are virtuous and have admirable character
          traits, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend's Rebecca Bunch is flawed and sometimes unsympathetic; however, the
          audience still roots for her to find love.

TABLE 7.4 Preliminary drafting plan sample

Planning the Main Points and Body Paragraphs

Your main points should be your topic sentences, expressed as one sentence at the beginning of each
paragraph. Preview these main points by adding because to your thesis statement as illustrated below.

Examples

  · Because romantic comedies such as Knocked Up (2007) depict their leads as unquestionably "good"
      people . . .

  · Because Rebecca Bunch is sometimes selfish . . .
  · Because Rebecca Bunch is sometimes promiscuous . . .
  · Because despite these flaws, men still seek her attention . . .
  · Because the audience sees Rebecca as realistic, they root for her . . .

Now complete a graphic organizer like Table 7.5 by adding your main points from your primary source.
220 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

                                  Point 1. Because . . .  Explanation:
                                                          Example:

                                  Point 2. Because . . .  Explanation:
                                                          Example:

                                  Point 3. Because . . .  Explanation:
                                                          Example:

                                  Point 4. Because . . .  Explanation:
                                                          Example:

                                  TABLE 7.5 Main points organizer

As you continue to plan your review, consider these questions: Depending upon your audience, how much
background or context should you provide about your topic? Are they likely or unlikely to have knowledge
about the topic? Do you need to summarize anything about your primary source? Do you need to provide
historical or cultural context? Use the notes you took earlier as your draft your essay. Remember, you can
change things! It is up to you to decide how to organize your argument and where to present specific evidence.

Your review will contain both summary/observation (objectivity) and evaluation/analysis (subjectivity).
Practice determining whether statements are summary or observation as opposed to evaluation or analysis.

Secondary Source Evidence

Once you form your own opinions, you may want to look for additional sources to support your review.
Secondary sources, or sources that contain the opinions and analyses of others, are frequently used in
academic writing to help writers support a point or provide background and context. Scholarly, peer-reviewed
secondary sources give your review greater credibility because the articles are written by experts in their
fields. Use your college library's databases, or ask a librarian whether your college provides access to journals
that publish articles on movies, television, and culture. Most colleges have access to JSTOR, a database search
engine focused on the humanities. In addition, the MLA International Bibliography is a common database of
journals related to culture. Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and Annotated
Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources provide more information about finding
sources.

Another, less academic, place to look for secondary sources is in Recap. In recent years, recapping has become
a popular way to join the conversation about TV shows, with sites such as The AV Club, The Huffington Post,
Slate (https://openstax.org/r/slate), The Verge (https://openstax.org/r/theverge), and Vox (https://openstax.org/
r/vox) dedicating staff to summarizing and discussing popular shows. Fans engage with each other and recap
writers by commenting on and sharing the articles.

Note, too, that well-known publications, such as The New York Times (https://openstax.org/r/
thenewyorktimes), review not only movies and TV shows but also products such as those you may have chosen
to write your review about. In addition, Consumer Reports (https://openstax.org/r/consumerreports) is one of
the longest-running magazines dedicated to reviewing products of all kinds. Many websites, as well, review
video games and consoles.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                              7.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment 221

   Drafting the Introduction

   The introduction should interest readers in your topic and make them eager to learn more about it. If you

   were proposing this idea to a company, what would your "elevator pitch" be? What might you say to quickly

   pique audience interest? You might describe the part that convinced you it was good. You might explain why

s  your audience would find the topic relatable.

   Be sure readers know by the end of the introduction what specifically you are reviewing. Provide the title and
   necessary background/context: when it was made, the medium (film, book, podcast), the genre, and how to
   find it (Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu). Include your overall evaluation: Did you like it or not, and why overall?

   Then present your thesis at the end of your introduction.

   Introduction example. Many people love romantic comedies, but what happens when real life isn't like the
   movies? We are conditioned to believe there is one person we are destined to be with. Disney movies, TV shows
   like The Office, Hallmark Channel Christmas movies, and traditional romantic comedies reinforce the notion

                                                                                                                            end s
   that for the believer, true love is right around the corner. But everyone knows the pain of rejection or of pining
   for a person who doesn't seem to notice them. The CW series Crazy Ex-Girlfriend shows what it's like when love
   is more complicated than what we see in the movies. The show follows Rebecca Bunch, a successful but
   unhappy--and far from virtuous or admirable--New York lawyer who instantly abandons her life to move to
   West Covina, California, to pursue Josh Chan, her summer-camp crush from long ago. Rebecca cooks up crazy,
   desperate schemes to get the attention of the aloof and clueless Josh. Crazy Ex-Girlfriend masterfully taps into
   our inner crazy ex by making good comedy out of Instagram stalking, relationship sabotage, and infatuation.

   Now, write your introduction:

   General statement: ________

   Background or context: ________

   Brief summary: ________

   Evaluation: ________

   Thesis: ________

   Drafting the Body

   For the body of the review, provide more background and context wherever you think such information is
   necessary. Because the purpose of this part of the review is to present the main points that support the thesis,
   be sure to show how these points explain the criteria on which you have based your evaluation. Back up the
   main points with specific, concrete evidence from your primary source. At this point, return to your early notes
   and use the descriptions and quotations you gathered. You will likely have collected more evidence as well. Use
   a graphic organizer like Table 7.6 to create your draft. Main points 1 and 2 should be your topic sentences.

                                            Explanation:

                                            Evidence:

                              Main point 1  Examples:
                                            Quotations:

                                            Secondary source evidence (if needed):

                              TABLE 7.6 Drafting the body
222 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

                                  Explanation:

                                  Evidence:

Main point 2                      Examples:

s Quotations:

                                  Secondary source evidence (if needed):

                                  Explanation:

                                  Evidence:                               end s

Main point 3                      Examples:
                                  Quotations:

                                  Secondary source evidence (if needed):

                                  Explanation:

                                  Evidence:

Main point 4                      Examples:
                                  Quotations:

                                  Secondary source evidence (if needed):

                                  Explanation:

                                  Evidence:

Main point 5                      Examples:
                                  Quotations:

                                  Secondary source evidence (if needed):

TABLE 7.6 Drafting the body

Drafting the Conclusion

For the conclusion, summarize briefly how the criteria you used led you to your evaluation, rephrase or
validate your thesis, and make a recommendation.

      Conclusion example. Crazy Ex-Girlfriend is a refreshing take on the romantic comedy genre. It elevates
      comedy by using catchy, original songs to accompany clever dialogue. Though Rebecca is intense and extreme,
      her situation is relatable, and she comes across as more sympathetic than not, proving that people don't have
      to be perfect to be deserving of love. The departures from the romantic comedy playbook leave the audience
      guessing what will happen next, ensuring the show never feels tired or stale. What comes after the grand
      gesture and big kiss? That's a question this show tries to answer, and sooner than you might expect. If you're
      looking for a new binge-worthy show, clear your calendar for the next week and give Crazy Ex-Girlfriend a try.

Now, write your conclusion.

Brief summary of criteria and evaluation: ________

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     7.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Entertainment 223

Restate or validate thesis: ________

Make a recommendation: ________

     Peer Review: Conferencing with a Partner

After you finish your draft, receiving feedback from a peer will help you identify the strengths and weaknesses
in your review. Because writers sometimes find it hard to review their work from the perspective of their
audience, peer feedback will help you see your writing in ways not obvious to you. As a peer reviewer yourself,
try to offer suggestions to make the essay more like something you would want to read.

To give and receive the most effective feedback, use the following guidelines:

1. On your own draft, note the areas you are unsure about and where you especially want feedback. It's a
      good idea to have specific questions so that your peer can focus on what you think will help you.

2. When you are assigned a peer, read their essay at least once without commenting, just to get a sense of
      what the essay is about.

3. Read the essay a second time. In the margins, add any comments or reactions to the essay.
4. Focus on the introduction and comment on its effectiveness.

      1. In what ways are the first few sentences engaging?
      2. Would you want to keep reading to learn more? Why or why not?
      3. In what ways does the introduction clearly establish what is being reviewed? Does it provide sufficient

            background information? In what ways does the thesis make a judgment or an evaluation with a
            reason that leads to the judgment or evaluation?
      4. Mark what you think the thesis is. If you find no clear thesis, mark something for the writer to focus on
            to arrive at a thesis.
      5. Jot down one or two prodding, open-ended questions to help the writer develop or revise the thesis.

5. Next, focus on the body paragraphs.
      1. Is enough background provided, either in the introduction or early in the body, to give you a complete
            sense of what the writer is evaluating?
      2. If there is not enough background, jot down a few questions that could be answered with additional
            background and context.
      3. What is the main point of each body paragraph?
      4. In what ways do the main points support the thesis (my thesis is true because . . .)?
      5. Do the body paragraphs contain specific, concrete details from the primary source to support the
            main points?
      6. If the body needs more specific details, mark places where the writer can add more detail.

6. Next, focus on the conclusion.
      1. Does the conclusion clearly tie up the main points?
      2. If not, how might the writer revise the conclusion?

7. Although your task is not to edit the essay or mark every error, point out any consistent patterns of
      grammatical errors.

8. When you have finished, summarize your comments at the end of the review by writing three things on
      which your peer can focus when revising.

As you work, be detailed and specific in your comments so that your peer can use them to make revisions:

  · What specifically is working or not working?
  · Why is it working or not working?
  · What can the writer do specifically to revise?

If you are having trouble finding something to comment on, remember that you can make comments about
224 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

       what the writer does well. Be sure to explain in detail why you think it's working. Be sure to consult Evaluation:
       Effect on Audience as well.

           Revising: Maintaining Ownership

       When you receive your reviewed essay, look over the comments. Remember that they are merely suggestions;
       your revisions are ultimately up to you. For example, a sentence fragment, while technically incorrect, could be
       an effective way to emphasize a point. It is your call to decide whether your use of language is appropriate for
       your audience and purpose. With that said, however, it's possible your peer pointed out something you did not
       notice.

       As you revise, keep in mind the following success criteria. Ensure your essay has them:

         · Specific topic: The essay is about a specific TV show, film, book, podcast, video game, or other primary
             source(s).

         · Interesting lead: You show your audience why this topic interests you and try to capture their attention.
         · Thesis: You present a clear, debatable, and specific thesis about your topic.
         · Body: The body supports the thesis with clear main points. Summary is used effectively to provide

             background and context.
         · Specific details: You support your main points with relevant and ample details (in the form of quotations,

             paraphrases, vivid descriptions, etc.) from the primary source or sources as well as secondary sources, if
             you have used them.
         · Citation: Sources are cited correctly in the text.

     7.6 Editing Focus: Quotations

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain the role direct quotations play in writing.
         · Select and integrate direct quotations into your writing.

       Direct quotation, or someone's exact words, provide specific, concrete evidence from your primary and
       secondary sources. When reviewing a film or book, for example, you are likely to incorporate a number of
       direct quotations into your writing. Quotations are effective when they are used appropriately and correctly.
       For example, a general statement of observation such as "The candidate for senate gave a disastrous interview
       on TV last night" should be backed up with concrete evidence from the interview. To demonstrate how and
       why the interview was "disastrous," you might give examples such as these: "When asked whether she
       supported ethics reform, Ms. Simpson did not give a direct answer. She stated, `I think ethics are important,
       and I hold myself to a high ethical standard.'"

       While quotations are covered more extensively in Punctuation, this section will introduce you to using
       quotations in a review.

      When to Use Quotations

       Use quotations to support a point you are making. Avoid using them to present a point. Don't pepper your
       essay with randomly selected quotations because you think they make your essay look well researched.
       Instead, present your point, and back it up with a quotation.

       Using a direct quotation is effective in the following instances:

         · Because of its source, the quotation adds credibility to your point.
              Wearing a mask is the easiest thing we can do as individuals to stop the spread of COVID-19. According
                 to Dr. Anthony Fauci, "There should be universal wearing of masks." (Castillejo and Yang)

                 Because Fauci is the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), his
                 statement on mask wearing is credible evidence that supports the point.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                 7.6 · Editing Focus: Quotations 225

  · Because the author makes a statement in a particular way, its meaning would be less effective if
      paraphrased.
      In his review of the Microclimate Air Helmet, critic Drew Magary injects humor by quipping, "No one at
          the vape shop cared that I was dressed like I was in an old Moby video."

          Using a direct quotation from Magary's review illustrates his style of humor more effectively than a
          description or paraphrase of the joke.

  · Because the quotation contains important information, it is more effective than a paraphrase.
      Hurricane Harvey brought a record amount of flooding when it hit the Houston, Texas, area in 2017.
          Harvey's rainfall "dumped an estimated 27 trillion gallons of rain over Texas and Louisiana during a
          6-day period." (Griggs)

          The direct quotation contains the exact statistics that show the record amount of flooding.

  · Because the quotation adds variety to the language and voice of the essay, it makes the most impact on the
      audience in its original form. For example, quote directly from a person you are writing about so that the
      audience imagines them speaking.

A teacher may have suggested you use details to "show instead of tell." Quotations are one way to show your
audience what you mean rather than tell them.

Practice finding quotations to illustrate the following point. You can search the web or your college library's
article databases.

      Personal computing has evolved from a single desktop computer for the whole family to a truly
      "personal" relationship each individual has with their devices.

Hint: Look for information about how the size of personal computers has changed, how the industry has
introduced new devices, how many Internet-connected devices an average person owns, and how many
different people use an Internet-connected device on average.

Embedding Quotations

In reviews particularly, you may want to use dialogue or narration as evidence to support a point. Because a
quotation should illustrate or support your point, be sure to state clearly and in your own words the point you
are making. A properly formatted quotation will contain the following:

  · Quote in exact words: Use ellipses (. . .) to omit irrelevant sections of a quotation or to shorten it. Use
      brackets ([]) to add information to a quotation to help it make sense.
      Original Quotation: "Cybersecurity is an important issue for businesses of all sizes. Every business from
          Fortune 500 companies to mom-and-pop stores has an obligation to protect customers' sensitive data.
          Data breaches, such as the Target breach in 2014, have been known to erode trust." (Flynn)
      Quotation using ellipses and brackets: "Cybersecurity is an important issue for businesses . . . Data
          breaches, such as the Target breach in 2014, have been known to erode [consumers'] trust [in the
          company]." (Flynn)

  · Correct punctuation: Use quotation marks ("") to show exactly where the quotation begins and ends. This
      punctuation helps separate the quotation from your words and ideas and helps you avoid plagiarism.

  · Signal phrase: Simple attribution phrases like "Smith says" or "As Jones argues" are important to use with
      quotations so that the quotation is integrated into your own sentence. When quoting directly, set off the
      quoted material from the signal phrase, or speaker tag, with a comma, as in Example 1 below. When the
      quotation is broken up by a signal phrase, use quotation marks around the quotation and commas around
      the signal phrase. Place periods and commas that belong to the quotation inside the quotation marks.
      Example 1: Smith shows us the importance of good time management skills when she says, "90% of A
          and B students begin their essays at least two weeks before they are due" (Flynn).
226 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

      Example 2: "Many students," Smith says, "leave insufficient time for writing assignments" (Flynn).

  · Parenthetical citation: Cite the source of your quotation with a correct parenthetical citation. See the MLA
      Documentation and Format to learn more about citation.

Practice using a quotation you found in the previous exercise by introducing the quotation with a signal
phrase, stating the quotation, and punctuating it correctly. Then introduce the signal phrase in the middle of
the quotation, and punctuate it correctly.

7.7 Evaluation: Effect on Audience

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain how your writing uses common elements of the review genre.
  · Evaluate reviews for thesis, evidence, rhetorical choices, clarity, and language awareness by using a rubric.

Essays follow a structure that includes the introduction and thesis, body paragraphs with main points
supported by relevant evidence, and a conclusion. In addition, academic essays are generally written with a
formal tone, use precise wording, and are carefully edited. Essays should be written with a specific audience
and purpose in mind and adhere to the conventions of the discipline's formatting guide (MLA in this case).
However, as you have worked to develop your writing voice during this course, you may have elected to
challenge some of these conventions for rhetorical purposes. Beyond following the typical structure of an
academic essay, a good review essay will demonstrate knowledge of the elements of the review genre, as
discussed in Glance at Genre: Criteria, Evidence, and Evaluation clear evaluation, specific criteria, and
understanding of genre and context. The following rubric reflects the characteristics of an effective evaluation
essay.

Rubric

      Score    Critical           Clarity and Coherence          Rhetorical Choices
              Language
5            Awareness
Skillful
             The text always      All paragraphs are unified     The writer fully engages the audience.
             adheres to the       under a single, clear thesis   Strategies such as thought-provoking
             "Editing Focus"      and connected with             questions, interesting statistics, or detailed
             of this chapter:     appropriate transitions. The   anecdotes or vignettes draw readers into
             when and how to      topic of each paragraph is     the essay, keep them interested, and make
             use quotations as    consistently clear and         them think about the topic. The writer
             discussed in         supports the thesis. Abundant  consistently shows concern for audience
             Section 7.6. The     and relevant supporting        knowledge and beliefs about the topic and
             text also shows      evidence in the form of        shows appreciation for multiple
             ample evidence       concrete details from the      perspectives. The writer demonstrates an
             of the writer's      primary source(s) and          understanding of the cultural context and
             intent to            secondary sources, if used,    genre of the subject of the review. The
             consciously meet     gives readers a sense of       writing throughout demonstrates a
             or challenge         completeness. No major         sophisticated command of language.
             conventional         questions from the
             expectations in      assignment instructions are
             rhetorically         unanswered.
             effective ways.

TABLE 7.7

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                  7.7 · Evaluation: Effect on Audience 227

Score           Critical         Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices
               Language
              Awareness

4             The text usually   Most paragraphs are unified      The writer generally engages the audience.
Accomplished  adheres to the     under a single, clear thesis     Some strategies such as thought-provoking
              "Editing Focus"    and connected with               questions, interesting statistics, or detailed
              of this chapter:   appropriate transitions. The     anecdotes or vignettes draw readers into
              when and how to    topic of each paragraph is       the essay, keep them interested, and make
              use quotations as  usually clear and supports the   them think about the topic. The writer
              discussed in       thesis. Relevant, if not always  generally shows concern for audience
              Section 7.6. The   abundant (and vice versa),       knowledge and beliefs about the topic and
              text also shows    supporting evidence in the       may acknowledge multiple perspectives.
              some evidence of   form of concrete details from    The writer often demonstrates
              the writer's       the primary source(s) and        understanding of the cultural context and
              intent to          secondary sources, if used,      genre of the subject of the review. The
              consciously meet   gives readers a sense of         writing usually demonstrates a
              or challenge       completeness. No major           sophisticated command of the language.
              conventional       questions from the
              expectations in    assignment instructions are
              rhetorically       unanswered.
              effective ways.

3             The text           Most paragraphs are fairly       The writer sometimes engages the
Capable       generally          unified under a single thesis,   audience. Occasional use of strategies such
              adheres to the     though some may lack             as thought-provoking questions, interesting
              "Editing Focus"    appropriate transitions. The     statistics, or detailed anecdotes or
              of this chapter:   topic of each paragraph is       vignettes may or may not succeed in
              when and how to    usually clear; some or all of    drawing readers into the essay, keeping
              use quotations as  the paragraphs support the       them interested, and making them think
              discussed in       thesis. Relevant supporting      about the topic. The writer generally shows
              Section 7.6. The   evidence in the form of          some concern for audience knowledge and
              text also shows    concrete details from primary    beliefs about the topic but may not
              limited evidence   source(s) and secondary          acknowledge multiple perspectives. The
              of the writer's    sources, if used, may be         writer sometimes demonstrates
              intent to          lacking so that readers do not   understanding of the cultural context and
              consciously meet   have a sense of completeness.    genre of the subject of the review. The
              or challenge       One or two major questions       writing demonstrates a fair command of the
              conventional       from the assignment              language in word choice and sentence
              expectations in    instructions may be              structure.
              rhetorically       unanswered.
              effective ways.

TABLE 7.7
228 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

       Score    Critical          Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices
               Language
 2            Awareness
 Developing
              The text            Some paragraphs are fairly       The writer occasionally engages the
 1            occasionally        unified under a single thesis,   audience and makes little or no use of
 Beginning    adheres to the      but transitions are lacking or   strategies such as thought-provoking
TABLE 7.7     "Editing Focus"     inappropriate. The topics of     questions, interesting statistics, or detailed
              of this chapter:    some paragraphs are clear,       anecdotes or vignettes. With such
              when and how to     but not all support the thesis.  omissions, the writer does not draw
              use quotations as   Relevant and sufficient          readers into the essay, keep them
              discussed in        supporting evidence in the       interested, or make them think about the
              Section 7.6. The    form of concrete details from    topic. The writer generally shows little or no
              text also shows     the primary source(s) and        concern for audience knowledge and
              emerging            secondary sources, if used, is   beliefs about the topic and ignores multiple
              evidence of the     lacking so that readers do not   perspectives. The writer may demonstrate
              writer's intent to  have a sense of completeness.    some understanding of the cultural context
              consciously meet    Major questions from the         and genre of the subject of the review. The
              or challenge        assignment instructions may      writing demonstrates little command of
              conventional        be unanswered.                   language in word choice and sentence
              expectations in                                      structure.
              rhetorically
              effective ways.

              The text does not   Most paragraphs lack unity       The writer rarely, if ever, engages the
              adhere to the       under a single thesis.           audience and makes little or no use of
              "Editing Focus"     Transitions are lacking or       strategies such as thought-provoking
              of this chapter:    inappropriate. The topics of     questions, interesting statistics, or detailed
              when and how to     most paragraphs are unclear,     anecdotes or vignettes. The writer does not
              use quotations as   and not all support the thesis.  draw readers into the essay, keep them
              discussed in        Relevant and sufficient          interested, or make them think about the
              Section 7.6. The    supporting evidence in the       topic. There is little or no concern for
              text also shows     form of concrete details from    audience knowledge and beliefs about the
              little to no        the primary source(s) and        topic and little or no attention to multiple
              evidence of the     secondary sources, if used, is   perspectives. The writer demonstrates little
              writer's intent to  lacking so that readers have     or no understanding of the cultural context
              consciously meet    no sense of completeness.        and genre of the subject of the review and
              or challenge        Major questions from the         minimal command of language in word
              conventional        assignment instructions are      choice and sentence structure.
              expectations in     unanswered or are addressed
              rhetorically        with little attention.
              effective ways.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                 7.8 · Spotlight on ... Language and Culture 229

7.8 Spotlight on ... Language and Culture

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the role of sociohistorical context, including cultural and linguistic variations, in the review genre.
  · Identify and act on opportunities to publish a review.

Reviewing, and evaluation and analysis more generally, often involves showing understanding of
sociohistorical context. In other words, the work you are reviewing was created at a particular time for a
specific audience. The film Black Panther, for example, was released in 2018 for a primarily American
audience, but viewers and reviewers can delve further into this film's cultural context.

For one thing, this film can be placed in the context of other films from the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU).
The MCU features characters from Marvel comic books and began with the release of Iron Man in 2008. In
addition to the Avengers films, the MCU includes character-specific "origin story" films of which Black Panther
is a part. Characters from one film may appear as characters in other MCU films.

In addition, Black Panther is part of a touchstone cultural moment. Since the beginning of the Black Lives
Matter (2013-present) movement, more attention has been called to the lack of Black representation in films
and TV. The film's Black Panther, played by Chadwick Boseman, is a Black superhero who gives Black
moviegoers a chance to see a superhero who looks like them. The film also comments on Black poverty and
questions whether power and wealth should be shared or hoarded. The film also provides audiences of other
backgrounds and ethnicities with the opportunity to witness characters who are developed beyond their
stereotypes, as Caelia Marshall points out regarding the character of Killmonger in the Annotated Student
Sample. These elements work to create empathy within a multicultural society.

Offensive Language: When Is It Offensive and When Is It Artful?

The question of language as a reflection of culture often surfaces in writing and reviewing dialogue, whether in
film or books. When is offensive language gratuitous, and when does it serve an artistic purpose? The answer
is never clear-cut in such areas, but as a reviewer you can ask yourself certain questions to determine whether
you think it enhances the work. The basic, if simplified, question is this: Does the work lose its strength,
honesty, sense of reality, or characterization if offensive language is removed? If the answer is yes, then the
language serves an artistic purpose. Imagine, for example, dramas dealing with criminals involved in
organized crime. The offensive language seems natural and contributes to the drama's realism. Take away the
language, and that realism is lost. Other films, however, would lose nothing in character depiction or realism if
offensive language were omitted--not substituted for something less offensive.

Diversity in Hollywood

Recently, more attention is being paid to diversity in television and movies. The #OscarsSoWhite controversy
began after the 2015 Oscars, following two consecutive years of all White nominees in the leading and
supporting actor categories. The uproar brought awareness to the lack of diversity in Hollywood, and not just
in terms of actors. Conversations about diversity behind the scenes began as well.

One criticism the #OscarsSoWhite controversy brought to light was about the stories Hollywood tells. Whose
stories get told, and who gets to tell those stories? While a limited number of people of color have been
nominated for and even won Oscars, traditionally they have been for movies about racism and slavery (written
by White writers or directed by White directors) and stereotypical roles such as the "magic negro" (a Black
character who helps a White character). Who gets to decide what stories are made into movies became a major
subject of conversation, as the people who fund movies are also typically White.

The movie Green Book (2018) illustrates the backlash that can happen when movies fail to include enough
diverse voices. The film is about a Black pianist (played by Mahershala Ali, b. 1974) and his White driver
(played by Viggo Mortensen, b. 1958) traveling the country in 1962. The movie won the Oscar for Best Picture
230 7 · Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?

       that year, and Ali won an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor. However, criticism of the movie was aired both
       before and after the Oscars ceremony. The family of the real-life pianist, Don Shirley (1927-2013), said the
       filmmakers worked with them very little. Some criticized the movie for seeming to be more about the driver,
       Frank Vallelonga (1930-2013), than about Shirley. The movie's director, Peter Farrelly (b. 1956), is a White
       man better known for directing raunchy comedies than movies about the Civil Rights era.

       FIGURE 7.3 The film's title refers to The Green Book, a travel guide published from 1936 to 1966 that listed hotels,
       restaurants, gas stations, and other places that welcomed Black travelers. This issue is from 1959. (credit: "The
       Negro Travelers' Green Book 1959" by Victor Hugo Green [1892-1960]/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
       All of these points highlighted the importance of diversity not only on set, but among those who participate in
       the voting bodies of the Oscars and Golden Globe Awards. As a result, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
       Sciences, which chooses the nominees and winners of the Oscars, and the Hollywood Foreign Press
       Association, which chooses the nominees and winners of the Golden Globe Awards, introduced measures to
       diversify their ranks. Despite promises to diversify, however, it was revealed in 2021 that the HFPA had no
       Black members. As a result, NBC decided to stop broadcasting the Golden Globe awards, and some prominent
       celebrities, such as Tom Cruise (b. 1962), sent their awards back.
       Hollywood has been a White, male-dominated industry. Movie critics Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert, mentioned
       at the beginning of this chapter, were two of the most influential critics in film history. For most of Hollywood's
       history, White men have influenced how television and movies have been received. This situation has been
       changing, as the Internet and increased cultural awareness are helping to create more diversity. For example,
       National Public Radio Pop Culture Happy Hour (https://openstax.org/r/popculturehappyhour) regularly invites
       people of color, women, and LGBTQ people onto its panel. Their views on gender, race, and queerness in
       movies and television provide perspectives often missing from mainstream criticism.

      Publish Your Work

       After you have written and revised your essay, share it with the world. One easy way to share is to post a
       condensed version of your essay online. Here are some sites to consider, depending on the genre and medium
       of your review subject.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                              7.9 · Portfolio: What the Arts Say About You 231

Books

  · Amazon (https://openstax.org/r/booksamazon)
  · Good Reads (https://openstax.org/r/booksgoodreads)
  · Barnes and Noble (https://openstax.org/r/bornesandnoble)

Films

  · Rotten Tomatoes (https://openstax.org/r/rotentomatoes)
  · Internet Movie Database (https://openstax.org/r/internetmoviedatabase)
  · The AV Club (https://openstax.org/r/theavclub)

      For The AV Club, consider participating in a conversation about the subject of your review by posting in
          the comments section of a review.

Video games

  · GameStop (https://openstax.org/r/GameStop)
  · Amazon (https://openstax.org/r/videogameamazon)

Podcasts

  · Google Podcasts (https://openstax.org/r/googlepodcasts)
  · Stitcher (https://openstax.org/r/stitcher)

TV shows

  · Amazon (https://openstax.org/r/tvshowsamazon)
  · The AV Club (https://openstax.org/r/theavclub)
  · Internet Movie Database (https://openstax.org/r/internetmoviedatabase)

You can also seek out other opportunities to share your writing in local newspapers and magazines. Contact
the editor of your college, alternative weekly, or daily newspaper and ask whether they accept freelance work.

7.9 Portfolio: What the Arts Say About You

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Reflect in writing on the development of composing processes.
  · Explain how those processes affect your work.

As you prepare to place this chapter's writing task in your portfolio, reflect on your review by answering the
following questions.

  · On what basis did you choose your topic? Did you choose it because of a long-standing interest in films, TV,
      books, or video games or because of something else?

  · Did your evaluation and thesis seem obvious from the beginning, or did you have to think for a long time
      before settling on them?

  · What made this topic personally appealing?
  · What was easy about composing your essay? What was hard?
  · What would you do differently if you could start over again?
  · In what ways did you revise your essay between the first and final drafts?
  · How did you get ideas for revision? Was it from peer feedback, your instructor, or a tutor?

Reflective Task

Now write a reflection for your portfolio, adding a section about your interest in the genre of the primary
source you chose. Discuss your reflection with another student, noting areas of similarities and differences.
232 7 · Further Reading

Further Reading

Onion, Rebecca. "Midsommar's Real Villains Aren't Murderous Pagans. They're Grad Students." Slate, 12 July
    2019, slate.com/culture/2019/07/midsommar-graduate-students-villains-ari-aster.html.

Paskin, Willa. "In Its Immensely Satisfying Season Finale, Game of Thrones Became the Show It Has Always
   Tried Not to Be." Slate, 27 June 2016, slate.com/culture/2016/06/game-of-thrones-season-6-finale-
    reviewed.html.

Siede, Caroline. "A Not-Quite-Live Rent Is A Lovingly Imperfect Celebration of a Lovingly Imperfect Musical."
   The AV Club, 28 Jan. 2019, tv.avclub.com/a-not-quite-live-rent-is-a-lovingly-imperfect-
    celebrati-1832113330.

Ugwu, Reggie. "The Hashtag That Changed the Oscars: An Oral History." The New York Times, 9 Sept. 2020,
    www.nytimes.com/2020/02/06/movies/oscarssowhite-history.html.

VanDerWerff, Emily. "Why Cultural Criticism Matters." Vox, 31 Dec. 2018, www.vox.com/culture/2018/12/31/
    18152275/criticism-explained-cultural-writing.

Wilkinson, Alissa. "Netflix's Totally Delightful Set It Up Proves Just How Durable the Romcom Formula Is." Vox,
    5 July 2018, www.vox.com/summer-movies/2018/6/29/17513562/set-it-up-review-netflix-romantic-
    comedy-romcom.

Works Cited

Castillejo, Esther, and Allie Yang. "Fauci to David Muir: `Universal Wearing of Masks' Essential to Combat
   COVID-19 Spread." ABC News, 10 Aug. 2020, abcnews.go.com/US/fauci-david-muir-universal-wearing-
    masks-essential-combat/story?id=72294374.

Cooke, Rachel. "Michiko Kakutani: `It Is More Rewarding to Debate Than Hit Delete.'" The Guardian, 17 Oct.
    2020, www.theguardian.com/books/2020/oct/17/michiko-kakutani-it-is-more-rewarding-to-debate-than-
    hit-delete.

Gocsik, Karen, and Dave Monahan. Writing About Movies. W.W. Norton and Co., 2018.
Griggs, Brandon. "Harvey's Devastating Impact by the Numbers." CNN, 1 Sept. 2017, www.cnn.com/2017/08/

    27/us/harvey-impact-by-the-numbers-trnd/index.html.
Jones, Nate. "How Green Book and Bohemian Rhapsody Became This Year's Oscar Villains." Vulture, 16 Jan.

    2019, www.vulture.com/2019/01/the-oscars-green-book-and-bohemian-rhapsody-controversy.html.
Kakutani, Michiko. "`The Death of Expertise' Explores How Ignorance Became a Virtue." The New York Times,

    21 March 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/03/21/books/the-death-of-expertise-explores-how-ignorance-
    became-a-virtue.html.
---. "The Handmaid's Thriller: In `The Testaments,' There's a Spy in Gilead." The New York Times, 3 Sept. 2019,
    www.nytimes.com/2019/09/03/books/review/testaments-margaret-atwood-handmaids-tale.html.
---. "James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It's Very Persuasive." The New York Times, 12 April 2018,
    www.nytimes.com/2018/04/12/books/review/james-comey-a-higher-loyalty.html.
Magary, Drew. "I Tested the Dumbest PPE of All Time--The Rich Guy COVID Helmet." SFGate, 15 Jan. 2021,
    www.sfgate.com/culture/editorspicks/article/drew-magary-coronavirus-helmet-microclimate-
    air-15867960.php.

Access for free at openstax.org.
Facts Analytical Report: Writing from 8

FIGURE 8.1 Engineer, physician, researcher, and NASA astronaut Mae Carol Jemison (b. 1956) was the first Black
woman to travel in space. As an astronaut aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour in 1992, Jemison conducted
scientific research on the production of saline solution and frog reproduction. She also was a co-investigator on two
bone cell experiments. More recently, she published a scientific report on biomaterials for human space exploration.
(credit: NASA Image and Video Library/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

8.1 Information and Critical Thinking
8.2 Analytical Report Trailblazer: Barbara Ehrenreich
8.3 Glance at Genre: Informal and Formal Analytical Reports
8.4 Annotated Student Sample: "U.S. Response to COVID-19" by Trevor Garcia
8.5 Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report
8.6 Editing Focus: Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information
8.7 Evaluation: Reviewing the Final Draft
8.8 Spotlight on ... Discipline-Specific and Technical Language
8.9 Portfolio: Evidence and Objectivity
INTRODUCTION The writing genre for this chapter is the analytical report. The broad purpose of an
analytical report is to inform and analyze--that is, to teach your readers (your audience) about a subject by
providing information based on facts supported by evidence and then drawing conclusions about the
significance of the information you provide. As an academic and professional genre, reports are necessarily
234 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

       objective, which can make for dry reading. Consider the writing identity that you have been developing
       throughout this course as you tackle this genre. In what ways can you give your report voice? In what ways can
       you acknowledge or challenge the conventions of the genre?

       You have likely written or presented a report at some point in your life as a student; perhaps you wrote a lab
       report on a science experiment, presented research you conducted, or analyzed a book you read. While some
       reports seek to inform readers about a topic, an analytical report examines a subject or an issue by
       considering its causes and effects, by comparing and contrasting, or by discussing a problem and proposing
       one or more solutions. See Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking for more about using these
       reasoning and organizational strategies in your writing.

     8.1 Information and Critical Thinking

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Distinguish between fact and opinion.
         · Recognize bias in reading and in yourself.
         · Ask critical thinking questions to explore an idea for a report.

       Knowledge in the social and natural sciences and technical fields is often focused on data and ideas that can
       be verified by observing, measuring, and testing. Accordingly, writers in these fields place high value on
       neutral and objective case analysis and inferences based on the careful examination of data. Put another way,
       writers describe and analyze results as they understand them. Likewise, writers in these fields avoid
       subjectivity, including personal opinions, speculations, and bias. As the writer of an analytical report, you
       need to know the difference between fact and opinion, be able to identify bias, and think critically and
       analytically.

      Distinguishing Fact from Opinion

       An analytical report provides information based on facts. Put simply, facts are statements that can be proven
       or whose truth can be inferred.

       It may be difficult to distinguish fact from opinion or allegation. As a writer, use a critical eye to examine what
       you read. The following are examples of factual statements:

         · Article I, Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution specifies that the legislative branch of the government consists
             of the Senate and the House of Representatives.

         · The school board voted to approve the administration's proposal.

       Facts that use numbers are called statistics. Some numbers are stated directly:

         · The earth's average land and ocean surface temperature in March 2020 was 2.09 degrees Fahrenheit
             higher than the average surface temperature during the 20th century.

         · The total number of ballots cast in the 2020 presidential election was approximately 159 million.
         · The survey results showed that 45 percent of first-year students at this university attended every class,

             whether in person or online.

       Other numbers are implied:

         · Mercury is the planet closest to the sun.
         · College tuition and fees have risen in the past decade.

       Factual statements such as those above stand in contrast to opinions, which are statements of belief or value.
       Opinions form the basis of claims that are supported by evidence in argumentative writing, but they should be
       avoided in informative and analytical writing. Here are two statements of opinion about an increase in college
       tuition and fees:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      8.1 · Information and Critical Thinking 235

  · Although tuition and fees have risen, the value of a college education is worth the cost.
  · The increase in college tuition and fees over the past 10 years has placed an unreasonably heavy financial

      burden on students.

Both statements indicate that the writer will make an argument. In the first, the writer will defend the
increases in college tuition and fees. In the second, the writer will argue that the increases in tuition and fees
have made college too expensive. In both arguments, the writer will support the argument with factual
evidence. See Proposal: Writing about Problems and Solutions for more information about fact and opinion.

Want to know more about facts? Read the blog post Fact-Checking 101 (https://openstax.org/r/fact-
checking101) by Laura McClure, posted to the TED-Ed website.

Recognizing Bias

In addition to distinguishing between fact and opinion, it is important to recognize bias. Bias is commonly
defined as a preconceived opinion about something--a subject, an idea, a person, or a group of people. As the
writer of a report, you will learn to recognize bias in yourself and in the information you gather.

Bias in What You Read

Some writing is intentionally biased and intended to persuade, such as the editorials and opinion pieces
described above. However, a report and the evidence on which it is based should not be heavily biased. Bias
becomes a problem when a source you believe to be neutral, objective, and trustworthy presents information
that attempts to sway your opinion. Identifying Bias (https://openstax.org/r/identifyingbias), posted by Tyler
Rablin, is a helpful guide to recognizing bias.

As you consider sources for your report, the following tips can also help you spot bias and read critically:

  · Determine the writer's purpose. Is the writer simply informing you or trying to persuade you?
  · Research the author. Is the writer known for taking a side on the topic of the writing? Is the writer

      considered an expert?
  · Distinguish between fact and opinion. Take note of the number of facts and opinions throughout the

      source.
  · Pay attention to the language and what the writer emphasizes. Does the author use emotionally loaded,

      inflammatory words or descriptions intended to sway readers? What do the title, introduction, and any
      headings tell you about the author's approach to the subject?
  · Read multiple sources on the topic. Learn whether the source is leaving out or glossing over important
      information and credible views.
  · Look critically at the images and any media that support the writing. Do they reinforce positive or
      negative aspects of the subject?

Bias in Yourself

Most individuals bring what psychologists call cognitive bias to their interactions with information or with
other people. Cognitive bias influences the way people gather and process new information. As you research
information for a report, also be aware of confirmation bias. This is the tendency to seek out and accept
information that supports (or confirms) a belief you already have and may cause you to ignore or dismiss
information that challenges that belief. A related bias is the false consensus effect, which is the tendency to
overestimate the extent to which other people agree with your beliefs.

For example, perhaps you believe strongly that college tuition is too high and that tuition should be free at the
public colleges and universities in your state. With that belief, you are likely to be more receptive to facts and
statistics showing that tuition-free college benefits students by boosting graduation rates and improving
financial security after college, in part because the sources may seem more mainstream. However, if you
believe strongly that tuition should not be free, you are likely to be more receptive to facts and statistics
showing that students who don't pay for college are less likely to be serious about school and take longer to
236 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

       graduate--again, because the sources may seem more mainstream.

      Asking Critical Questions about a Topic for a Report

       As you consider a topic for a report, note the ideas that occur to you, interesting information you read, and
       what you already know. Answer the following questions about potential topics to help you understand a topic
       in a suitably analytical framework for a report.

         · What is/was the cause of ________?
         · What is/was the effect of ________?
         · How does/did ________ compare or contrast with another similar event, idea, or item?
         · What makes/made ________ a problem?
         · What are/were some possible solutions to ________?
         · What beliefs do I have about ________?
         · What aspects of ________ do I need to learn more about to write a report about it?
       In the report that appears later in this chapter, student Trevor Garcia analyzes the U.S. response to the
       COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Trevor began thinking about his topic with the question What was the U.S.
       response to the COVID-19 pandemic? Because he had lived through 2020, he was able to draw upon personal
       experience: his school closed, his mother was laid off, and his family's finances were tight. As he researched
       his question, he moved beyond the information he gathered from his own experiences and discovered that the
       United States had failed in several key areas. He then answered the questions below to arrive at an analytical
       framework:
         · What was the cause of the poor U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020?
         · What was the effect of the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020?
         · How did the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic compare/contrast with the responses of other

             countries?
         · What are some possible solutions to the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic?
         · What do I already believe about the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic?
         · What aspects of the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic do I need to learn more about?
       For his report, Trevor chose to focus on the first question: What was the cause of the poor U.S. response to the
       COVID-19 pandemic in 2020?

     8.2 Trailblazer

     Analytical Report Trailblazer: Barbara Ehrenreich

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Define the term myth buster and its connection to field research.
         · Answer questions about what it means to investigate and report information.
         · Gather information from a biographical text.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                             8.2 · Trailblazer 237

                                                                                "As a
                                                                             journalist, I
                                                                             search for
                                                                             the truth."

FIGURE 8.2 Barbara Ehrenreich (https://openstax.org/r/barbaraehrenrich)
worked as a waitress as part of her research for Nickel and Dimed: On (Not)
Getting By in America (2001). (credit: "Customer service" by Alan Cleaver/
flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Myth-Buster

Self-described "myth buster by trade" Barbara Ehrenreich (b. 1941) has tackled many myths during her years
as an activist and a writer, most often confronting widely held beliefs related to health and wealth.

Ehrenreich was born in 1941 in Butte, Montana, the daughter of a copper miner who finished college after she
and her siblings were born. The family moved frequently when Ehrenreich was young and finally settled in Los
Angeles. Ehrenreich attended Reed College in Portland, Oregon, and went to graduate school at Rockefeller
University in New York City, where she earned a PhD in cell biology. Ehrenreich became involved in the
women's health movement in the 1970s and at that point decided to become a full-time writer. Her work life
settled into three tracks: "journalism, . . . book-length projects on subjects, . . . [and] activism." Over her long
career, she has written for magazines and newspapers and has published more than 20 books, the most recent
of which is Natural Causes: An Epidemic of Wellness, the Certainty of Dying, and Killing Ourselves to Live
Longer (2018).

Ehrenreich is perhaps best known for Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America (2001), a first-person
account of her three-month experiment trying to make ends meet on minimum wage. She went undercover,
leaving her middle-class home behind, and moved around the United States from Florida to Maine to
Minnesota. Ehrenreich worked as a waitress, hotel maid, house cleaner, nursing home aide, and Walmart
salesperson. On the wages and tips she made at her various jobs, she attempted to find healthy food, health
care, and affordable housing in trailer parks and residential hotels.

In Nickel and Dimed, Ehrenreich busts the myth that poor people have figured out how to live well on less
money than middle-class people. No such "secret economies" exist, Ehrenreich writes. Instead, poor people
pay "a host of special costs," whether for renting a room by the week because they cannot save up two months'
rent to get an apartment, buying restaurant food because the weekly room doesn't have a stove, or going to the
emergency room for a toothache because they can't afford to go to the dentist.

As a piece of writing, Nickel and Dimed falls into the genre of memoir. However, the book is also a report;
Ehrenreich conducted extensive on-the-ground field research, recording the tasks she performed at her jobs,
interactions with managers, and conversations with coworkers about their lives. She recorded her findings
when she was not working. Although some readers have criticized Ehrenreich for not being honest about her
background and education, most have praised the light she shines on the other side of American
prosperity--the people who work hard but who never manage to get ahead. Her work as a "myth buster" to
238 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

       expose the hardships faced by poor working people in America illustrates the problem of accepting opinions
       as facts.

       In the introduction to Nickel and Dimed, Ehrenreich describes the research methods. She also discusses
       Nickel and Dimed on C-Span (https://openstax.org/r/C-span).

      Discussion Questions

       1. What does Barbara Ehrenreich mean when she describes herself as a "myth buster"? If you were to bust a
            myth, what would it be?

       2. What facts do you think Ehrenreich discovered during her time working undercover? What opinions do you
            think she formed?

       3. What do you think were Ehrenreich's sources of information, and how did she obtain such information?

       4. If you went undercover to investigate and report on an issue that you think people should know about, what
            would it be? How would you go about your undercover reporting?

       5. Could someone live on minimum wage in your community? What information about the cost of housing,
            food, transportation, and medical care would you need to answer the question? How could you find it?

     8.3 Glance at Genre: Informal and Formal Analytical Reports

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Determine purpose and audience expectations for an analytical report.
         · Identify key features of informal and formal reports.
         · Define key terms and characteristics of an analytical report.

       It is important to understand the purpose of your report, the expectations of the audience, any specific
       formatting requirements, and the types of evidence you can use.

      Defining a Specific Purpose

       Your purpose is your reason for writing. The purpose of a report is to inform; as the writer, you are tasked with
       providing information and explaining it to readers. Many topics are suitable for informative writing--how to
       find a job, the way a disease spreads within a population, or the items on which people spend the most money.
       Some textbooks are examples of informative writing, as is much of the reporting you find on reputable news
       sites.

       An analytical report is a type of report. Its purpose is to present and analyze information. An assignment for an
       analytical report will likely include words such as analyze, compare, contrast, cause, and/or discuss, indicating
       the specific purpose of the report. Here are a few examples:

         · Discuss and analyze potential career paths with strong employment prospects for young adults.
         · Compare and contrast proposals to reduce binge drinking among college students.
         · Analyze the Cause-and-effect of injuries on construction sites and the effects of efforts to reduce

             workplace injuries.
         · Discuss the Effect of the 1965 Voting Rights Act on voting patterns among U.S. citizens of color.
         · Analyze the success and failure of strategies used by the major political parties to encourage citizens to

             vote.

      Tuning In to Audience Expectations

       The audience for your report consists of the people who will read it or who could read it. Are you writing for
       your instructor? For your classmates? For other students and teachers in professional fields or academic

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     8.3 · Glance at Genre: Informal and Formal Analytical Reports 239

disciplines? For people in your community? Whoever your readers are, they expect you to do the following:

  · Have an idea of what they already know about your topic, and adjust your writing as needed. If readers are
      new to the topic, they expect you to provide necessary background information. If they are knowledgeable
      about the topic, they will expect you to cover the background quickly.

  · Provide reliable information in the form of specific facts, statistics, and examples. Whether you present
      your own research or information from other sources, readers expect you to have done your homework in
      order to supply trustworthy information.

  · Define terms, especially if audience members may be unfamiliar with your topic.
  · Structure your report in a logical way. It should open with an introduction that tells readers the subject

      and should follow a logical structure.
  · Adopt an objective stance and neutral tone, free of any bias, personal feelings, or emotional language. By

      demonstrating objectivity, you show respect for your readers' knowledge and intelligence, and you build
      credibility and trust, or ethos, with them.
  · Present and cite source information fairly and accurately.

Informal Reports

An informal analytical report will identify a problem, provide factual information about the problem, and
draw conclusions about the information. An informal report is usually structured like an essay, with an
introduction or summary, body paragraphs, and a conclusion or recommendations. It will likely feature
headings identifying key sections and be presented in academic essay format, such as MLA Documentation
and Format or APA Documentation and Format. For an example of an informal analytical report documented
in APA style, see Trevor Garcia's paper on the U.S. response to COVID-19 in 2020 in the Annotated Student
Sample.

Other types of informal reports include journalism reports. A traditional journalism report involves a reporter
for a news organization reporting on the day's events--the results of an election, a political crisis, a plane
crash, a celebrity marriage--on TV, on radio, or in print. An investigative journalism report, on the other hand,
involves reporters doing original research over a period of weeks or months to uncover significant new
information, similar to what Barbara Ehrenreich did for her book Nickel and Dimed. For sample traditional
and investigative journalistic reports, visit the website of a reliable news organization or publication, such as
the New York Times (https://openstax.org/r/newyorktimes), the Washington Post (https://openstax.org/r/
washingtonpost), the Wall Street Journal (https://openstax.org/r/wallstreetjournal), the Economist
(https://openstax.org/r/economist), the New Yorker (https://openstax.org/r/newyorker), or the Atlantic
(https://openstax.org/r/atlantic).

Formal Reports

Writers in the social sciences, the natural sciences, technical fields, and business often write formal analytical
reports. These include lab reports, research reports, and proposals.

Formal reports present findings and data drawn from experiments, surveys, and research and often end with a
conclusion based on an analysis of these findings and data. These reports frequently include visuals such as
graphs, bar charts, pie charts, photographs, or diagrams that are captioned and referred to in the text. Formal
reports always cite sources of information, often using APA Documentation and Format, used in the examples
in this chapter, or a similar style.

If you are assigned a formal report in a class, follow the instructions carefully. Your instructor will likely
explain the assignment in detail and provide explicit directions and guidelines for the research you will need
to do (including any permission required by your college or university if you conduct research on human
subjects), how to organize the information you gather, and how to write and format your report. A formal report
is a complex, highly organized, and often lengthy document with a specified format and sections usually
marked by headings.
240 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

       Following are the components of a formal analytical report. Depending on the assignment and the audience, a
       formal report you write may include some or all of these parts. For example, a research report following APA
       format usually includes a title page, an abstract, headings for components of the body of the report (methods,
       results, discussion), and a references page. Detailed APA guidelines are available online, including at the
       Purdue University Online Writing Lab (https://openstax.org/r/purdueuniversity).

       Components of Formal Analytical Reports

         · Letter of transmittal. When a report is submitted, it is usually accompanied by a letter or email to the
             recipient explaining the nature of the report and signed by those responsible for writing it. Write the letter
             of transmittal when the report is finished and ready for submission.

         · Title page. The title page includes the title of the report, the name(s) of the author(s), and the date it was
             written or submitted. The report title should describe the report simply, directly, and clearly and should
             not try to be too clever. For example, The New Student Writing Project: A Two-Year Report is a clear,
             descriptive title, whereas Write On, Students! is not.

         · Acknowledgments. If other people and/or organizations contributed to the report, include a page or
             paragraph thanking them.

         · Table of contents. For long reports (10 pages or more), create a table of contents to help readers navigate
             easily. List the major components and subsections of the report and the pages on which they begin.

         · Executive summary or abstract. The executive summary or abstract is a paragraph that highlights the
             findings of the report. The purpose of this section is to present information in the quickest, most
             concentrated, and most economical way possible to be useful to readers. Write this section after you have
             completed the rest of the report.

         · Introduction or background. The introduction provides necessary background information to help
             readers understand the report. This section also indicates what information is included in the report.

         · Methods. Especially in the social sciences, the natural sciences, and technical disciplines, the methods or
             procedures section outlines how you gathered information and from what sources, such as experiments,
             surveys, library research, interviews, and so on.

         · Results. In the results section, you summarize the data you have collected from your research, explain
             your method of analysis, and present this information in detail, often in a table, graph, or chart.

         · Discussion or Conclusion. In this section, you interpret the results and present the conclusions of your
             research. This section also may be called "Discussion of Findings."

         · Recommendations. In this section, you explain what you believe should be done in response to your
             research findings.

         · References and bibliography. The references section includes every source you cited in the report. The
             bibliography contains, in addition to those cited in the report, sources that readers can consult to learn
             more.

         · Appendix. An appendix (plural: appendices) includes documents that are related to the report or contain
             information that can be culled but are not deemed central to understanding the report.

       The following links take you to sample formal reports written by students and offer tips from librarians posted
       by colleges and universities in the United States. These samples may help you better understand what is
       involved in writing a formal analytical report.

         · Product review report (https://openstax.org/r/productreviewreport), from the University/College Library of
             Broward College and Florida Atlantic University

         · Business report (https://openstax.org/r/businessreport), from Wright State University
         · Technical report (https://openstax.org/r/technicalreport), from the University of Utah
         · Lab report (https://openstax.org/r/labreport), from Hamilton College
         · Field report (https://openstax.org/r/fieldreport), from the University of Southern California

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                           8.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "U.S. Response to COVID-19" by Trevor Garcia 241

Exploring the Genre

The following are key terms and characteristics related to reports.

  · Audience: Readers of a report or any piece of writing.
  · Bias: A preconceived opinion about something, such as a subject, an idea, a person, or a group of people.

      As a reader, be attentive to potential bias in sources; as a writer, be attentive to your own biases.
  · Body: The main part of a report between the introduction and the conclusion. The body of an analytical

      report consists of paragraphs in which the writer presents and analyzes key information.
  · Citation of sources: References in the written text to sources that a writer has used in a report.
  · Conclusion and/or recommendation: The last part of a report. In this section, the writer summarizes the

      significance of the information in the report or offers recommendations--or both.
  · Critical thinking: The ability to look beneath the surface of words and images to analyze, interpret, and

      evaluate them.
  · Ethos: The sense that the writer or other authority is trustworthy and credible; also known as ethical

     appeal.
  · Evidence: Statements of fact, statistics, examples, and expert opinions that support the writer's points.
  · Facts: Statements whose truth can be proved or verified and that serve as evidence in a report.
  · Introduction: The first section of a report after any front matter, such as an abstract or table of contents. In

      an analytical report, the writer introduces the topic to be addressed and often presents the thesis at the
      end of the introduction.
  · Logos: The use of facts as evidence to appeal to an audience's logical and rational thinking; also known as
     logical appeal.
  · Objective stance: Writing in a way that is free from bias, personal feelings, and emotional language. An
      objective stance is especially important in report writing.
  · Purpose: The reason for writing. The purpose of an analytical report is to examine a subject or issue
      closely, often from multiple perspectives, by looking at causes and effects, by comparing and contrasting,
      or by examining problems and proposing solutions.
  · Statistics: Factual statements that include numbers and often serve as evidence in a report.
  · Synthesis: Making connections among and combining ideas, facts, statistics, and other information.
  · Thesis: The central or main idea that you will convey in your report. The thesis is often referred to as the
      central claim in argumentative writing.
  · Thesis statement: A declarative sentence (sometimes two) that states the topic, the angle you are taking,
      and the aspects of the topic you will cover. For a report, a thesis indicates and limits the scope of the
      report.

8.4 Annotated Student Sample: "U.S. Response to COVID-19" by Trevor Garcia

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify the genre conventions of an informal analytical report.
  · Analyze the organizational structure of a report and how writers develop ideas.
  · Recognize how writers use evidence and objectivity to build credibility.
  · Identify sources of evidence within a text and in source citations.
            242 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

s

                                                                                              end s

                 FIGURE 8.3 Doctors, nurses, and corpsmen aboard the Navy hospital ship USNS Comfort provided intensive care
                 for patients in spring 2020 to relieve the New York City medical system, which was overwhelmed by cases of
                 COVID-19. (credit: "U.S. Navy Doctors, Nurses and Corpsmen Treat COVID Patients in the ICU Aboard USNS
                 Comfort" by Navy Medicine from Washington, DC, USA/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

              Introduction

                 The analytical report that follows was written by a student, Trevor Garcia, for a first-year composition course.
                 Trevor's assignment was to research and analyze a contemporary issue in terms of its causes or effects. He
                 chose to analyze the causes behind the large numbers of COVID-19 infections and deaths in the United States
                 in 2020. The report is structured as an essay, and its format is informal.

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS
              Successes and Failures

                        With more than 83 million cases and 1.8 million deaths at the end of 2020, COVID-19 has turned the world
                        upside down. By the end of 2020, the United States led the world in the number of cases, at more than 20
                        million infections and nearly 350,000 deaths. In comparison, the second-highest number of cases was in India,
                        which at the end of 2020 had less than half the number of COVID-19 cases despite having a population four
                        times greater than the U.S. ("COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic," 2021). How did the United States come to
                        have the world's worst record in this pandemic? An examination of the U.S. response shows that a reduction of
                        experts in key positions and programs, inaction that led to equipment shortages, and inconsistent policies were
                        three major causes of the spread of the virus and the resulting deaths.
                 Ianntnrootdaut ction. Informal reports follow essay structure and open with an overview.end annotat
                 Santantoitsatitcs as Evidence. The writer gives statistics about infection rates and numbers of deaths; a comparison
                 provides context.end annotat
                 SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: No Author. A web page without a named author is cited by the title and the year.end annotat
                 TanhneostisatStatement. The rhetorical question leads to the thesis statement in the last sentence of the introduction.
                 The thesis statement previews the organization and indicates the purpose--to analyze the causes of the U.S.
                 response to the virus.end annotat

              Reductions in Expert Personnel and Preparedness Programs

                 Hanenaodtiantgs. This heading and those that follow mark sections of the report.end annotat

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
   8.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "U.S. Response to COVID-19" by Trevor Garcia 243

   Banondoyt.aTthe three paragraphs under this heading support the first main point in the thesis statement.end annotat

   Epidemiologists and public health officials in the United States had long known that a global pandemic was
   possible.

s  TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topic. The rest of this paragraph and ethnedtswo that

   follow develop the topic chronologically.end annotat

   In 2016, the National Security Council (NSC) published Playbook for Early Response to High-Consequence
   Emerging Infectious Disease Threats and Biological Incidents, a 69-page document on responding to diseases
   spreading within and outside of the United States. On January 13, 2017, the joint transitioenntdeasms of outgoing
   president Barack Obama and then president-elect Donald Trump performed a pandemic preparedness exercise
   baesendd osn the playbook; however, it was never adopted by the incoming administration (Goodman & Schulkin,
   2020). A year later, in February 2018, the Trump administration began to cut funding for the Prevention and
   Public Health Fund at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, leaving key positions unfilled. Other
   individuals who were fired or resigned in 2018 were the homeland security adviser, whose portfolio included
   global pandemics; the director for medical and biodefense preparedness; and the top official in charge of a
   pandemic response. None of them were replaced, thus leaving the White House with no senior person who had
   experience in public health (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). Experts voiced concerns, among them Luciana Borio,
   director of medical and biodefense preparedness at the NSC, who spoke at a symposeiunmd smarking the
   centennial of the 1918 influenza pandemic in May 2018: "The threat of pandemic flu is the number one health
   security concern," she said. "Are we ready to respond? I fear the answer is no" (Sun, 2018, final para.).

   Aanundoietantce. The writer assumes that his readers have a strong grasp of government and agencies within the               end annotat
   government.

   Sanynothtaetsis. The paragraph synthesizes factual evidence from two sources and cites them in APA style.end annotat

   EanxnpoetrattQuotation as Supporting Evidence. The expert's credentials are given, her exact words are placed in
   quotation marks, and the source is cited in parentheses.end annotat

   SanonuorctaetCitation in APA Style: No Page Numbers. Because the source of the quotation has no page numbers, the
   specific paragraph within the source ("final para."; alternatively, "para. 18") is provided in the parenthetical citation.end annotat

   Cuts continued in 2019, among them a maintenance contract for ventilators in the federal emergency supply
   and PREDICT, a U.S. agency for international development designed to identify and prevent pandemics
   (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). In July 2019, the White House eliminated the position of an American public
   health official in Beijing, China, who was working with China's disease control agency to help detect and contain
   infectious diseases. The first case of COVID-19 emerged in China four months later, on November 17, 2019.

   Danenvoetlaotpment of First Main Point. This paragraph continues the chronological development of the first point, using
   a transitional sentence and evidence to discuss the year 2019.end annotat

   After the first U.S. coronavirus case was confirmed in 2020, the secretary of the Department of Health and
   Human Services (HHS) was named to lead a task force on a response, but after several months, he was
   replaced when then vice president Mike Pence was officially charged with leading the White House Coronavirus
   Task Force (Ballhaus & Armour, 2020). Experts who remained, including Dr. Deborah Birx and Dr. Anthony Fauci
   of the National Institutes of Health, were sidelined. Turnover of personnel in related government departments
   and agencies continued throughout 2020, leaving the country without experts in key positions to lead the
   pandemic response.

   Danenvoetlaotpment of First Main Point. This paragraph continues the chronological development of the first point, using
   a transitional sentence and evidence to discuss the start of the pandemic in 2020.end annotat
   244 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

   Inaction and Equipment Shortages

   Banondoyt.aTthe three paragraphs under this heading support the second main point in the thesis statement.end annotat

   In January and February of 2020, the president's daily brief included more than a dozen detailed warnings,

   based on wire intercepts, computer intercepts, and satellite images by the U.S. intelligence community (Miller &

s  Nakashima, 2020). Although senior officials beganentod asssemble a task force, no direct action was taken until

   mid-March.

   enTadonpnsoictaStentences. The paragraph opens with two sentences stating the topic that is developed in the following      end annotat
     paragraphs.

   The stockpile of medical equipment and personal protective equipment was danegnedrosusly low before the
   pandemic began. Although the federal government had paid $9.8 million to manufacturers in 2018 and 2019 to
   ednedveslop and produce protective masks, by April 2020 the government had not yet received a single mask
   (Swaine, 2020). Despite the low stockpile, a request ebnydthse head of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in
   early 2020 to begin contacting companies about possible shortages of necessary medical equipment, including
   personal protective equipment, was denied. This decision was made to avoid alarming the industry and the
   public and to avoid giving the impression that the administration was not prepared for the pandemic (Ballhaus
   & Armour, 2020).

   TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topic that is developed in the paragraph.end annotat

   Oanbnjeoctatitve Stance. The writer presents evidence (facts, statistics, and examples) in mostly neutral, unemotional
   language, which builds trustworthiness, or ethos, with readers.end annotat

   Sanynothtaetsis. The paragraph synthesizes factual evidence from two sources.end annotat

   When former President Trump declared a national emergency on March 13, federal agencies began placing bulk
   orders for masks and other medical equipment. These orders led to critical shortages throughout the nation. In
   addition, states were instructed to acquire their own equipment and found themselves bidding against each
   other for the limited supplies available, leading one head of a coronavirus team composed of consulting and
   private equity firms to remark that "the federal stockpile was . . . supposed to be our stockpile. It's not
   supposed to be states' stockpiles that they then use" (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020, April 2, 2020).

   Policy Decisions

   Banondoyt.aTthe paragraph under this heading addresses the third main point in the thesis statement.end annotat

   Policy decisions, too, hampered the U.S. response to the pandemic.

   TaonpnoictaStentence. The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topic that is developed in the paragraph.end annotat

   Although the HHS and NSC recommended stay-at-home directives on February 14, directives and guidelines for
   social distancing were not announced until March 16, and guidelines for mask wearing were inconsistent and
   contradictory (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). Implementing the recommendations was left to the discretion of
   state governors, resulting in uneven stay-at-home orders, business closures, school closures, and mask
   mandates from state to state. The lack of a consistent message from the federal government not only delegated
   responsibility to state and local governments but also encouraged individuals to make their own choices,
   further hampering containment efforts. Seeing government officials and politicians without masks, for example,
   led many people to conclude that masks were unnecessary. Seeing large groups of people standing together at
   political rallies led people to ignore social distancing in their own lives.

   Sanynothtaetsis. The paragraph synthesizes factual evidence from a source and examples drawn from the writer's              end annotat
   observation.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                8.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "U.S. Response to COVID-19" by Trevor Garcia 245

   Conclusion

   Although the first cases of COVID-19 were detected in the United States in January, genetic researchers later

   determined that the viral strain responsible for sustained transmission of the disease did not enter the country

   until around February 13 (Branswell, 2020), providing further evidence that the failed U.S. response to the

s  pandemic could have been prevented. Cuts to public health staff reduced the number of experts in leadership

   positions. Inaction in the early months of the pandemic led to critical shortages of medical equipment and

   supplies. Mixed messages and inconsistent policies undermined efforts to control and contain the disease.

   Unfortunately, the response to the disease in 2020 cannot be changed, but 2021 looks brighter. Most people

   who want the vaccine--nonexistent at the beginning of the pandemic and unavailable until recently--will have

   received it by the end of 2021. Americans will have experienced two years of living with the coronavirus, and

   everyone will have been affected in some way.

   Canonnoctlautsion. The report concludes with a restatement of the main points given in the thesis and points to the future.end annotat

                         end s                    References

   Ballhaus, R., & Armour, S. (2020, April 22). Health chief's early missteps set back coronavirus response. Wall Street

   Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/health-chiefs-early-missteps-set-back-coronavirus-

   response-11587570514

   Branswell, H. (2020, May 26). New research rewrites history of when COVID-19 took off in the U.S.--and points to
      missed chances to stop it. STAT. https://www.statnews.com/2020/05/26/new-research-rewrites-history-of-
       when-covid-19-arrived-in-u-s-and-points-to-missed-chances-to-stop-it/

   COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic. (2021, January 13). Worldometer. https://www.worldometers.info/
       coronavirus/#countries

   Goodman, R., & Schulkin, D. (2020, November 3). Timeline of the coronavirus pandemic and U.S. response. Just
       Security. https://www.justsecurity.org/69650/timeline-of-the-coronavirus-pandemic-and-u-s-response/

   Miller, G., & Nakashima, E. (2020, April 27). President's intelligence briefing book repeatedly cited virus threat.
      Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/presidents-intelligence-briefing-book-
       repeatedly-cited-virus-threat/2020/04/27/ca66949a-8885-11ea-ac8a-fe9b8088e101_story.html

   Sun, L. H. (2018, May 10). Top White House official in charge of pandemic response exits abruptly. Washington Post.
       https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2018/05/10/top-white-house-official-in-charge-of-
       pandemic-response-exits-abruptly/

   Swaine, J. (2020, April 3). Federal government spent millions to ramp up mask readiness, but that isn't helping now.
      Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/federal-government-spent-millions-to-ramp-
       up-mask-readiness-but-that-isnt-helping-now/2020/04/03/d62dda5c-74fa-11ea-
       a9bd-9f8b593300d0_story.html

   Ranenfeorteant ces Page in APA Style. All sources cited in the text of the report, and only those sources, are listed in
   alphabetical order with full publication information. See the Handbook for more on APA documentation style.end annotat

   Discussion Questions

   1. Trevor Garcia identifies three reasons for the failure of the United States to contain the coronavirus in
       2020. What are they? Can you think of others he should have included?

   2. What does Trevor use as evidence--facts, statistics, examples? What are the sources of his evidence? Are his
       sources credible and reliable?

   3. Analyze Trevor's objectivity and bias as a writer. Is his language objective? Give examples of where he is
       objective and where he reveals his bias.
246 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

4. In what ways does Trevor view the U.S. response to the pandemic through the lens of critical, analytical
    thinking? Give examples.

5. What are three strengths of Trevor's report? What are three weaknesses?

8.5 Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify the elements of the rhetorical situation for your report.
  · Find and focus a topic to write about.
  · Gather and analyze information from appropriate sources.
  · Distinguish among different kinds of evidence.
  · Draft a thesis and create an organizational plan.
  · Compose a report that develops ideas and integrates evidence from sources.
  · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

You might think that writing comes easily to experienced writers--that they draft stories and college papers all
at once, sitting down at the computer and having sentences flow from their fingers like water from a faucet. In
reality, most writers engage in a recursive process, pushing forward, stepping back, and repeating steps
multiple times as their ideas develop and change. In broad strokes, the steps most writers go through are
these:

  · Planning and Organization. You will have an easier time drafting if you devote time at the beginning to
      consider the rhetorical situation for your report, understand your assignment, gather ideas and
      information, draft a thesis statement, and create an organizational plan.

  · Drafting. When you have an idea of what you want to say and the order in which you want to say it, you're
      ready to draft. As much as possible, keep going until you have a complete first draft of your report,
      resisting the urge to go back and rewrite. Save that for after you have completed a first draft.

  · Review. Now is the time to get feedback from others, whether from your instructor, your classmates, a
      tutor in the writing center, your roommate, someone in your family, or someone else you trust to read your
      writing critically and give you honest feedback.

  · Revising. With feedback on your draft, you are ready to revise. You may need to return to an earlier step
      and make large-scale revisions that involve planning, organizing, and rewriting, or you may need to work
      mostly on ensuring that your sentences are clear and correct.

Considering the Rhetorical Situation

Like other kinds of writing projects, a report starts with assessing the rhetorical situation--the circumstance
in which a writer communicates with an audience of readers about a subject. As the writer of a report, you
make choices based on the purpose of your writing, the audience who will read it, the genre of the report, and
the expectations of the community and culture in which you are working. A graphic organizer like Table 8.1
can help you begin.

Rhetorical Situation Element                    Brainstorming Questions                                   Your
                                                                                                      Responses

Topic                                          What topic or topics do you want to know more about?
                                               How can you find out more about this topic or topics?
Is the topic of your report specified, or      What constraints do you have?
are you free to choose?

TABLE 8.1 Considering the rhetorical situation

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                8.5 · Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 247

      Rhetorical Situation Element                            Brainstorming Questions                   Your
                                                                                                    Responses
Purpose                                 To analyze a subject or issue from more than one
What is the purpose of your report?     perspective?
                                        To analyze a cause or an effect?
                                        To examine a problem and recommend a solution?
                                        To compare or contrast?
                                        To conduct research and report results?

Audience                                Who is your primary audience--your instructor? Your
Who will read your report?              classmates?

                                        What can you assume your audience already knows about
                                        your topic?

                                        What background information does your audience need to
                                        know?

                                        How will you shape your report to connect most effectively
                                        with this audience?

                                        Do you need to consider any secondary audiences, such as
                                        people outside of class?

                                        If so, who are those readers?

Presentation                            Should you prepare a traditional written document or use
What format should your report take?    another medium, such as a slide deck or video
                                        presentation?

                                        Should you include visuals and other media along with
                                        text, such as figures, charts, graphs, photographs, audio,
                                        or video?

                                        What other presentation requirements do you need to
                                        consider?

Context                                 What is happening in your city, county, state, area, or
                                        nation or the world that needs reporting on?
How do the time period and location
affect decisions you make about your    What current events or new information might relate to
report?                                 your topic?

                                        Is your college or university relevant to your topic?

Culture and Community                   How will you show awareness of your community's social
                                        and cultural expectations in your report?
What social or cultural assumptions do
you or your audience have?

TABLE 8.1 Considering the rhetorical situation
248 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

      Summary of Assignment

       Write an analytical report on a topic that interests you and that you want to know more about. The topic can be
       contemporary or historical, but it must be one that you can analyze and support with evidence from sources.

       The following questions can help you think about a topic suitable for analysis:

        1. Why or how did ________ happen?
        2. What are the results or effects of ________?
        3. Is ________ a problem? If so, why?
        4. What are examples of ________ or reasons for ________?
        5. How does ________ compare to or contrast with other issues, concerns, or things?

       Consult and cite three to five reliable sources. The sources do not have to be scholarly for this assignment, but
       they must be credible, trustworthy, and unbiased. Possible sources include academic journals, newspapers,
       magazines, reputable websites, government publications or agency websites, and visual sources such as TED
       Talks. You may also use the results of an experiment or survey, and you may want to conduct interviews.

       Consider whether visuals and media will enhance your report. Can you present data you collect visually?
       Would a map, photograph, chart, or other graphic provide interesting and relevant support? Would video or
       audio allow you to present evidence that you would otherwise need to describe in words?
       Another Lens. To gain another analytic view on the topic of your report, consider different people affected by
       it. Say, for example, that you have decided to report on recent high school graduates and the effect of the
       COVID-19 pandemic on the final months of their senior year. If you are a recent high school graduate, you
       might naturally gravitate toward writing about yourself and your peers. But you might also consider the adults
       in the lives of recent high school graduates--for example, teachers, parents, or grandparents--and how they
       view the same period. Or you might consider the same topic from the perspective of a college admissions
       department looking at their incoming freshman class.

             Quick Launch: Finding and Focusing a Topic

       Coming up with a topic for a report can be daunting because you can report on nearly anything. The topic can
       easily get too broad, trapping you in the realm of generalizations. The trick is to find a topic that interests you
       and focus on an angle you can analyze in order to say something significant about it. You can use a graphic
       organizer to generate ideas, or you can use a concept map similar to the one featured in Writing Process:
       Thinking Critically About a "Text."
       Asking the Journalist's Questions

       One way to generate ideas about a topic is to ask the five W (and one H) questions, also called the journalist's
       questions: Who? What? When? Where? Why? How? Try answering the following questions to explore a topic:

       Who was or is involved in ________?

       What happened/is happening with ________? What were/are the results of ________?

       When did ________ happen? Is ________ happening now?

       Where did ________ happen, or where is ________ happening?

       Why did ________ happen, or why is ________ happening now?

       How did ________ happen?

       For example, imagine that you have decided to write your analytical report on the effect of the COVID-19
       shutdown on high-school students by interviewing students on your college campus. Your questions and
       answers might look something like those in Table 8.2:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                              8.5 · Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 249

Question                                      Sample Answer

Who was             Nearly every student of my generation was sent home to learn in 2020. My school was one of
involved in the     the first in the United States to close. We were in school one day, and then we were all sent
2020 COVID-19       home, wondering when we would go back.
shutdown?

What happened       Schools closed in March 2020. Students started online learning. Not all of them had
during the          computers. Teachers had to figure out how to teach online. All activities were
shutdown?           canceled--sports, music, theater, prom, graduation celebrations--pretty much everything.
                    Social life went online. Life as we knew it changed and still hasn't returned to normal.
What were/are
the results of
the shutdown?

When did the        Everything was canceled from March through the end of the school year. Although many
shutdown            colleges have in-person classes, many of us are doing most of our classes online, even if we
happen? Is it       are living on campus. This learning situation hasn't been easy. I need to decide whether I want
happening now?      to focus on then or now.

Where did the       Schools were closed all over the United States and all over the world. Some schools are still
shutdown            closed.
happen, or
where is it still
happening?

Why did the         Schools closed because the virus was highly contagious, and no one knew much about how
shutdown            many people would get sick from it or how sick they would get. Many schools were still closed
happen, or why      for much of the 2020-21 school year.
is it happening
now?

How was the         Governors of many states, including mine, issued orders for schools to close. Now colleges are
shutdown            making their own plans.
implemented?
How is it still in
effect?

TABLE 8.2 Journalist's questions and answers

Asking Focused Questions

Another way to find a topic is to ask focused questions about it. For example, you might ask the following
questions about the effect of the 2020 pandemic shutdown on recent high school graduates:

  · How did the shutdown change students' feelings about their senior year?
  · How did the shutdown affect their decisions about post-graduation plans, such as work or going to college?
  · How did the shutdown affect their academic performance in high school or in college?
  · How did/do they feel about continuing their education?
  · How did the shutdown affect their social relationships?

Any of these questions might be developed into a thesis for an analytical report. Table 8.3 shows more
examples of broad topics and focusing questions.
250 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

                  Broad Topics                                                   Focusing Questions

Sports, such as college athletes and           How does participating in a sport affect the academic performance of
academic performance                           college athletes?
                                               Does participation help or hurt students' grades?
                                               Does participation improve athletes' study habits?

Culture and society, such as cancel            Who is affected by cancel culture? Who is canceled, and who is
culture                                        empowered?

                                               How do the lives of people who are canceled change? How do the lives
                                               of people who are canceling others change?

                                               How does cancel culture affect community attitudes and actions?

History and historical events, such as         How did voting patterns change after the passage of the Voting Rights
the Voting Rights Act of 1965                  Act of 1965?

                                               How has the law been challenged?

                                               How have voting patterns changed in the years since the law was
                                               challenged?

Health and the environment, such as a          What are the known health benefits of a plant-based diet?
plant-based diet                               What are the effects of a plant-based diet on the environment?
                                               How much money can a person save (or not save) by adopting a plant-
                                               based diet, such as vegetarianism or veganism?

Entertainment and the arts, such as TV         How do TV talent shows affect the careers of their contestants?
talent shows                                   How many of the contestants continue to develop their talent?
                                               How many continue to perform several years after their appearance on
                                               a show?

Technologies and objects, such as              Do people depend on smartphones more than they did a year ago? Five
smartphones                                    years ago?

                                               What has changed about people's relationships with their phones?

TABLE 8.3 Broad topics and focusing questions

Gathering Information

Because they are based on information and evidence, most analytical reports require you to do at least some
research. Depending on your assignment, you may be able to find reliable information online, or you may need
to do primary research by conducting an experiment, a survey, or interviews. For example, if you live among
students in their late teens and early twenties, consider what they can tell you about their lives that you might
be able to analyze. Returning to or graduating from high school, starting college, or returning to college in the
midst of a global pandemic has provided them, for better or worse, with educational and social experiences

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                   8.5 · Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 251

that are shared widely by people their age and very different from the experiences older adults had at the same
age.

Some report assignments will require you to do formal research, an activity that involves finding sources and
evaluating them for reliability, reading them carefully, taking notes, and citing all words you quote and ideas
you borrow. See Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and Annotated Bibliography:
Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources for detailed instruction on conducting research.

Whether you conduct in-depth research or not, keep track of the ideas that come to you and the information
you learn. You can write or dictate notes using an app on your phone or computer, or you can jot notes in a
journal if you prefer pen and paper. Then, when you are ready to begin organizing your report, you will have a
record of your thoughts and information. Always track the sources of information you gather, whether from
printed or digital material or from a person you interviewed, so that you can return to the sources if you need
more information. And always credit the sources in your report.

Kinds of Evidence

Depending on your assignment and the topic of your report, certain kinds of evidence may be more effective
than others. Other kinds of evidence may even be required. As a general rule, choose evidence that is rooted in
verifiable facts and experience. In addition, select the evidence that best supports the topic and your approach
to the topic, be sure the evidence meets your instructor's requirements, and cite any evidence you use that
comes from a source. The following list contains different kinds of frequently used evidence and an example of
each.

  · Definition: An explanation of a key word, idea, or concept.

     The U.S. Census Bureau refers to a "young adult" as a person between 18 and 34 years old.

  · Example: An illustration of an idea or concept.

     The college experience in the fall of 2020 was starkly different from that of previous years. Students who
     lived in residence halls were assigned to small pods. On-campus dining services were limited. Classes
     were small and physically distanced or conducted online. Parties were banned.

  · Expert opinion: A statement by a professional in the field whose opinion is respected.

     According to Louise Aronson, MD, geriatrician and author of Elderhood, people over the age of 65 are the
     happiest of any age group, reporting "less stress, depression, worry, and anger, and more enjoyment,
     happiness, and satisfaction" (255).

  · Fact: Information that can be proven correct or accurate.

     According to data collected by the NCAA, the academic success of Division I college athletes between 2015
     and 2019 was consistently high (Hosick).

  · Interview: An in-person, phone, or remote conversation that involves an interviewer posing questions to
      another person or people.

     During our interview, I asked Betty about living without a cell phone during the pandemic. She said that
     before the pandemic, she hadn't needed a cell phone in her daily activities, but she soon realized that she,
     and people like her, were increasingly at a disadvantage.

  · Quotation: The exact words of an author or a speaker.

     In response to whether she thought she needed a cell phone, Betty said, "I got along just fine without a cell
     phone when I could go everywhere in person. The shift to needing a phone came suddenly, and I don't
     have extra money in my budget to get one."

  · Statistics: A numerical fact or item of data.
   252 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

   The Pew Research Center reported that approximately 25 percent of Hispanic Americans and 17 percent
   of Black Americans relied on smartphones for online access, compared with 12 percent of White people.

   · Survey: A structured interview in which respondents (the people who answer the survey questions) are all

   asked the same questions, either in person or through print or electronic means, and their answers

s  tabulated and interpreted. Surveys discover attitudes, beliefs, or habits of the general public or segments

   of the population.

   end s                                          end s

   A survey of 3,000 mobile phone users in October 2020 showed that 54 percent of respondents used their

   phones for messaging, while 40 percent used their phones for calls (Steele).

     · Visuals: Graphs, figures, tables, photographs and other images, diagrams, charts, maps, videos, and audio
         recordings, among others.

   Thesis and Organization

   Drafting a Thesis

   When you have a grasp of your topic, move on to the next phase: drafting a thesis. The thesis is the central idea
   that you will explore and support in your report; all paragraphs in your report should relate to it. In an essay-
   style analytical report, you will likely express this main idea in a thesis statement of one or two sentences
   toward the end of the introduction.

   For example, if you found that the academic performance of student athletes was higher than that of non-
   athletes, you might write the following thesis statement:

   Although a common stereotype is that college athletes barely pass their classes, an analysis of athletes'
   academic performance indicates that athletes drop fewer classes, earn higher grades, and are more likely to be
   on track to graduate in four years when compared with their non-athlete peers.

   The thesis statement often previews the organization of your writing. For example, in his report on the U.S.
   response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Trevor Garcia wrote the following thesis statement, which
   detailed the central idea of his report:

   An examination of the U.S. response shows that a reduction of experts in key positions and programs, inaction
   that led to equipment shortages, and inconsistent policies were three major causes of the spread of the virus
   and the resulting deaths.

   After you draft a thesis statement, ask these questions, and examine your thesis as you answer them. Revise
   your draft as needed.

   · Is it interesting? A thesis for a report should answer a question that is worth asking and piques curiosity.
   · Is it precise and specific? If you are interested in reducing pollution in a nearby lake, explain how to stop

      the zebra mussel infestation or reduce the frequent algae blooms.
   · Is it manageable? Try to split the difference between having too much information and not having

      enough.

   Organizing Your Ideas

   As a next step, organize the points you want to make in your report and the evidence to support them. Use an
   outline, a diagram, or another organizational tool, such as Table 8.4.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                             8.5 · Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 253

         Report Section                                      Content                                         Your
                                                                                                             Notes

                                Draw readers in with an overview; an anecdote; a question (open-ended, not

s                               yes-or-no); a description of an event, scene, or situation; or a quotation.

   Introduction (usually one

   paragraph, but can be        Provide necessary background here or in the first paragraph of the body,

   two)                         defining terms as needed.

                                State the tentative thesis.

                                                                                        underline

   First Main Point             Give the first main point related to the thesis.

                                Develop the point in paragraphs supported by evidence.
                                eennddusnderline

   Second Main Point            Give the second main point related to the thesis.
                                Develop the point in paragraphs supported by evidence.

   Additional Main Points       Give the third and additional main point(s) related to the thesis.
                                Develop the points in paragraphs supported by evidence.

   Conclusion                   Conclude with a summary of the main points, a recommended course of
                                action, and/or a review of the introduction and restatement of the thesis.

   TABLE 8.4 Organization plan

   Drafting an Analytical Report

   With a tentative thesis, an organization plan, and evidence, you are ready to begin drafting. For this
   assignment, you will report information, analyze it, and draw conclusions about the cause of something, the
   effect of something, or the similarities and differences between two different things.

   Introduction

   Some students write the introduction first; others save it for last. Whenever you choose to write the
   introduction, use it to draw readers into your report. Make the topic of your report clear, and be concise and
   sincere. End the introduction with your thesis statement. Depending on your topic and the type of report, you
   can write an effective introduction in several ways. Opening a report with an overview is a tried-and-true
   strategy, as shown in the following example on the U.S. response to COVID-19 by Trevor Garcia. Notice how he
   opens the introduction with statistics and a comparison and follows it with a question that leads to the thesis
   statement (underlined).

               With more than 83 million cases and 1.8 million deaths at the end of 2020, COVID-19 has turned the
               world upside down. By the end of 2020, the United States led the world in the number of cases, at
               more than 20 million infections and nearly 350,000 deaths. In comparison, the second-highest
               number of cases was in India, which at the end of 2020 had less than half the number of COVID-19
               cases despite having a population four times greater than the U.S. ("COVID-19 Coronavirus
               Pandemic," 2021). How did the United States come to have the world's worst record in this pandemic?
               An examination of the U.S. response shows that a reduction of experts in key positions and programs,
               inaction that led to equipment shortages, and inconsistent policies were three major causes of the
               spread of the virus and the resulting deaths.
   254 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

   For a less formal report, you might want to open with a question, quotation, or brief story. The following
   example opens with an anecdote that leads to the thesis statement (underlined).

   Betty stood outside the salon, wondering how to get in. It was June of 2020, and the door was locked.

   A sign posted on the door provided a phone number for her to call to be let in, but at 81, Betty had

s  lived her life without a cell phone. Betty's day-to-day life had been hard during the pandemic, but she

   had planned for this haircut and was looking forward to it; she had a mask on and hand sanitizer in her

   car. Now she couldn't get in the door, and she was discouraged. In that moment, Betty realized how

   much Americans' dependence on cell phones had grown in the months since the pandemic began.

   Betty and thousands of other senior citizens who could not afford cell phones or did not have the
   technological skills and support they needed were being left behind in a socieutnydtehralitnwe as increasingly

   reliant on technology.

   Body Paeernandgdruasnpdhesr:liPnoeint, Evidence, Analysis

   Use the body paragraphs of your report to present evidence that supports your thesis. A reliable pattern to
                                                                                                                                             end s

   keep in mind for developing the body paragraphs of a report is point, evidence, and analysis:

     · The point is the central idea of the paragraph, usually given in a topic sentence stated in your own words
         at or toward the beginning of the paragraph. Each topic sentence should relate to the thesis.

     · The evidence you provide develops the paragraph and supports the point made in the topic sentence.
         Include details, examples, quotations, paraphrases, and summaries from sources if you conducted formal
         research. Synthesize the evidence you include by showing in your sentences the connections between
         sources.

     · The analysis comes at the end of the paragraph. In your own words, draw a conclusion about the evidence
         you have provided and how it relates to the topic sentence.

   The paragraph below illustrates the point, evidence, and analysis pattern. Drawn from a report about
   concussions among football players, the paragraph opens with a topic sentence about the NCAA and NFL and
   their responses to studies about concussions. The paragraph is developed with evidence from three sources. It
   concludes with a statement about helmets and players' safety.

               The NCAA and NFL have taken steps forward and backward to respond to studies about the danger of
               concussions among players. Responding to the deaths of athletes, documented brain damage,
               lawsuits, and public outcry (Buckley et al., 2017), the NCAA instituted protocols to reduce potentially
               dangerous hits during football games and to diagnose traumatic head injuries more quickly and
               effectively. Still, it has allowed players to wear more than one style of helmet during a season, raising
               the risk of injury because of imperfect fit. At the professional level, the NFL developed a helmet-rating
               system in 2011 in an effort to reduce concussions, but it continued to allow players to wear helmets
               with a wide range of safety ratings. The NFL's decision created an opportunity for researchers to look
               at the relationship between helmet safety ratings and concussions. Cocello et al. (2016) reported that
               players who wore helmets with a lower safety rating had more concussions than players who wore
               helmets with a higher safety rating, and they concluded that safer helmets are a key factor in reducing
               concussions.

   Developing Paragraph Content

   In the body paragraphs of your report, you will likely use examples, draw comparisons, show contrasts, or
   analyze causes and effects to develop your topic.

   Paragraphs developed with Example are common in reports. The paragraph below, adapted from a report by
   student John Zwick on the mental health of soldiers deployed during wartime, draws examples from three
   sources.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
   8.5 · Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 255

   Throughout the Vietnam War, military leaders claimed that the mental health of soldiers was stable

   and that men who suffered from combat fatigue, now known as PTSD, were getting the help they

   needed. For example, the New York Times (1966) quoted military leaders who claimed that mental

   fatigue among enlisted men had "virtually ceased to be a problem," occurring at a rate far below that

s  of World War II. Ayres (1969) reported that Brigadier General Spurgeon Neel, chief American medical

   officer in Vietnam, explained that soldiers experiencing combat fatigue were admitted to the

   psychiatric ward, sedated for up to 36 hours, and given a counseling session with a doctor who

   reassured them that the rest was well deserved and that they were ready to return to their units.

   Although experts outside the military saw profound damage to soldiers' psyches when they returned

   home (Halloran, 1970), the military stayed the course, treating acute cases expediently and showing

   little concern for the cumulative effect of combat stress on individual soldierse.nd s

   When you analyze causes and effects, you explain the reasons that certain things happened and/or their
   results. The report by Trevor Garcia on the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 is an example: his
   report examines the reasons the United States failed to control the coronavirus. The paragraph below, adapted
   from another student's report written for an environmental poelnicdyscourse, explains the effect of white settlers'
   views of forest management on New England.

   The early colonists' European ideas about forest management dramatically changed the New England
   landscape. White settlers saw the New World as virgin, unused land, even though indigenous people
   had been drawing on its resources for generations by using fire subtly to improve hunting, employing
   construction techniques that left anceienndt strees intact, and farming small, efficient fields that left the
   surrounding landscape largely unaltered. White settlers' desire to develop wood-built and wood-
   burning homesteads surrounded by large farm fields led to forestry practices and techniques that
   resulted in the removal of old-growth trees. These practices defined the way the forests look today.

   Compare and contrast paragraphs are useful when you wish to examine similarities and differences. You can
   use both comparison and contrast in a single paragraph, or you can use one or the other. The paragraph below,
   adapted from a student report on the rise of populist politicians, compares the rhetorical styles of populist
   politicians Huey Long and Donald Trump.

   A key similarity among populist politicians is their rejection of carefully crafted sound bites and erudite
   vocabulary typically associated with candidates for high office. Huey Long and Donald Trump are two
   examples. When he ran for president, Long captured attention through his wild gesticulations on
   almost every word, dramatically varying volume, and heavily accented, folksy expressions, such as
   "The only way to be able to feed the balance of the people is to make that man come back and bring
   back some of that grub that he ain't got no business with!" In addition, Long's down-home persona
   made him a credible voice to represent the common people against the country's rich, and his
   buffoonish style allowed him to express his radical ideas without sounding anti-communist alarm
   bells. Similarly, Donald Trump chose to speak informally in his campaign appearances, but the persona
   he projected was that of a fast-talking, domineering salesman. His frequent use of personal
   anecdotes, rhetorical questions, brief asides, jokes, personal attacks, and false claims made his
   speeches disjointed, but they gave the feeling of a running conversation between him and his
   audience. For example, in a 2015 speech, Trump said, "They just built a hotel in Syria. Can you believe
   this? They built a hotel. When I have to build a hotel, I pay interest. They don't have to pay interest,
   because they took the oil that, when we left Iraq, I said we should've taken" ("Our Country Needs"
   2020). While very different in substance, Long and Trump adopted similar styles that positioned them
   as the antithesis of typical politicians and their worldviews.

   Conclusion
   The conclusion should draw the threads of your report together and make its significance clear to readers. You
   256 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

   may wish to review the introduction, restate the thesis, recommend a course of action, point to the future, or
   use some combination of these. Whichever way you approach it, the conclusion should not head in a new
   direction. The following example is the conclusion from a student's report on the effect of a book about
   environmental movements in the United States.

s  Since its publication in 1949, environmental activists of various movements have found wisdom and

   inspiration in Aldo Leopold's A Sand County Almanac. These audiences included Leopold's

   conservationist contemporaries, environmentalists of the 1960s and 1970s, and the environmental

   justice activists who rose in the 1980s and continue to make their voices heard today. These

   audiences have read the work differently: conservationists looked to the author as a leader,

   environmentalists applied his wisdom to their movement, and environmental justice advocates have

   pointed out the flaws in Leopold's thinking. Even so, like those before them, environmental justice

   activists recognize the book's value as a testament to taking the long view and eliminating biases that
   may cloud an objective assessment of humanity's interdependent relationshipewnidthsthe environment.

   Citing Sources

   You must cite the sources of information and data included in your report. Citations must appear in both the
   text and a bibliography at the end of the report.

   The sample paragraphs in the previous section include examples of in-text citation using APA documentation
   style. Trevor Garcia's report on the U.S. response to COVID-19 in 2020 also uses APA documentation style for
   citations in the text of the report and the list of references at the end. Your instructor may require another
   documentation style, such as MLA or Chicago.

        Peer Review: Getting Feedback from Readers

   You will likely engage in peer review with other students in your class by sharing drafts and providing
   feedback to help spot strengths and weaknesses in your reports. For peer review within a class, your instructor
   may provide assignment-specific questions or a form for you to complete as you work together.

   If you have a writing center on your campus, it is well worth your time to make an online or in-person
   appointment with a tutor. You'll receive valuable feedback and improve your ability to review not only your
   report but your overall writing.

   Another way to receive feedback on your report is to ask a friend or family member to read your draft. Provide
   a list of questions or a form such as the one in Table 8.5 for them to complete as they read.

                                                  Questions for Reviewer                          Comment or
                                                                                                  Suggestion
   Does the introduction interest you in the topic of the report?
   Can you find the thesis statement? Underline it for the writer.
   Does the thesis indicate the purpose of the report?
   Does each body paragraph start with a point stated in the writer's own words? Does that point
   relate to the thesis?
   Mark paragraphs that don't have a clear point.

   TABLE 8.5 Peer review questions

   Access for free at openstax.org.
8.5 · Writing Process: Creating an Analytical Report 257

                                                Questions for Reviewer                        Comment or
                                                                                              Suggestion
 Does each body paragraph support the main point of the paragraph with details and evidence,
 such as facts, statistics, or examples?
 Mark paragraphs that need more support and/or explanation.

 Does each body paragraph end with an analysis in the writer's own words that draws a
 conclusion?
 Mark paragraphs that need analysis.

 Where do you get lost or confused?
 Mark anything that is unclear.

 Does the report flow from one point to the next?
 Does the organization make sense to you?
 Does the conclusion wrap up the main points of the report and connect to the thesis?
 Mark anything in the conclusion that seems irrelevant.

 Does the report have an engaging title?
TABLE 8.5 Peer review questions

     Revising: Using Reviewers' Responses to Revise your Work

When you receive comments from readers, including your instructor, read each comment carefully to
understand what is being asked. Try not to get defensive, even though this response is completely natural.
Remember that readers are like coaches who want you to succeed. They are looking at your writing from
outside your own head, and they can identify strengths and weaknesses that you may not have noticed. Keep
track of the strengths and weaknesses your readers point out. Pay special attention to those that more than
one reader identifies, and use this information to improve your report and later assignments.

As you analyze each response, be open to suggestions for improvement, and be willing to make significant
revisions to improve your writing. Perhaps you need to revise your thesis statement to better reflect the
content of your draft. Maybe you need to return to your sources to better understand a point you're trying to
make in order to develop a paragraph more fully. Perhaps you need to rethink the organization, move
paragraphs around, and add transition sentences.

Below is an early draft of part of Trevor Garcia's report with comments from a peer reviewer:
   258 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

   To truly understand what happened, it's important first to look back to the years leading up to the pandemic.

   Epidemiologists and public health officials had long known that a global pandemic was possible. In 2016, the

   U.S. National Security Council (NSC) published a 69-page document with the intimidating title Playbook for

   Early Response to High-Consequence Emerging Infectious Disease Threats and Biological Incidents. The

s  document's two sections address responses to "emerging disease threats that start or are circulating in another

   country but not yet confirmed within U.S. territorial borders" and to "emerging disease threats within our

   nation's borders." On 13 January 2017, the joint Obama-Trump tranesnitdiosenntdeasms performed a pandemic
   preparedness exercise; however, the playbook was never adopted by the incoming administration.

   PaneneortRaet view Comment: Do the words in quotation marks need to be a direct quotation? It seems like a paraphrase
   would work here.end annotat

   PaneneortRaet view Comment: I'm getting lost in the details about the playbook. What's theeOndbasma-Trump transition   end annotat
   team?

   In February 2018, the administration began to cut funding for the Prevention and Public Health Fund at the
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; cuts to other health agencies continued throughout 2018, with
   funds diverted to unrelated projects such as housing for detained immigrant children.

   PaneneortRaet view Comment: This paragraph has only one sentence, and it's more like an example. It needs a topic
   sentence and more development.end annotat

   eTnhdrese months later, Luciana Borio, director of medical and biodefense preparedness at the NSC, spoke at a
   symposium marking the centennial of the 1918 influenza pandemic. "The threat of pandemic flu is the number
   one health security concern," she said. "Are we ready to respond? I fear the answer is no."

   PaneneortRaet view Comment: This paragraph is very short and a lot like the previous paragraph in that it's a single
   example. It needs a topic sentence. Maybe you can combine them?end annotat

   PaneneortRaet view Comment: Be sure to cite the quotation.end annotat

   Reading these comments and those of others, Trevor decided to combine the three short paragraphs into one
   paragraph focusing on the fact that the United States knew a pandemic was possible but was unprepared for it.
   He developed the paragraph, using the short paragraphs as evidence and connecting the sentences and
   evidence with transitional words and phrases. Finally, he added in-text citations in APA documentation style to
   credit his sources. The revised paragraph is below:

   Epidemiologists and public health officials in the United States had long known that a global pandemic was
   possible. In 2016, the National Security Council (NSC) published Playbook for Early Response to High-
   Consequence Emerging Infectious Disease Threats and Biological Incidents, a 69-page document on
   responding to diseases spreading within and outside of the United States. On January 13, 2017, the joint
   transition teams of outgoing president Barack Obama and then president-elect Donald Trump performed a
   pandemic preparedness exercise based on the playbook; however, it was never adopted by the incoming
   administration (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). A year later, in February 2018, the Trump administration began to
   cut funding for the Prevention and Public Health Fund at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
   leaving key positions unfilled. Other individuals who were fired or resigned in 2018 were the homeland security
   adviser, whose portfolio included global pandemics; the director for medical and biodefense preparedness; and
   the top official in charge of a pandemic response. None of them were replaced, leaving the White House with no
   senior person who had experience in public health (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). Experts voiced concerns,
   among them Luciana Borio, director of medical and biodefense preparedness at the NSC, who spoke at a
   symposium marking the centennial of the 1918 influenza pandemic in May 2018: "The threat of pandemic flu is
   the number one health security concern," she said. "Are we ready to respond? I fear the answer is no" (Sun,
   2018, final para.).

   A final word on working with reviewers' comments: as you consider your readers' suggestions, remember, too,

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                    8.6 · Editing Focus: Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information 259

that you remain the author. You are free to disregard suggestions that you think will not improve your writing.
If you choose to disregard comments from your instructor, consider submitting a note explaining your reasons
with the final draft of your report.

8.6 Editing Focus: Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between essential and nonessential information in sentences.
  · Use commas for clearer, more effective sentences.

A comma is a mark of separation. It alerts readers to a brief pause or pauses within a sentence that is part of
your analytical report.

Nonessential and Essential information

Nonessential information refers to information within a sentence that is not necessary for the reader to
understand its meaning. Essential information refers to information within a sentence that is necessary for
the reader to understand its meaning.

Nonessential Information

Placing commas around a word or group of words within a sentence usually indicates that the information is
not necessary for readers to understand the sentence's meaning. In the example below, the underlined words
refer to and explain the phrase current math curriculum, but they can be removed without changing the
meaning of the sentence: the math curriculum currently in use isn't meeting current needs. The information is
interesting and perhaps useful, but it is "extra" and does not change the basic meaning of the sentence.

      The current math curriculum,uwndheicrhlinweas adopted by the school district 10 years ago,ennodlounngdeerrlmineeets
      the needs of the students.

Essential Information

Certain words in a sentence are often necessary for readers to understand its meaning. In the example below,
the word current was removed from between the words The and math and replaced by the underlined words
that tell readers which curriculum no longer meets students' needs. It is essential because without it,
confusion may arise about which math curriculum no longer meets students' needs.

      The math curriculum tuhnadtetrhleindeistrict adopted 10 years agoennodlounngdeerrlmineeets the needs of the students.

To Comma or Not to Comma?

Place commas around nonessential information, but not around essential information. You can test whether
information is nonessential by removing the information. If the meaning of the sentence is unchanged, the
information is nonessential. If the meaning becomes too general or changes in any way, the information is
essential. Often, nonessential information is introduced with the word which and essential information with
that.

Place Commas around Nonessential Information

Place commas around information that is not essential to the meaning of a sentence, as illustrated in the
following sentences:

  · The entire math department,uwndheicrhlincoensists of 16 teachers and 7 staff members,ehnads urenqdueerlsitneed a review of
      the curriculum.

  · The department chair,uwndheorhlianseled the math department for 11 years,ehnads uangrdeeerdlintoethe teachers' request.
  · The curriculum will become effective in June,uwndhernlitnhee school year is finished.end underline
260 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

       Do Not Place Commas around Essential Information
       Do not place commas around information that is essential to the meaning of a sentence, as illustrated in the
       following sentences:

         · According to the department chair, the math curriculum needs to focus on skills tuhnadtesrtluindents need after
             high school graduation.end underline

         · The math teachers wunhdoetrelainceh Algebra 1 and Algebra 2ehnadveunredqeurleisnteed a review of the curriculum.
         · The teachers are concerned tuhnadtesrtluindents are not retaining what they have learned.end underline
         · The department has consulted the curriculum expert MunadlceorlmineGreen.end underline
       See Punctuation for more on commas.

      Practice Using Commas

       Read each of the following sentences. Decide whether the underlined portion of each sentence is nonessential
       or essential. Place commas before, after, or around the nonessential information as appropriate.
        1. The department has consulted the curriculum expert Malcolm Green wunhdoesrelitneextbook is widely used.end underline
        2. Two members of the math department JuanndeelrlelinBerady and Tye Lavalleeanrde ruentdireinrlginneext year.
        3. The textbooks tuhnadtearrleinneow in useeanrde ouuntddeartleinde.
        4. Students have given feedback on the online classes tuhnadtehralivneereplaced in-person classes.end underline
        5. The math department now offers more evening classes wunhdicehrlaintteract more studentseannddufenwderlsinuemmer

             classes.
        6. Several instructors wunhdoetrelainceh matheanlsdoutneadcehrlicnoemputer science classes.

     8.7 Evaluation: Reviewing the Final Draft

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Evaluate feedback on your report as a whole.
         · Apply another reader's response to the rhetorical choices you made as a writer.
       When you have finished revising and editing your report, have a friend or classmate evaluate it using the
       following rubric, which is similar to the one your instructor might use. At the end of the rubric is a section for
       your reader to offer additional feedback or expand on the reasoning behind their assessment. Pay attention to
       the feedback, and ask questions if something isn't clear. Then, revise your paper again, using the feedback you
       find helpful.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                             8.7 · Evaluation: Reviewing the Final Draft 261

Rubric

Score         Critical Language          Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

5             The text always adheres    The introduction sparks interest    The topic of the report
Skillful      to the "Editing Focus" of  and leads expertly to a clear,      demonstrates superior
              this chapter: commas       intriguing thesis. All main points  understanding of the purpose.
              with nonessential and      are expertly developed in body      The report consistently shows
              essential information, as  paragraphs with clear central       expert awareness of audience,
              discussed in Section 8.6.  points and fact-based, reliable     context, and community
              The text also shows        evidence, which is analyzed         expectations. The presentation is
              ample evidence of the      appropriately and thoroughly.       highly appropriate to the
              writer's intent to         Appropriate transitions clearly     content. The writer's voice is
              consciously meet or        connect ideas and evidence,         objective and trustworthy.
              challenge conventional     which is abundant and integrated    Language is consistently clear
              expectations in            smoothly into the sentences.        and appropriate. Correct
              rhetorically effective                                         citations are included in the text
              ways                                                           and bibliography.

4             The text usually adheres   The introduction sparks interest    The topic of the report
Accomplished  to the "Editing Focus" of  and leads smoothly to a clear       demonstrates comprehensive
              this chapter: commas       thesis. Most main points are well   understanding of the purpose.
              with nonessential and      developed in body paragraphs        The report usually shows
              essential information, as  with clear central points and       awareness of audience, context,
              discussed in Section 8.6.  solid, sufficient evidence, which   and community expectations.
              The text also shows        is analyzed adequately.             The presentation is appropriate
              some evidence of the       Appropriate transitions connect     to the content. The writer's voice
              writer's intent to         ideas and evidence, which is        is objective and trustworthy.
              consciously meet or        integrated smoothly into most       Language is usually clear and
              challenge conventional     sentences.                          appropriate. Correct citations are
              expectations in                                                included in the text and
              rhetorically effective                                         bibliography
              ways.

TABLE 8.6
262 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

       Score  Critical Language                Clarity and Coherence                 Rhetorical Choices
 3                Awareness
 Capable
              The text generally               The introduction may spark some       The topic of the report
 2            adheres to the "Editing          interest and leads to a fairly clear  demonstrates understanding of
 Developing   Focus" of this chapter:          thesis. Most main points are          the purpose. The report shows
              commas with                      stated, but some may not be fully     some, but possibly inconsistent,
TABLE 8.6     nonessential and                 developed in body paragraphs,         awareness of audience, context,
              essential information, as        which may lack sufficient             and community expectations.
              discussed in Section 8.6.        evidence or adequate analysis.        The presentation is generally
              The text also shows              Appropriate transitions connect       appropriate to the content. The
              limited evidence of the          some ideas and evidence, which        writer's voice strays occasionally
              writer's intent to               is integrated inconsistently into     from objectivity and
              consciously meet or              sentences.                            trustworthiness, but language is
              challenge conventional                                                 generally clear. Some citations
              expectations in                                                        may be incorrect or missing.
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

              The text occasionally            The introduction may be               The topic of the report
              adheres to the "Editing          somewhat interesting but may          demonstrates a weak
              Focus" of this chapter:          lack a smooth transition to the       understanding of the purpose.
              commas with                      thesis. Main points are missing       The report shows little
              nonessential and                 from some body paragraphs,            awareness of audience, context,
              essential information, as        which may have no discernible         and community expectations.
              discussed in Section 8.6.        central point and are                 The presentation may be
              The text also shows              insufficiently developed.             somewhat appropriate to the
              emerging evidence of the         Inappropriate or insufficient         content. The writer's voice is
              writer's intent to               transitions minimally connect         only occasionally objective and
              consciously meet or              ideas and evidence, which is          trustworthy. Citations are
              challenge conventional           poorly integrated into sentences.     incomplete, incorrect, or missing.
              expectations in                  Language is often confusing or
              rhetorically effective           inappropriate.
              ways.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                          8.8 · Spotlight on ... Discipline-Specific and Technical Language 263

           Score  Critical Language           Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices
                      Awareness

                  The text does not adhere

s                 to the "Editing Focus" of                                    The topic of the report

                  this chapter: commas        The introduction, if it is present, demonstrates poor or no

                  with nonessential and       may be somewhat interesting but understanding of the purpose.

                  essential information, as lacks a thesis. Most or all of the The report shows little or no

   end s1         discussed in Section 8.6.   body paragraphs have no central  awareness of audience, context,
                  The text also shows little  point and are undeveloped.       or community expectations. The

   Beginning      to no evidence of the       There are no clear connections presentation is inappropriate to

                  writer's intent to          among ideas and evidence, which content. The writer's voice is

                  consciously meet or         is insufficient, unconvincing, and neither objective nor trustworthy.

                  challenge conventional poorly integrated into the            Language is confusing or

                  expectations in             sentences.                       inappropriate. Citations are

                  rhetorically effective                                       missing or incorrect.

                  ways.

   TABLE 8.6

   8.8 Spotlight on ... Discipline-Specific and Technical Language

   LEARNING OUTCOMES
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:

     · Explain the role of discipline-specific and technical language in various situations and contexts.
     · Implement purposeful shifts in voice, tone, level of formality, and word choice.
     · Pursue options for publishing your report.

   Proficient report writers in all academic disciplines and professions use language that is clear, direct,
   economical, and conventional. Moreover, they often use a specialized vocabulary to convey information to
   others in their field. These technical words allow specialists to communicate precisely and efficiently with
   other experts, but such terms can be confusing to nonspecialists. The following guidelines can help you shape
   the language of a report in a social science, natural science, or technical field:

     · Define disciplinary and technical terms. For example, in a report about computer storage, you might
        need to define terms such as kilobyte, terabyte, gigabyte, and megabyte. In the following example, the
        writer defines these terms.
                     Computer storage space is measured in units called kilobytes (KB). Each KB equals 1,024 "bytes,"
                     or approximately 1000 single typewriter characters. Therefore, one KB equals about 180 English
                     words, or a little less than half of a single-spaced typed page, or maybe three minutes of fast
                     typing. One terabyte (TB) is 1024 gigabytes (GB), one GB is 1024 megabytes (MB), and one MB is
                     1024 KB.

     · Write out full names the first time you use them, followed by abbreviations or acronyms in
         parentheses. Then you can use the abbreviation or acronym throughout the rest of the report. For
        example, write out U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) or Occupational Safety and Health
        Administration (OSHA) the first time you refer to it, and use USDA or OSHA subsequently. In the previous
         example about computer storage, the writer used the abbreviations for KB, TB, GB, and MB after writing
         out the full words. The sentence below, from Trevor Garcia's report, gives another example:
   264 8 · Analytical Report: Writing from Facts

   After the first U.S. coronavirus case was confirmed in 2020, the secretary of the Department of
   Health and Human Services (HHS) was named to lead a task force on a response, but after several
   months he was replaced when then vice president Mike Pence was officially charged with leading
   the White House Coronavirus Task Force (Ballhaus & Armour, 2020).

s  · Write in third-person point of view. Third-person point of view will help you use objective language that

   is free of value judegnmdesnts and emotional responses, as demonstrated in the following examples:

   The causes of obesity areecnodmsplex and involve multiple factors, including genetics, underlying

   health conditions, cultural attitudes towarednfdosod and exercise, access to healthy food and health

   care, safe outdoor spaces, income, and leisure time.

   The survey respondents self-identified as cisgender female (153), cisgender male (131), gender
   nonbinary (12), and transgender (4).

   · Consider occasional use of the passive voice. Traditionally, writers in the sciences and technical fields
      have used the passive voice for objectivity and neutrality. In the passive voice, the subject of the sentence
      is acted upon; in the active voice, the subject acts. Increasingly, scientific and technical writers use the
      active voice in the introduction and conclusion sections of reports, which are more interpretative. They
      use the passive voice in the method and results sections, which are more straight-up reporting.

   Notice that by using the passive voice, the writer is able to avoid naming the person or group who conducted
   the survey. The passive voice is a technique that writers often use when they don't want to make the name of
   an individual or group public. See Clear and Effective Sentences for more on passive and active voice.

   Passive voice: A survey of 300 students wunadsecrolnindeuctedeantda ulanrdgerslitnatee university in the southern
   United States.

   Active voice: Wunedceornlidnuectedeansduurvnedyeorlfin3e00 students at a large state university in the southern United
   States.

   · Pay attention to the details of meaning, grammar, punctuation, and mechanics. Each discipline values
      precision and correctness, and each has its own specialized vocabulary for talking about knowledge.
      Writers are expected to use terms precisely and to spell them correctly. Your writing will gain greater
      respect when it reflects standard grammar, punctuation, and mechanics.

   Publish Your Report

   Now that you have completed all stages of your report, you may want to think about sharing it with students at
   your school or other colleges. Your college may have a journal that publishes undergraduate research work. If
   so, find out about submitting your work. Also, listed here are some of the many publications that feature
   undergraduate student research. Check them out.

   · Papers & Publications: Interdisciplinary Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/
      papersandpublications) (accepts work from students in the southeastern United States)

   · Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/journalofugresearch) (peer-reviewed
      undergraduate journal; accepts research work in all subjects)

   · Journal of Student Research (https://openstax.org/r/journalofstudentresearch) (accepts student work from
      high school through graduate school)

   · Crossing Borders: A Multidisciplinary Journal of Undergraduate Scholarship (https://openstax.org/r/
      crossingborders) (published at Kansas State University; accepts student research in all disciplines from
      undergraduates throughout the country)

   · 1890: A Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/1890UGresearch) (accepts
      undergraduate works of research, creative writing, poetry, reviews, and art)

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                    8.9 · Portfolio: Evidence and Objectivity 265

8.9 Portfolio: Evidence and Objectivity

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Write about the development of your composing processes.
  · Write about how composing processes affect your work.
  · Write about your objectivity as a writer.

As you complete your report, think critically about your writing process. Watch An Introduction to Reflective
Writing (https://openstax.org/r/anintroductionreflectivewriting), and reflect on what you created from the first
step of discovering ideas to the last steps of composing and editing the final draft.

Reflective Task: Lessons Learned

As you add your analytical report to your portfolio, write either a cover letter or a journal entry in which you
respond to the following questions:

  · How did you choose the topic for your report? Did you have to narrow or expand it?
  · What methods did you use to gather ideas about your topic? What outside sources did you consult to

      gather information about your topic?
  · How did you settle on your thesis? Did you rewrite it multiple times?
  · What strategies did you use to organize your report?
  · What strategies did you use to develop paragraphs? What difficulties, if any, did you encounter?
  · How challenging was it for you to adopt an objective stance? Did you recognize your own biases? Was it

      difficult to write in third-person point of view?
  · How did input from peers and other readers affect your drafting and revision processes? What specific

      constructive criticism did you receive that helped you?
  · In what ways was this report easier or harder to write than other papers you have written?
  · What could you have done differently to make writing your report easier or more effective?
266 8 · Further Reading

Further Reading

The following books are just a few examples of in-depth book-length reporting.
Boo, Katherine. Behind the Beautiful Forevers: Life, Death, and Hope in a Mumbai Undercity. Random House,

    2012.
Desmond, Matthew. Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. Crown, 2016.
Ehrenreich, Barbara. Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America. Metropolitan Books, 2001.
Macy, Beth. Dopesick: Dealers, Doctors, and the Drug Company That Addicted America. Little, Brown, 2018.
Wilkerson, Isabel. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration. Random House,

    2010.

Works Cited

"About." Barbara Ehrenreich, Hachette Book Group, www.barbaraehrenreich.com/.
Fowler, H. Ramsey, and Jane E. Aaron. The Little, Brown Handbook. 13th ed., Pearson, 2016.
McClure, Laura. "Fact-Checking 101." TED-Ed Blog, TED-Ed, 30 Mar. 2017, blog.ed.ted.com/2017/03/30/

    factchecking-101/.
"Professional, Technical Writing." OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab, Purdue U, 2021, owl.purdue.edu/owl/

    subject_specific_writing/professional_technical_writing/index.html.
"Reflective Writing in Education." Research and Learning Online, Monash U, www.monash.edu/rlo/

    assignment-samples/education/education-reflective-writing.

Access for free at openstax.org.
Art of Rhetoric Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the 9

FIGURE 9.1 To be effective, persuasive speeches depend on rhetoric. In this photograph, suffragist Elsie Hill
(1883-1970) speaks forcefully to a street gathering in St. Paul, Minnesota, in July 1916. When advocating for
women's suffrage, Hill, like other orators, relied on rhetorical strategies to persuade audiences that might have
disagreed with her platform. Conversely, some audience members could recognize her strategies and know how she
was using language to persuade them. Those people, consciously or not, were engaged in rhetorical analysis.
(credit: "Elsie Hill speaking [at street meeting in St. Paul, Minn., during Prohibition Party convention that endorsed a
plank advocating a suffrage amendment, July 1916]" by Harris & Ewing, Washington, D.C./Wikimedia Commons/
Library of Congress, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

9.1 Breaking the Whole into Its Parts
9.2 Rhetorical Analysis Trailblazer: Jamil Smith
9.3 Glance at Genre: Rhetorical Strategies
9.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Rhetorical Analysis: Evicted by Matthew Desmond" by Eliana Evans
9.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric
9.6 Editing Focus: Mixed Sentence Constructions
9.7 Evaluation: Rhetorical Analysis
9.8 Spotlight on ... Business and Law
9.9 Portfolio: How Thinking Critically about Rhetoric Affects Intellectual Growth
INTRODUCTION Because humans exist in social situations, communication has always been a part of what it
268 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       means to be human. Basic forms of communication, such as smiling or adopting certain physical stances, may
       be considered instinctive. However, when language began to replace sounds and gestures, communication
       became more specific. People used language to give and seek information, to express and react to emotions,
       and to persuade others to think or act in certain ways.

       Beginning with the ancient Greeks, a large part of language education has focused on the ability to persuade.
       The Greeks used the word rhetoric, which originally meant "the act of speaking a language," and expanded its
       importance to include a focus on situations in which language was used for a persuasive purpose: to motivate
       an audience to action.

       These ideas became central to Greek culture and patterns of behavior that characterized their way of life. This
       chapter will address persuasive techniques: how people use words to influence, lead, create new
       understanding, and rouse others to action. Your writing task will be to identify, explain, and analyze the
       strategies a particular writer uses to persuade readers. Analyzing the rhetorical strategies of other writers will
       help you develop your writing identity as you learn to incorporate some of these strategies into your own work
       while rejecting others.

     9.1 Breaking the Whole into Its Parts

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify and explain ethos, logos, pathos, and kairos.
         · Identify and analyze logical fallacies used in persuasion.
         · Explain how rhetorical strategies are used in real-life situations.

       Communicative situations nearly always contain rhetoric, the craft of persuading through writing or speaking.
       Think of your earliest instances of communication with parents or caregivers. Before you were proficient in
       language, you learned to navigate situations with your other senses, such as sight, sound, and touch. Consider
       people's facial expressions and tones of voice. How did you know when they were pleased, displeased, or
       confused by your actions? The emphasis is on the word how, because the how is what starts you on the path of
       analyzing the forms, intent, and effectiveness of communication. The point is that even facial expressions and
       tones of voice serve communicative functions and contain a rhetoric that one can observe, process, and
       analyze.

       Now, as an adult, you have learned to use rhetoric to be persuasive and to recognize when others are trying to
       persuade you. Imagine the following situation. A basic question arises among roommates: Where should we go
       for dinner? Your roommates want to go to Emiliano's Pizza Pavilion again, and their reasoning seems sound.
       First, having tried all pizza places in town, they know Emiliano makes the tastiest pizza--just the right
       combination of spices, vegetables, and cheese, all perfectly baked in the right oven at the right temperature.
       Furthermore, the pizza is fairly cheap and probably will provide leftovers for tomorrow. And they add that you
       don't really want to stay home all alone by yourself.

       You, on the other hand, are less keen on the idea; maybe you're tired of Emiliano's pizza or of pizza in general.
       You seem resistant to their suggestion, so they continue their attempts at persuasion by trying different tactics.
       They tell you that "everyone" is going to Emiliano's, not only because the food is good but because it's the place
       to be on a Thursday evening, hoping that others' decisions might convince you. Plus, Emiliano's has "a million
       things on the menu," so if you don't want pizza, you can have "anything you want." This evidence further
       strengthens their argument, or so they think.

       Your roommates continue, playing on your personal experience, adding that the last time you didn't join them,
       you went somewhere else and then got the flu, so you shouldn't make the same mistake twice. They add details
       and try to entice you with images of the pizza--a delicious, jeweled circle of brilliant color that tastes like

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      9.1 · Breaking the Whole into Its Parts 269

heaven, with bubbling cheese calling out to you to devour it. Finally, they try an extreme last-ditch accusation.
They claim you could be hostile to immigrants such as Emiliano and his Haitian and Dominican staff, who are
trying to succeed in the competitive pizza market, so your unwillingness to go will hurt their chances of
making a living.

However, because you know something about rhetoric and how your roommates are using it to persuade, you
can deconstruct their reasoning, some of which is flawed or even deceptive. Your decision is up to you, of
course, and you will make it independent of (or dependent on) these rhetorical appeals and strategies.

Rhetorical Strategies

As part of becoming familiar with rhetorical strategies in real life, you will recognize three essential building
blocks of rhetoric:

  · Ethos is the presentation of a believable, authoritative voice that elicits an audience's trust. In the case of
      the pizza example, the roommates have tried all other pizzerias in town and have a certain expertise.

  · Pathos is the use of appeals to feelings and emotions shared by an audience. Emiliano's pizza tastes good,
      so it brings pleasure. Plus, you don't want to be all alone when others are enjoying themselves, nor do you
      want to feel responsible for the pizzeria's economic decline.

  · Logos is the use of credible information--facts, reasons, examples--that moves toward a sensible and
      acceptable conclusion. Emiliano's is good value for the money and provides leftovers.

In addition to these strategies, the roommates in the example use more subtle ones, such as personification
and sensory language. Personification is giving an inanimate object human traits or abilities (the cheese is
calling out). Sensory language appeals to the five senses (a delicious, jeweled circle of brilliant color).

Logical Fallacies

Familiar with the three main rhetorical strategies and literary language, you also recognize the "sneakier" uses
of flawed reasoning, also known as logical fallacies. Some of the roommates' appeals are based on these
fallacies:

  · Bandwagon: argument that everyone is doing something, so you shouldn't be left behind by not doing it
      too. "Everyone" goes to Emiliano's, especially on Thursdays.

  · Hyperbole: exaggeration. Emiliano's has "a million things on the menu," and you can get "anything you
      want."

  · Ad hominem: attacking the person, not the argument. Because you are hesitant about joining your
      roommates, you are accused of hostility toward immigrants.

  · Causal fallacy: claiming or implying that an event that follows another event is the result of it. Because
      you ate elsewhere, you got the flu.

  · Slippery slope: argument that a single action could lead to disastrous consequences. If Emiliano's misses
      your business, they may go bankrupt.

In a matter of minutes, your roommates use all these strategies to try to persuade you to act or to agree with
their thinking. Identifying and understanding such strategies, and others, is a key element of critical thinking.
You can learn more about logical fallacies at the Purdue University Online Writing Lab (https://openstax.org/r/
Purdue_University_Online).

Kairos

As a whole, rhetoric also depends on another Greek rhetorical strategy, kairos. Kairos is the idea that timing is
important in trying to persuade an audience. An appeal may succeed or fail depending on when it is made. The
moment must be right, and an effective communicator needs to be aware of their audience in terms of kairos.
Going back to the roommates and pizza example, kairos might be an influence in your decision; if you were
tired of pizza, had to save money, or wanted to study alone, your roommates would have less chance of
persuasion. As a more serious example, if a recent series of car accidents has caused serious injuries on the
270 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       freeway, an audience might be more receptive to a proposal to reassess speed limits and road signage.
       Awareness of rhetorical strategies in everyday situations such as this will help you recognize and evaluate
       them in matters ultimately more significant than pizza.

     9.2 Trailblazer

     Rhetorical Analysis Trailblazer: Jamil Smith

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Demonstrate the ability to think critically about a text.
         · Identify and analyze rhetorical strategies.

                                                      "No matter what you
                                                     do, you have to be able
                                                     to process information

                                                       and think critically."

FIGURE 9.2 Jamil Smith, left (credit: "The Color of
Debt: Investigating Debt Collection and the Racial
Wealth Gap" by New America/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Whose Rhetoric?

Jamil Smith (b. 1975) is a well-recognized print and television journalist and commentator on politics, culture,
and sports. He has won three Emmys for sports journalism and is best known for his articles in Rolling Stone
and the New Republic and as a producer for MTV News, CNN, MSNBC, and The Rachel Maddow Show.

Smith grew up in Cleveland, Ohio, where he attended Shaker Heights High School. He has often written about
Cleveland and his work there with the Minority Achievement Committee (MAC), which pairs accomplished
minority achievers with their younger peers to encourage greater participation in education. Smith graduated
from the University of Pennsylvania in 1997 with a degree in English.

Smith often focuses on the full range of Black life in culture, politics, sports, and media. In guest appearances
and interviews, he emphasizes the overriding need for minority journalists to use rhetorical powers of
persuasion and to assert their place alongside traditionally White-dominated media voices. When Smith
became senior editor at the New Republic in 2015, he explained his task as being "to help usher this magazine
into a different era" (Connor). He recognized his presence there as an opportunity for his writing to serve as a
moving force for social change and even the radical transformation of American journalism.

For the February 19, 2018, cover story of Time magazine, Smith wrote an extensive essay on the film Black
Panther (2018) and its significance for Black American culture. The superhero film, based on a Marvel Comics
story, grossed about $1.3 billion and was hailed as one of the outstanding films of the year, winning three

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                      9.2 · Trailblazer 271

Oscars out of a total of seven nominations. In his essay, Smith attaches great importance to the movie for its
ability to address "what it means to be black in both America and Africa--and, more broadly, in the world"
(Smith, "Revolutionary").

Smith used the film as a vehicle for expressing his belief in the compelling role that representation--being a
presence, even an unexpected one--plays in communication. He has stated in an interview, "I really truly
believe in the power of storytelling." His fervor and commitment to creating a new understanding of Black life
are based on his taking the personal risk to establish credibility as someone proudly unafraid to open himself
to the audience: "My mission is to reflect the experiences of and tell the stories of people who have been
ignored and erased" (Smith, "Cleveland").

In his writings, Smith uses ethos to portray himself as a Black Clevelander, well acquainted with discrimination
and prejudice, who speaks personally from his experiences and seeks to reach the general population as a
whole. Smith wishes for readers to feel, as he does, that life needs to be complex, with "infinite versions" of the
self, from executives to garbage collectors and all positions in between. He says that most White people know
this already and see it reflected in films that represent their lives, but Black Americans have not yet
experienced this and consequently are emotionally "poorer" without the "boundless" paths that White people
have open to them (Smith, "Revolutionary").

Smith's review of Black Panther, which garnered an award from the New York chapter of the Society of
Professional Journalists, also relies on Smith's knowledge of culture and history. For example, he points out
that the character King T'Challa, introduced in Marvel Comics in 1966, reappears in the film at a time when
the United States still has not met demands for equal opportunities. Smith capsulizes the aims and key events
of the Black Power movement of the 1960s and names its leaders. He also quotes the Federal Reserve statistic
that in 2016, a typical Black family "had a median net worth of $17,600," whereas a White family "had a
median net worth of $171,000." He uses such statistics to claim that the movie conceives and portrays a world
in which Black people have the resources to "level the playing field" worldwide (Smith, "Revolutionary").

Given Smith's position and recognition in the journalistic profession, readers find his cultural criticism of
subjects in Black life and culture both logical and convincing. The example of Smith as a cultural critic--a
person who writes opinion pieces about the art, music, movies, and books of a particular culture--is especially
relevant in contemporary times. As people's lives change continually, new influences on culture may emerge
from the margins and come to be recognized. Language changes are a leading indicator of social change as
well, especially in audiences that themselves are not one-dimensional and will interpret the language
differently. In time, as with trends and fashions, diverse rhetoric may change a society and become widely
accepted and even emulated. In this light, read Jamil Smith's entire review (https://openstax.org/r/review1).

Another important figure you may wish to explore is Ta-Nehisi Coates (https://openstax.org/r/Ta-Nehisi).
Coates is a leading journalist and creative writer whose Black Panther graphic novels, written for Marvel
Comics, closely parallel the film. His use of rhetorical language particular to the Black experience in America
has won numerous awards and recognition. You can read more about Coates in Memoir Trailblazer: Ta-Nehisi
Coates.

Discussion Questions

1. How does Jamil Smith use contemporary culture to make persuasive points?

2. How has Smith established credibility with readers?

3. In what ways does Smith appeal to readers' emotions?

4. How does Smith's use of logos support his claims of racial inequality?
272 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

     9.3 Glance at Genre: Rhetorical Strategies

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify key rhetorical strategies that authors use to persuade readers.
         · Analyze texts to demonstrate understanding of key rhetorical concepts.
         · Identify genre conventions and explain how they are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.

       Rhetorical analysis is the genre, or type of writing, that examines the way writers and speakers use language
       to influence readers. Rather than describing or summarizing content--the what of characters or
       themes--rhetorical analysis focuses on the individual parts of a text to show how language works to create the
       effects the writer wants. In other words, in addition to content, writers use rhetorical strategies to deliver and
       strengthen their ideas and thus influence their readers. A rhetorical analysis should, therefore, address the
       rhetorical situation, or conditions of communication that surround the rhetoric. These consist of the author
       (who), message (what), readers (to whom), purpose (why), means (how), context (where and when), and culture
       (community).

       Culture refers to the way of life that a defined group of people establish. Their beliefs, laws, customs, and habits
       represent them as a group and may provide a signature to identify who they are and what they have
       accomplished. Rhetorical analysis must take these factors into full consideration, especially because cultural
       patterns are constantly changing and evolving with new knowledge and behaviors. Moreover, culture will vary
       greatly from group to group. Subgroups within a larger culture--for example, minorities within a majority
       population--may have distinct expressions of culture. When rhetorical analysis approaches language of a
       particular culture, questions may arise about who is best equipped to do the analysis and on what criteria,
       based on time and place.

       Writers of rhetorical analyses consider these elements carefully and ask questions based on them. What are
       the goals of the author of the text? What factors are at play in the author's choice of strategies used to make a
       rhetorical impact? What may occur in the interaction between the writer and reader? Will readers approach
       the piece neutrally, with no previous opinions? Are they likely to agree because they are of the same opinion, or
       are they hostile and ready to reject the arguments? Have they heard or read the ideas before? Will the ideas be
       too radical or too familiar? Are readers likely to see the author as sharing the field with them or as a stranger
       who must win their confidence?

      The Workings of Rhetorical Analysis

       The aim of rhetorical analysis is not to find agreement with or praise for the writer, although either may be
       implied or stated. The essential task of analyzing requires a detachment that will convince the readers of the
       validity and effectiveness (or lack thereof) of the writing by identifying the writer's tools and what they
       accomplish.

       As you formulate your rhetorical analysis, be aware of the following approaches and strategies that writers use
       to persuade an audience. Your goal will be to identify them in your analysis, explain their use, and evaluate
       their effectiveness.

         · Establishing credibility. Writers include their credentials or experience with the subject to ensure that
             readers will take them seriously as someone who knows what they're talking about. To reinforce their
             authority, they cite reliable sources as support for their points.

         · Sharing personal experience. Sharing a personal experience related to the subject enhances credibility
             and may also appeal to readers' emotions.

         · Targeting emotional concerns. By specifically addressing those incidents or outcomes that readers may
             fear or desire, the author can rally them to take a particular position. Emotional concerns also include
             appeals to the five senses and to broader sentiments such as love, loyalty, anger, justice, or patriotism.

         · Using devices that draw attention to claims. These include literary devices such as parallelism,

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                               9.3 · Glance at Genre: Rhetorical Strategies 273

      repetition, and rhetorical questions that writers and speakers use to emphasize points and unify a text.
  · Supporting claims with convincing evidence. Ways of supporting claims include quoting, summarizing,

      or paraphrasing expert opinions; relating anecdotes and examples; and citing appropriate statistics and
      facts.
  · Acknowledging the opposition. If a writer makes a point of explaining other groups' positions carefully
      and respectfully, readers from those groups, as well as the target audience, are more likely to be
      responsive to the writer. By acknowledging the opposition, writers show they have considered opposing
      views and can then demonstrate that their position is preferable.
  · Questioning the motivation of the opposition. By exposing others' possibly conflicting interests, the
      writer can undermine the credibility of an opponent's character or argument.
In addition to these, writers may use more questionable rhetorical devices to persuade readers. While the
techniques of each strategy differ, all lead away from the actual argument and seek to persuade through means
other than reasonable, logical thought. Such strategies include bandwagon, ad hominem (name-calling), bait
and switch, and more. Recall the roommates' use of some of these in their efforts at persuasion in Breaking the
Whole into Its Parts.

Rhetorical Strategies in Advertising and Public Policy

The strategies and other devices of rhetorical writing that are open to analysis are present in many types of
communication, including multimodal examples such as advertisements that combine visuals with carefully
crafted texts, dialogue, and voice-over.

           FIGURE 9.3 M&Ms (credit: "Plain M&Ms Pile" by Evan-Amos/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
Look at the M&Ms commercial, for example, in this collection (https://openstax.org/r/this-collection) of Super
Bowl ads. Starting at minute 4:57, the prize-winning ad for M&Ms initially shows the widely recognizable candy
in its multiple colors as both speaking cartoon figures and symbols of human behavior. The simple pitch: when
people have offended others in one of a range of interpersonal blunders, the candy is offered as a peace
offering. For example, the first image shows a man on a plane bumping into another passenger's seat, causing
him to spill his drink. The offender then offers the passenger a package of M&Ms. What is the rhetorical
strategy behind the situation and the gesture? The ad appeals to pathos in the sense that people feel the need
to be liked. Despite the humorous twist in the comment that he kicked the seat on purpose, the offending man
274 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       nonetheless doesn't want to be disliked. Nor do the others who commit other blunders. The sense of
       taste--sweetness--also comes into play, appealing to the senses, as does the sense of sight in the images of the
       colorful candy.
       Furthermore, placing the ad during the Super Bowl targets an audience of game watchers whose ages,
       interests, and habits have been studied. They may be in a snacking frame of mind, so the appeal of candy is
       timely (kairos). The ad combines sophistication, appropriate adult behavior, and childishly amusing animation
       and personification. Seeing the product makes it more memorable. On the other hand, note the subtle use of
       the bandwagon fallacy: different people in different situations are doing the same thing--offering M&Ms. The
       bandwagon implication is that if you do something you're sorry for or should be sorry for (or even if you don't),
       giving out M&Ms is the way to apologize and be likable. Because travelers, businesspeople, the religiously
       observant, and others from different walks of life are doing it, so should you.

       FIGURE 9.4 Smokey Bear has been the symbol of wildfire prevention since 1944. (credit: "Dear Smokey" by Rudy
       Wendelin/Special Collections, USDA National Agricultural Library, Public Domain)
       Figure 9.4 is an image from the U.S. Forest Service that also reflects the use of rhetorical strategies. Smokey
       Bear is a symbol created in 1944 to raise awareness of the danger of forest fires. Images of this gentle,
       personified bear are often accompanied by the slogan "Remember . . . only you can prevent forest fires" or a
       variation of it. The image shows Smokey dressed in rolled-up jeans, a name belt, and a ranger's hat. He is
       reading letters delivered by a mail truck and sent to his own ZIP code, 20252, from children and adults
       promising to cooperate with his environmental efforts. The entire image is among the most recognizable of
       American cultural symbols.
       The continuing identification of the bear and his appeal over decades is an example of the powerful use of
       rhetorical devices that speak without seeming to become dated and lose impact. First, a wild and dangerous
       animal is personified and made credible so that the credibility (ethos) of Smokey as a domesticated father
       figure with a fuzzy, playful cub climbing on the family mailbox removes any sense of danger and instead makes
       him into a believable voice for safety. No humans are emphasized in the illustration; the mail truck is seen only
       in the distance after having delivered another stack of fan mail. Other small animals are present in the
       background, as are familiar household items such as a shovel, a mailbox, an American flag, a boat on crystal
       clear water, and the playful images of the ranger's hat and rolled-up jeans on crossed legs. The drawing
       features bright primary colors and the dark forest green of bountiful nature. The print medium in the center of
       the illustration, the sign reading "Prevent forest fires," unifies the visual.
       Because the images are emotionally accessible to children as well as adults, they appeal to widely shared

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                               9.3 · Glance at Genre: Rhetorical Strategies 275

pathos. The unspoken implication is that preventing forest fires will allow these young animals and forest
plants to live rather than die in a carelessly started--and deadly--fire. In addition, it will allow human life to
continue safely and pleasurably, as viewers can see, far in the background, people sailing and enjoying the
water. If children's wisdom and receptivity to images are present, this idealized picture has great appeal.
Rather than a harsh rebuke for adult negligence, the lesson of Smokey relies on the power of rhetoric to modify
behavior with specific, carefully crafted appeals. Yet the most frequently used slogan, "Only you can prevent
forest fires," is an example of hyperbole. Certainly "you" are not the sole person responsible for starting or
preventing fires. Other people and other factors are at work aside from yourself.
More explicit, however, is this earlier image:

FIGURE 9.5 Dating from about 1960, this image shows a member of the Boy Scouts and a member of the Camp Fire
Girls with Smokey. (credit: "Smokey with Scouts" by United States Department of Agriculture/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain)
The rhetorical strategy again is pathos, appealing to a sense of guilt. If these children can help prevent fires,
then surely adults can do the same, as they are likely more knowledgeable and care for the safety and health of
their children.

Rhetorical Analysis: Key Terms

Rhetorical Appeals
When doing a rhetorical analysis, notice these appeals writers use to persuade their audiences.

  · Ethos: believable, authoritative voice that elicits credibility and audience trust.
  · Kairos: sense of appropriate timing when attempting to persuade.
  · Logos: credible information--facts, reasons, or examples--presented as evidence that moves toward a

      sensible and acceptable conclusion.
  · Pathos: the use of appeals to feelings and emotions shared by an audience. Some of the general categories

      are fear, guilt, anger, love, loyalty, patriotism, and duty.
276 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       Rhetorical Devices and Language Use

       When doing a rhetorical analysis, notice these devices writers use to organize and emphasize their writing.

         · Figurative language: similes and metaphors. Comparing one aspect of things that in other ways are
             completely different is an essential part of rhetorical language. Simile example: "The treasure chest of
             nature's wonders shone like a pirate's gold tooth." Metaphor example: "The pizza was a disk of saucy
             sunlight."

         · Numerical data: statistics and figures. When accurate, numerical data can strengthen an argument.
         · Parallel structure: repetition of the same pattern of words to show that ideas are equally significant.

             Parallel structure, or parallelism, calls attention to these ideas, achieves balance, and makes the
             statements more memorable. Example: "Ask not what your country can do for you but what you can do for
             your country."
         · Personification: giving an inanimate or nonhuman object human characteristics to make it seem alive
             and relatable. Examples: "The virus packed its bags and spread across the ocean"; "Twitter erupted in
             outrage."
         · Repetition: repeating a single word or group of words to build emphasis. Example: "The first cuanudseereliinsndeunderline
             poverty; the second cuanudseereliinsndpeouonrdheerlailnthe; the third cuanudseereliinsndeiusncrdiemrliinnaetion. These cuanudseersliehnnaedveunbdeenrline
             studied, but to what effect?"
         · Rhetorical question: a question that is not expected to be answered, one for which there is no answer, or
             one that creates a dramatic effect. Examples: "Has it occurred to you to ask why the economy is so
             unstable? A first point to consider is . . ."; "Do you think poverty will go away by itself?"
         · Understatement: presenting something as less important than it is as a way of distancing from the truth.
             Understatement is often used sarcastically or ironically. Example: "It may not have occurred to politicians
             that poverty leads to a host of health-related issues."

       Rhetorical Fallacies

       When doing a rhetorical analysis, notice these fallacies writers may use to unethically persuade their
       audiences.

         · Ad hominem: logical fallacy that attempts to discredit a person, not an argument. Ad hominem, meaning
             "against the man," is often termed name-calling. Examples: "She's just a leftover from another era who
             can't accept change"; "He's a stupid bully and an outright thief."

         · Bait and switch: logical fallacy that introduces a point about one thing that is likely to be accepted and
             then changes the terms once initial agreement occurs. Example: "Buy these phones at this price before
             they're all gone!" When you go to buy one, moments later, the phones are gone--and they're far more
             expensive.

         · Bandwagon: logical fallacy often used in advertising and propaganda. It tries to make people do
             something or think a certain way because everyone is doing it, and if they don't go along, they will be
             excluded. Example: "Everyone is buying these sneakers; get yours now before you're left out." Negative
             example: "This style is so dated; no one wears things like this now."

         · Causal fallacy: the faulty logic of claiming or believing that an event that follows another event is the
             result of it. For example, losing your keys after going to a concert does not mean the events are connected
             causally; going to the concert did not cause you to lose your keys.

         · Hyperbole: exaggeration. Hyperbole is one of the staples of advertising language. Examples: "Season's
             Best Peppermint Glazed Delights"; "I have a ton of homework."

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                 9.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Rhetorical Analysis: Evicted by Matthew Desmond" by Eliana Evans 277

            9.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Rhetorical Analysis: Evicted by Matthew
            Desmond" by Eliana Evans

                 LEARNING OUTCOMES
                 By the end of this section, you will be able to:
public domain t· Identify the ways a student writer has analyzed the rhetorical strategies in a persuasive text.

                    · Demonstrate critical thinking and problem-solving when reading a rhetorical analysis.

              Introduction

                 Matthew Desmond (b. 1979 or 1980) is a sociology professor at Princeton University. He has published four
                 books, each addressing issues of poverty or racial inequality in American life. He has been recognized by the
                 Politico 50 list as an important contributing voice to national political debate. In the analysis that followse, nd public domain t
                 student Eliana Evans examines Desmond's work from a rhetorical perspective.

                 FIGURE 9.6 Matthew Desmond discusses Evicted at the Library of Congress. (credit: "Matthew Desmond at 2017
                 National Book Festival" by United States Library of Congress/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS
              Story as Persuasion

                        Imagine it's Friday--payday. One American worker picks up her check for $637. Now, imagine that $550 will go
                        toward rent, leaving only a small amount for everything else. The remaining $87 must be divided among food,
                        utilities, childcare, and medical treatment. Unfortunately, many of the nation's poor don't have to imagine this
                       troubling scenario because this is their reality. In his book Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City,
                        ethnographer and author Matthew Desmond follows eight poor families in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, as they
                        struggle to establish and maintain one of humanity's most basic needs: housing. As an ethnographer, Desmond
                        gathers research to promote the study and documentation of human culture: how people live under all kinds of
                        conditions.
278 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

Eanthnosta. tBy mentioning Desmond's qualifications as an ethnographer, Eliana Evans appeals to ethos: Desmond is an
authority whose opinions can be taken seriously.end annotat

Ianntnrootdaut ctory Anecdote. By beginning with a real-life example and addressing the reader directly, the writer

                 immediately emphasizes Desmond's hard-hitting point. This strategy engages readers from the start.end annotat

public domain t
                        Living and working in the typical mid-size American city of Milwaukee in the early 2000s, Desmond highlights

the  source  of  the  cyclical poverty he observes             around  him.  He  concludes  that  unstable  housing  is  "deeply  .  .  .
                              end public domain t

implicated in the creation of poverty" (5).

TanhneostisatStatement. The writer notes that Desmond offers his thesis statement, or the main point of his argument,
without delay, building off the specific example in the introduction.end annotat end public domain t

Throughout his book, Desmond explains that inflated rents and evictions-- the forced loss of housing--create

power imbalances between landlords and tenants. Legal and economic systems rigged against the poor are to
end public domain t                                            end public domain t
blame for creating an unbreakable cycle of poverty for renters. To advance his deductive argument, Desmond

largely employs emotional anecdotal evidence, introducing readers to the real-life circumstances of eight

families, thus using pathos to reach his readers. To reinforce this anecdotal evidence, he also employs logical

statistical evidence as well as emotional allusions to the nation's founding principle of equality.

To bring his book to life, Desmond uses many quotations from the people he portrays in the cycle of poverty.
Early in the book, he describes the life of Sherrena Tarver, an entrepreneur landlord who owns and manages
numerous properties and has to evict nonpaying tenants in the most difficult circumstance. At one point, she
faces a tough decision about Lamar, a legless man who occupies an apartment where he helps neighborhood
boys stay in school and control their lives. He simply cannot meet his financial responsibilities, and Sherrena is
torn between helping him and protecting her own bottom line. "I guess I got to stop feeling sorry for these
people because nobody is feeling sorry for me," she states (11). She will have to pay her own mortgage on the
property. No connection exists if others do not feel sorry for Sherrena, who has to face her own inner conflict
about Lamar.

Eanthnosta, tPathos, and Logos. Desmond speaks with authority as someone who cares deeply about the injustices of the
housing situation. Evans notes that Desmond also relies on emotional and logical thought and examples, and she
shows this in his quotations.end annotat

Although his book identifies unstable housing as a cause of poverty, Desmond writes for the purpose of creating
empathy in voters and establishing facts that policy makers cannot ignore to remedy the housing trap. The
moving description of eviction and its effects allows readers to fully appreciate his proposed solutions. As a
main point, Desmond advocates for legislation that would establish a universal housing voucher program
combined with government regulation to stabilize rents. He explains that voucher "programs lift roughly 2.8
million people out of poverty" each year (302). If these programs were expanded and supported by laws that
would prevent landlords from establishing exploitative rents, many more people could be helped. Desmond
hopes to convince voters who have been moved by his ethnographic discussion to elect candidates who are
serious about ending poverty and creating a more equal America.

Laannogtuaatge Use. Evans uses the phrase "as a main point" to emphasize to readers that Desmond strongly believes in
the voucher system.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
                 9.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Rhetorical Analysis: Evicted by Matthew Desmond" by Eliana Evans 279

                 In support of his argument, Desmond presents multiple anecdotal examples to illustrate the root of the cyclical

                 poverty his subjects face. For example, in Chapter 16, Kamala, a middle-aged mother of three, leaves her

                 children for one evening in the care of Devon, their father. Later, a fire caused by a lamp kills their eight-month-

                 old daughter. The apartment is uninhabitable, but the landlord, Sherrena, keeps the month's rent. The police

public domain t  report that the three children, abandoned by Devon, were alone in the apartment. The high cost oef nmdopnuthbllyicrednotmain t
                 leaves Kamala with few options for proper childcare, and without childcare, she has few options for

                 employment. The exploitation by landlords such as Sherrena only intensifies the tenant's poverty. Kamala, who

                 still has two children to support, is left with no home, no money, and little means of survival. Her story, and the

                 stories of the many others Desmond chronicles, supports the argument that unstable housing is a cause of

                 poverty, not a condition.  end public domain t

Eanxnaomtaptles and Pathos. Desmond's discussion gains emotional strength from the story of a child's needless death.end annotat

                                                         end public domain t
Pananthootastand Logos. The logic of the situation is theantdapfuabmliiclydmomusatinentdure hardship with little support. The
overwhelmeinngdnpeuebdliacnddomthaeintrat p of poverty in poor housing make for strong logical and emotional persuasion.end annotat

                 Desmond relays the stories of Kamala and others to generate empathy with readers. These stories create
                 emotional appeal in that they allow readers to experience the spiraling effects of poverty along with people
                 they come to care about. Indeed, Desmond relies on the intensity of Kamala's story to give poverty a face.
                 Kamala is no longer a nameless, faceless statistic. She is a real woman who experiences the loss of a child as a
                 result of circumstances beyond her control. Kamala's story helps break the preconception that poor people are
                 lazy and make individual choices to perpetuate their own poverty. Her situation illustrates a cycle of
                 unbreakable tragedy and poverty that begins with her inability to secure affordable and stable housing. The
                 details of her story make it hard for the public to ignore.

                 Desmond does not rely on anecdotal evidence alone. He also includes statistical evidence to support his
                 argument.

LaongnioctaaltEvidence. The writer notes Desmond's use of quantitative evidence--an appeal to logic. Readers are eager
to learn facts that will strengthen the impact of Desmond's argument.end annotat

                 In the prologue, Desmond explains that Arleen pays "88 percent of [her] $628-a-month welfare check" in rent
                 (3). This disproportionate sum creates a situation in which "1 in 8 poor renting families nationwide [are] unable
                 to pay all of their rent" (5). In Milwaukee, "landlords evict roughly 16,000 adults and children each year" (4).
                 Such numbers go beyond empathy and instead appeal to logic. Policy makers are likely to reject the idea of
                 drafting laws to relieve poverty based on feelings or empathy. Statistics, however, provide hard numbers that
                 are not subject to debate and that reinforce the need for logical and realistic solutions. Desmond also notes
                 that eviction and its effects have been vastly ignored by sociologists. These statistics fight preconceptions such
                 as Why don't poor people just get jobs? In addition, by using personification, Desmond explains that poverty is
                 a formidable enemy that a minimum-wage job cannot defeat.

Laongnosta. tAs a skilled writer, Desmond knows that if political action is called for, he will have to present a heavy dose of
facts and numbers. Evans notes that readers are more likely to be persuaded by a combination of different rhetorical
strategies, such as pathos and logos.end annotat

Panenrsootantification. Evans notes that Desmond uses figurative language to personify the idea of poverty, calling it "a
formidable enemy."end annotat

                 Finally, Desmond appeals to his readers' sense of right and wrong when he asks a key rhetorical question: Is
                 housing a fundamental American right? If readers answer "yes," then it is un-American to systematically lock
                 poor people away from the founding ideals of the country through housing, banking, and legal systems that
                 work to guarantee their poverty. The American dream is one of equal opportunity. Yet, despite the
                 constitutional guarantee of civil rights, the poor people who struggle to maintain housing in Desmond's
                 Milwaukee are further separated from the American dream by race.
280 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

public domain t  For example, in Chapter 3, Desmond describes the segregation that has long plagued Milwaukee: despite the
                 "open housing measure" guaranteed by "the 1968 Civil Rights Act," Milwaukee "remain[s] one of the most
                 racially divided cities in the nation" (34). The housing divide in Milwaukee not only keeps poor people from
                 achieving the American dream of stable and affordable housing, but it also supports a system of segregation
                 that goes against the founding ideal of equality.

Laongnostaatnd Pathos. Desmond addresses the issue of right vs. wrong. He attempts to persuade readers by offering

examples that make them think about the legal aspects of housing (logos) and the effects that deprivation have on

individuals (pathos).end annotat                                                              end public domain t

end public domain t                       end public domain t

                 Desmond's  argument  is  enticing  in  many  ways.  However,  critics point  dooumt tahiantthe  proposes  a  solution  that  fixes
                                                                                end public

                 only the short-term problem of sustaining stable housing with a universal voucher program that provides no

                 incentive for work. The long-term problem, which Desmond never addresses, would have to include a solution

                 that would raise a massive number of people out of poverty by enabling them to sustain reliable housing, along

                 with other living expenses, without relying heavily on government assistance. Vouchers may begin to eat away

                 at the root of poverty, but they are a short-term, rather than a long-term, fix.

Aandndorteastsing Counterclaims. Evans is careful to include some possibly negative views of Desmond's main points to
indicate that she has considered all sides before reaching a final verdict on the validity of his argument.end annotat

                 In the end, though, Desmond's argument is effective because he provides ample evidence with varying appeals
                 to support his claims. The use of anecdotes allows readers to feel the pain of poverty. Desmond's statistical
                 research shows logical reasons to end poverty through universal housing. The mentions of founding principles
                 such as equality show that readers have a moral obligation as Americans to participate in a solution to the
                 housing crisis.

                 Although much of Desmond's book relies on its anecdotal evidence and emotional appeal, it is his logic that
                 ultimately proves convincing. He identifies a tangible cause of poverty, then offers an equally tangible solution
                 to the problem he describes. If having stable and affordable housing will help end poverty and thus improve
                 society, then the government should provide this through vouchers and rent regulation.

Canonnoctlautsion and Thesis Statement Reaffirmed. Evans praises Desmond for his rhetorical ability to appeal to
readers in different ways. She claims that his logical approach, presenting facts and figures along with emotional
appeals, should be enough to convince the government to act.end annotat

Work Cited

Desmond, Matthew. Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. Broadway Books, 2016.

Discussion Questions

1. Why do you think Eliana Evans begins her rhetorical analysis with an example about the problems of
    paying rent and living on a reduced income?

2. How does Evans portray Desmond as someone worth listening to?
3. How does Evans evaluate Desmond's use of logic in arguing his points?
4. According to Evans, how does Desmond use pathos in persuading readers?
5. What is Evans's final opinion of Desmond's ability to persuade? Explain.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              9.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric 281

9.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop a rhetorical analysis through multiple drafts.
  · Identify and analyze rhetorical strategies in a rhetorical analysis.
  · Demonstrate flexible strategies for generating ideas, drafting, reviewing, collaborating, revising, rewriting, and

      editing.
  · Give and act on productive feedback for works in progress.

The ability to think critically about rhetoric is a skill you will use in many of your classes, in your work, and in
your life to gain insight from the way a text is written and organized. You will often be asked to explain or to
express an opinion about what someone else has communicated and how that person has done so, especially if
you take an active interest in politics and government. Like Eliana Evans in the previous section, you will
develop similar analyses of written works to help others understand how a writer or speaker may be trying to
reach them.

Summary of Assignment: Rhetorical Analysis

The assignment is to write a rhetorical analysis of a piece of persuasive writing. It can be an editorial, a movie
or book review, an essay, a chapter in a book, or a letter to the editor. For your rhetorical analysis, you will need
to consider the rhetorical situation--subject, author, purpose, context, audience, and culture--and the
strategies the author uses in creating the argument. Back up all your claims with evidence from the text. In
preparing your analysis, consider these questions:

  · What is the subject? Be sure to distinguish what the piece is about.
  · Who is the writer, and what do you know about them? Be sure you know whether the writer is considered

      objective or has a particular agenda.
  · Who are the readers? What do you know or what can you find out about them as the particular audience to

      be addressed at this moment?
  · What is the purpose or aim of this work? What does the author hope to achieve?
  · What are the time/space/place considerations and influences of the writer? What can you know about the

      writer and the full context in which they are writing?
  · What specific techniques has the writer used to make their points? Are these techniques successful,

      unsuccessful, or questionable?

For this assignment, read the following opinion piece by Octavio Peterson, printed in his local newspaper. You
may choose it as the text you will analyze, continuing the analysis on your own, or you may refer to it as a
sample as you work on another text of your choosing. Your instructor may suggest presidential or other
political speeches, which make good subjects for rhetorical analysis.

When you have read the piece by Peterson advocating for the need to continue teaching foreign languages in
schools, reflect carefully on the impact the letter has had on you. You are not expected to agree or disagree with
it. Instead, focus on the rhetoric--the way Peterson uses language to make his point and convince you of the
validity of his argument.

Another Lens. Consider presenting your rhetorical analysis in a multimodal format. Use a blogging site or
platform such as WordPress or Tumblr to explore the blogging genre, which includes video clips, images,
hyperlinks, and other media to further your discussion. Because this genre is less formal than written text,
your tone can be conversational. However, you still will be required to provide the same kind of analysis that
you would in a traditional essay. The same materials will be at your disposal for making appeals to persuade
your readers. Rhetorical analysis in a blog may be a new forum for the exchange of ideas that retains the basics
of more formal communication. When you have completed your work, share it with a small group or the rest of
the class. See Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image for more about
282 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       creating a multimodal composition.

             Quick Launch: Start with a Thesis Statement

       After you have read this opinion piece, or another of your choice, several times and have a clear understanding
       of it as a piece of rhetoric, consider whether the writer has succeeded in being persuasive. You might find that
       in some ways they have and in others they have not. Then, with a clear understanding of your purpose--to
       analyze how the writer seeks to persuade--you can start framing a thesis statement: a declarative sentence
       that states the topic, the angle you are taking, and the aspects of the topic the rest of the paper will support.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                         9.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric 283

Complete the following sentence frames as you prepare to start:

1. The subject of my rhetorical analysis is ________.
2. My goal is to ________, not necessarily to ________.
3. The writer's main point is ________.
4. I believe the writer has succeeded (or not) because ________.
5. I believe the writer has succeeded in ________ (name the part or parts) but not in ________ (name the part

      or parts).
6. The writer's strongest (or weakest) point is ________, which they present by ________.

     Drafting: Text Evidence and Analysis of Effect

As you begin to draft your rhetorical analysis, remember that you are giving your opinion on the author's use
of language. For example, Peterson has made a decision about the teaching of foreign languages, something
readers of the newspaper might have different views on. In other words, there is room for debate and
persuasion.

The context of the situation in which Peterson finds himself may well be more complex than he discusses. In
the same way, the context of the piece you choose to analyze may also be more complex. For example, perhaps
Greendale is facing an economic crisis and must pare its budget for educational spending and public works.
It's also possible that elected officials have made budget cuts for education a part of their platform or that
school buildings have been found obsolete for safety measures. On the other hand, maybe a foreign company
will come to town only if more Spanish speakers can be found locally. These factors would play a part in a real
situation, and rhetoric would reflect that. If applicable, consider such possibilities regarding the subject of your
analysis. Here, however, these factors are unknown and thus do not enter into the analysis.

Introduction

One effective way to begin a rhetorical analysis is by using an anecdote, as Eliana Evans has done. For a
rhetorical analysis of the opinion piece, a writer might consider an anecdote about a person who was in a
situation in which knowing another language was important or not important. If they begin with an anecdote,
the next part of the introduction should contain the following information:

  · Author's name and position, or other qualification to establish ethos
  · Title of work and genre
  · Author's thesis statement or stance taken ("Peterson argues that . . .")
  · Brief introductory explanation of how the author develops and supports the thesis or stance
  · If relevant, a brief summary of context and culture

Once the context and situation for the analysis are clear, move directly to your thesis statement. In this case,
your thesis statement will be your opinion of how successful the author has been in achieving the established
goal through the use of rhetorical strategies. Read the sentences in Table 9.1, and decide which would make
the best thesis statement. Explain your reasoning in the right-hand column of this or a similar chart.

                               Sentence                  Why or Why Not?

Only 50 percent of the students have said they want to
study Spanish or any other language, so statistics show
a lack of interest in spite of Octavio Peterson's
rhetorical claims.

TABLE 9.1 Thesis statement choices
284 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

                                Sentence                       Why or Why Not?

 A public vote should be taken to see how many
 residents support Octavio Peterson's rhetoric and ideas
 on language and whether his divisive opinion can be
 considered as it stands.

 Because Octavio Peterson's ideas on foreign language
 teaching are definitely worthy of support, I will
 summarize his letter and show why he is correct.

 This analysis of Peterson's language shows how he
 uses rhetorical strategies to persuade readers to
 consider the future of language learning in the city's
 schools.

TABLE 9.1 Thesis statement choices

The introductory paragraph or paragraphs should serve to move the reader into the body of the analysis and
signal what will follow.

Body

Your next step is to start supporting your thesis statement--that is, how Octavio Peterson, or the writer of your
choice, does or does not succeed in persuading readers. To accomplish this purpose, you need to look closely
at the rhetorical strategies the writer uses.

First, list the rhetorical strategies you notice while reading the text, and note where they appear. Keep in mind
that you do not need to include every strategy the text contains, only those essential ones that emphasize or
support the central argument and those that may seem fallacious. You may add other strategies as well. The
first example in Table 9.2 has been filled in.

Rhetorical     Paragraph(s)                                    Effect on Argument
 Device/          Location
 Strategy

Ethos,         First, second,     By referring to himself, his education, his job, and his community involvement as
credibility    fourth             a parent and concerned resident and by saying he has researched the subject,
                                  the writer establishes credibility.

Pathos,
emotion

Logos, reason

Kairos,
timeliness

Repetition

Figurative
language

TABLE 9.2 Rhetorical strategies

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                 9.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric 285

Rhetorical      Paragraph(s)     Effect on Argument
 Device/           Location
 Strategy

Speaking
familiarly or
"folksily"

Rhetorical
question

Parallel
structure

Addressing
counterclaims

Bandwagon

Ad hominem
(name-
calling)

Hyperbole
(exaggeration)

Causal fallacy

TABLE 9.2 Rhetorical strategies

When you have completed your list, consider how to structure your analysis. You will have to decide which of
the writer's statements are most effective. The strongest point would be a good place to begin; conversely, you
could begin with the writer's weakest point if that suits your purposes better. The most obvious organizational
structure is one of the following:

  · Go through the composition paragraph by paragraph and analyze its rhetorical content, focusing on the
      strategies that support the writer's thesis statement.

  · Address key rhetorical strategies individually, and show how the author has used them.

As you read the next few paragraphs, consult Table 9.3 for a visual plan of your rhetorical analysis. Your first
body paragraph is the first of the analytical paragraphs. Here, too, you have options for organizing. You might
begin by stating the writer's strongest point. For example, you could emphasize that Peterson appeals to ethos
by speaking personally to readers as fellow citizens and providing his credentials to establish credibility as
someone trustworthy with their interests at heart.

Following this point, your next one can focus, for instance, on Peterson's view that cutting foreign language
instruction is a danger to the education of Greendale's children. The points that follow support this argument,
and you can track his rhetoric as he does so.

You may then use the second or third body paragraph, connected by a transition, to discuss Peterson's appeal
to logos. One possible transition might read, "To back up his assertion that omitting foreign languages is
detrimental to education, Peterson provides examples and statistics." Locate examples and quotes from the
text as needed. You can discuss how, in citing these statistics, Peterson uses logos as a key rhetorical strategy.
286 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

In another paragraph, focus on other rhetorical elements, such as parallelism, repetition, and rhetorical
questions. Moreover, be sure to indicate whether the writer acknowledges counterclaims and whether they are
accepted or ultimately rejected.

The question of other factors at work in Greendale regarding finances, or similar factors in another setting,
may be useful to mention here if they exist. As you continue, however, keep returning to your list of rhetorical
strategies and explaining them. Even if some appear less important, they should be noted to show that you
recognize how the writer is using language. You will likely have a minimum of four body paragraphs, but you
may well have six or seven or even more, depending on the work you are analyzing.

In your final body paragraph, you might discuss the argument that Peterson, for example, has made by
appealing to readers' emotions. His calls for solidarity at the end of the letter provide a possible solution to his
concern that the foreign language curriculum "might vanish like a puff of smoke."

Use Table 9.3 to organize your rhetorical analysis. Be sure that each paragraph has a topic sentence and that
you use transitions to flow smoothly from one idea to the next.

Body        Write a topic sentence explaining your first point of analysis. If you begin with what you think is the
paragraph   writer's strongest point, state what it is and explain the rhetorical strategies used to support it.
1           Provide appropriate quotations from the text.

            Suggestion: Address ethos, pathos, and logos first. You may need more than one paragraph to cover
            them.

Body        If needed, continue your discussion of ethos, pathos, and/or logos, explaining how they function in
paragraph   the text and providing examples. Once you have completed your discussion, move on to your next
2           point, which will address one or more specific strategies used.

Body        Following a transition, write a topic sentence to address another point or points in the text. Discuss
paragraph   the strategies used, provide examples and quotations as appropriate, and show how they support
3           (or don't support) the writer's thesis statement. Consider rhetorical strategies such as parallelism,
            repetition, rhetorical questions, and figurative language.

Body        Continue as needed. In this paragraph, you might point out rhetorical fallacies, such as bandwagon,
paragraphs  ad hominem, or any others you notice, if you have not yet done so. Indicate how they strengthen or
4-6 (or     weaken the writer's position. If you have already addressed all the elements of your analysis,
more if     discuss the writer's approach to counterclaims. You may need more than four body paragraphs for
needed)     your rhetorical analysis.

TABLE 9.3 Drafting organizer

Conclusion

As you conclude your essay, your own logic in discussing the writer's argument will make it clear whether you
have found their claims convincing. Your opinion, as framed in your conclusion, may restate your thesis
statement in different words, or you may choose to reveal your thesis at this point. The real function of the
conclusion is to confirm your evaluation and show that you understand the use of the language and the
effectiveness of the argument.

In your analysis, note that objections could be raised because Peterson, for example, speaks only for himself.
You may speculate about whether the next edition of the newspaper will feature an opposing opinion piece
from someone who disagrees. However, it is not necessary to provide answers to questions you raise here. Your
conclusion should summarize briefly how the writer has made, or failed to make, a forceful argument that may

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              9.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically about Rhetoric 287

require further debate.

For more guidance on writing a rhetorical analysis, visit the Illinois Writers Workshop website
(https://openstax.org/r/Illinois) or watch this tutorial (https://openstax.org/r/this-tutorial).

     Peer Review: Guidelines toward Revision and the "Golden Rule"

Now that you have a working draft, your next step is to engage in peer review, an important part of the writing
process. Often, others can identify things you have missed or can ask you to clarify statements that may be
clear to you but not to others. For your peer review, follow these steps and make use of Table 9.4.

1. Quickly skim through your peer's rhetorical analysis draft once, and then ask yourself, What is the main
     point or argument of my peer's work?

2. Highlight, underline, or otherwise make note of statements or instances in the paper where you think your
      peer has made their main point.

3. Look at the draft again, this time reading it closely.
4. Ask yourself the following questions, and comment on the peer review sheet as shown.
288 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

         Peer Review: Rhetorical Analysis

         Name of Writer: ________ Name of Reviewer: ________

         Title

           · Is the title of this work straightforward and consistent with the content? If not, how can your peer revise their
               title?

           · If the title is more creative, does it attract readers and make them want to read further? If not, how can your
               peer revise the title?

         Thesis Statement

           · Does the thesis statement succinctly communicate the purpose? If not, how can your peer better
               communicate this in a thesis statement?

           · Does your peer offer an appropriate discussion of their chosen rhetorical topic, purpose, writer, reader(s), and
               context? If not, how can your peer better address these areas?

           · Does your peer address the writer's success in persuading readers and explain how the writer succeeds or
               does not succeed? If not, how can your peer better provide reasoning and text evidence to support their
               evaluation?

           · Depending on your peer's approach, does the thesis statement appear in an appropriate place? If not, how
               can your peer improve the placement or strength of the statement?

         Body

           · Does your peer mention the three major appeals and provide sufficient explanations and examples of their
               use? If not, what needs to be added or revised?

           · Does your peer mention relevant rhetorical strategies and explain their functions? If not, how can your peer
               improve this part of the analysis?

           · Does your peer note any logical fallacies, explain why the author uses them, and analyze their effects on the
               text? If not, what does your peer need to add or change?

           · Does your peer note and explain the writer's counterclaims? If the writer doesn't address them, has your
               peer noted this omission? If not, what does your peer need to add?

         Conclusion

           · Does the conclusion support your peer's thesis statement? If not, what revisions does your peer need to
               make?

       TABLE 9.4

       The Golden Rule

       An important part of the peer review process is to keep in mind the familiar wisdom of the "Golden Rule": treat
       others as you would have them treat you. This foundational approach to human relations extends to
       commenting on others' work. Like your peers, you are in the same situation of needing opinion and guidance.
       Whatever you have written will seem satisfactory or better to you because you have written it and know what
       you mean to say.

       However, your peers have the advantage of distance from the work you have written and can see it through
       their own eyes. Likewise, if you approach your peer's work fairly and free of personal bias, you're likely to be
       more constructive in finding parts of their writing that need revision. Most important, though, is to make
       suggestions tactfully and considerately, in the spirit of helping, not degrading someone's work. You and your
       peers may be reluctant to share your work, but if everyone approaches the review process with these ideas in

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                     9.6 · Editing Focus: Mixed Sentence Constructions 289

mind, everyone will benefit from the opportunity to provide and act on sincerely offered suggestions.

     Revising: Staying Open to Feedback and Working with It

Once the peer review process is complete, your next step is to revise the first draft by incorporating
suggestions and making changes on your own. Consider some of these potential issues when incorporating
peers' revisions and rethinking your own work.

  · Too much summarizing rather than analyzing
  · Too much informal language or an unintentional mix of casual and formal language
  · Too few, too many, or inappropriate transitions
  · Illogical or unclear sequence of information
  · Insufficient evidence to support main ideas effectively
  · Too many generalities rather than specific facts, maybe from trying to do too much in too little time

In any case, revising a draft is a necessary step to produce a final work. Rarely will even a professional writer
arrive at the best point in a single draft. In other words, it's seldom a problem if your first draft needs
refocusing. However, it may become a problem if you don't address it. The best way to shape a wandering piece
of writing is to return to it, reread it, slow it down, take it apart, and build it back up again. Approach first-draft
writing for what it is: a warm-up or rehearsal for a final performance.

Suggestions for Revising

When revising, be sure your thesis statement is clear and fulfills your purpose. Verify that you have abundant
supporting evidence and that details are consistently on topic and relevant to your position. Just before
arriving at the conclusion, be sure you have prepared a logical ending. The concluding statement should be
strong and should not present any new points. Rather, it should grow out of what has already been said and
return, in some degree, to the thesis statement. In the example of Octavio Peterson, his purpose was to
persuade readers that teaching foreign languages in schools in Greendale should continue; therefore, the
conclusion can confirm that Peterson achieved, did not achieve, or partially achieved his aim.

When revising, make sure the larger elements of the piece are as you want them to be before you revise
individual sentences and make smaller changes. If you make small changes first, they might not fit well with
the big picture later on.

One approach to big-picture revising is to check the organization as you move from paragraph to paragraph.
You can list each paragraph and check that its content relates to the purpose and thesis statement. Each
paragraph should have one main point and be self-contained in showing how the rhetorical devices used in the
text strengthen (or fail to strengthen) the argument and the writer's ability to persuade. Be sure your
paragraphs flow logically from one to the other without distracting gaps or inconsistencies.

9.6 Editing Focus: Mixed Sentence Constructions

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply knowledge of linguistic structures, including grammar and punctuation.
  · Recognize and correct errors in mixed sentence construction.

A mixed-construction sentence contains parts that do not fit together because of grammatical structure or
meaning. These sentence errors occur when writers begin a statement in one way, or one direction, and then
unintentionally change grammatical paths. This kind of sentence construction can detract from an otherwise
solidly analytical text.

  · Mixed Sentence 1: Learning to ballroom dance it has shown increased agility, and you live longer.

     First Problem: The reader expects a verb to follow "learning to ballroom dance" so that learning will mean
     something. But the word it interrupts before the verb appears. It collides with the first part of the sentence
290 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

             rather than completing it, and the sentence ends up making little sense.
             Second Problem: The second part of the sentence, "and you live longer," is confusing because it
             introduces you instead of continuing the idea of learning to ballroom dance.
             To eliminate confusion, you would have to rewrite either the first or the second part of the sentence.
             Revised: Studies have shown that learning to ballroom dance increases agility and lengthens life span.
       In fact, because it is the dancing itself and not the learning that has these effects, the sentence could be edited
       further.
             Further Revision: Ballroom dancing has been shown to increase agility and lengthen life.
       In the following examples, the writer needs to revise either the second part to fit with the first part or the first
       part to fit with the second.
         · Mixed Sentence 2: By starting my general studies classes last semester gave me the opportunity to take
             classes in my major this fall.
             Second Part Revised: By starting my general studies classes last spring,uInhdaedrletinhde oupnpdoertluinneity to take
             classes in my major this fall.
             First Part Revised: Sutnadretirnlignemenyd guenndeerralilnsetudies classes last spring gave me the opportunity to take classes
             in my major this fall.
       Read the following mixed-construction sentences, and note the ways they have been corrected.
         · Mixed Sentence 3: For people who have hobbies, they are happier than others.
             Revision: People who have hobbies are happier than others.
         · Mixed Sentence 4: The required qualification is someone who writes well.
             Problem: The qualification is the ability to write well, not the person.
             Revision: The required qualification is the ability to write well.
             Further Revision: The company requires someone who writes well.
         · Mixed Sentence 5: Nurses, an excellent career choice, involves an extra semester.
             Problem: Nurses are not a profession, nursing is.
             Revision: Nursing, an excellent career choice, involves an extra semester.

      Just Because... Doesn't Mean and Is When Constructions

       Just because . . . doesn't mean constructions are common in speech but should be avoided in writing. They are
       another example of mixed sentence construction.

         · Just Because . . . Construction: Just because I want to work in Washington doesn't mean I'll get a good job
             there.
             Revision: Simply wanting to work in Washington doesn't guarantee a good job there. Revision: Although I
             want to work in Washington, I will need to find a good job there.

       Another common mixed construction in spoken English involves the use of is when. This construction should
       also be avoided in writing.

         · Is When Construction: A feeling of accomplishment is when I finish revising a paper.
             Problem: "A feeling of accomplishment" is a noun phrase followed by a linking verb. This construction
             means that what follows the verb either describes the noun or renames it in different words. Therefore, to

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                     9.7 · Evaluation: Rhetorical Analysis 291

     balance the sentence, you need an adjective or noun to complete the subject. When, however, is an adverb
      referring to time, and in this sentence, it begins an adverb clause. In other words, "a feeling" cannot be the
      same as or described in terms of time.

      Revision: A feeling of accomplishment iusnfdineirslhininegernedviusinndgearlpinaeper.

      Revision: Iufnedeel ralisneenseeonfdacucnodmerplliinsehment wunhdeenrIliefnninedisuhnrdeevrilsinineg a paper.

Your Turn

Now, correct the following mixed-construction sentences. After you have finished, go back and check your
rhetorical analysis for mixed-construction sentences, and revise them as needed.

1. Putting your computer to sleep is when you can save the most electricity.
2. If you plant your seeds too close, anyone knows tomatoes cannot grow with corn.
3. Swimming in deep water is the danger of tides.
4. Just because you like math doesn't mean to eliminate classes in the humanities.
5. For people who want to be firefighters may have to work long and often intense shifts.

9.7 Evaluation: Rhetorical Analysis

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Evaluate the elements of a rhetorical analysis.
  · Identify and correct errors involving mixed sentence structures.
  · Evaluate an essay for clarity, coherence, and language.

At various points in your writing, especially after you complete the first draft, check the rubric provided here.
Your instructor is likely to use a similar rubric to evaluate your rhetorical analysis. Aligning your writing to
applicable points in the rubric--especially to those reflecting a score of 5-- will keep you focused and guide you
in your work.

Rubric

      Score  Critical Language Awareness             Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical Choices

5            The text always adheres to the          The essay presents all information  The writer skillfully
Skillful     "Editing Focus" of this                 clearly and logically. Well-chosen  identifies rhetorical
             chapter--mixed sentence                 transitions connect paragraphs and  strategies and
             constructions, as discussed in          sections, and the essay focuses     writes with
             Section 9.6--and maintains              consistently on its thesis          precision and
             consistency in constructing the         statement. Claims are fully         insight. The writer
             grammatical paths of sentences.         supported with quoted or            maintains a
             The text also shows ample evidence      paraphrased evidence.               consistent voice
             of the writer's intent to consciously                                       and an awareness
             meet or challenge conventional                                              of the rhetorical
             expectations in rhetorically effective                                      situation.
             ways.

TABLE 9.5
292 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

Score         Critical Language Awareness                      Clarity and Coherence                 Rhetorical Choices

4             The text usually adheres to the                  The essay presents most               The writer
Accomplished  "Editing Focus" of this                          information clearly and logically.    identifies rhetorical
              chapter--mixed sentence                          Well-chosen transitions connect       strategies and
              constructions, as discussed in                   most paragraphs and sections, and     writes with
              Section 9.6--and maintains                       the essay focuses on its thesis       precision and
              consistency in constructing the                  statement. Claims are well            insight. The writer
              grammatical paths of sentences.                  supported with quoted or              maintains a
              The text also shows some evidence                paraphrased evidence.                 consistent voice
              of the writer's intent to consciously                                                  and an awareness
              meet or challenge conventional                                                         of the rhetorical
              expectations in rhetorically effective                                                 situation, although
              ways.                                                                                  there may be an
                                                                                                     occasional slip.

3             The text generally adheres to the                The essay presents most               The writer
Capable       "Editing Focus" of this                          information clearly and logically.    identifies most, if
              chapter--mixed sentence                          Transitions connect most              not all, rhetorical
              constructions, as discussed in                   paragraphs and sections, but the      strategies and
              Section 9.6--and maintains                       essay may stray occasionally from     writes with some
              consistency in constructing the                  its thesis statement. Claims are      insight. The writer
              grammatical paths of sentences.                  generally supported with quoted or    maintains a fairly
              The text also shows limited                      paraphrased evidence.                 consistent voice
              evidence of the writer's intent to                                                     and an awareness
              consciously meet or challenge                                                          of the rhetorical
              conventional expectations in                                                           situation, although
              rhetorically effective ways.                                                           there may be slips.

2             The text occasionally adheres to the             The essay presents some               The writer
Developing    "Editing Focus" of this                          information clearly, but the          identifies some
              chapter--mixed sentence                          organization is confusing and/or      rhetorical
              constructions, as discussed in                   illogical. Transitions connect some   strategies but
              Section 9.6--and maintains                       paragraphs and sections, but the      neglects to
              consistency in constructing the                  transitions may be confusing or       elaborate on them
              grammatical paths of sentences.                  misleading. The essay may stray       sufficiently. The
              The text also shows emerging                     from its thesis statement and is      writer maintains an
              evidence of the writer's intent to               either too short or too long. Claims  inconsistent voice
              consciously meet or challenge                    often lack the support of additional  and awareness of
              conventional expectations in                     quoted or paraphrased evidence.       the rhetorical
              rhetorically effective ways.                                                           situation.

TABLE 9.5

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                  9.8 · Spotlight on ... Business and Law 293

       Score      Critical Language Awareness     Clarity and Coherence                Rhetorical Choices

 1            The text does not adhere to the     The essay lacks clarity, and the     The writer
 Beginning    "Editing Focus" of this             organization is confusing and/or     identifies few if any
              chapter--mixed sentence             illogical. Transitions connect some  rhetorical
TABLE 9.5     constructions, as discussed in      paragraphs and sections, but the     strategies and
              Section 9.6--and does not maintain  transitions may be too few,          neglects to
              consistency in constructing the     confusing, or misleading. The essay  elaborate on them.
              grammatical paths of sentences.     often strays from its thesis         The writer
              The text also shows little to no    statement, if it has one, and is     maintains an
              evidence of the writer's intent to  either too short or too long.        inconsistent voice
              consciously meet or challenge                                            and shows little, if
              conventional expectations in        Claims that do appear are not        any, awareness of
              rhetorically effective ways.        effectively supported.               the rhetorical
                                                                                       situation.

9.8 Spotlight on ... Business and Law

LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify factors that influence the ways that work is designed, documented, and disseminated.
  · Apply methods and technologies commonly used for communication in various fields.
  · Write an effective résumé and accompanying cover letter.
  · Interpret legal language and rewrite it in plain English.

In the business and legal worlds, written and spoken rhetoric is crucial to successful outcomes and the internal
workings of an organization.

Rhetoric in Business

The ability to write persuasively by using rhetorical strategies is crucial to the success of a business, including
its profitability, employee satisfaction, and efficient operations. More immediately, though, using rhetorical
devices to get hired is no less crucial a skill. The purpose of business writing is often to sell, whether an idea, a
candidate, a product, or a strategy. For most people, the first step in business writing is an effective application
letter and résumé with the goal of obtaining an interview.
            294 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

s
                                                                          end s
                                                                                 end s

                 FIGURE 9.7 A strong cover letter and résumé will impress prospective employers, who will be well disposed toward
                 interviewing you. Remember the purpose of these written pieces is to obtain an interview, not the job--at least not
                 yet. (credit: "Women in Tech - 82" by WOCinTechChat.com/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
                 Application Letters and Résumés
                  When writing letters of application and résumés, keep in mind that you are writing to sell. In this case, you
                  need to "sell" yourself to a company. Thus, you want to convey information rhetorically and persuasively. The
                 most effective application letters have one element in common: they focus as much as possible not on you, the
                 applicant, but on the company and the ways in which you could be an asset as an employee. Therefore, keep in
                 mind that your need for work is not a real concern to a prospective employer. Rather, their needs and your
                 potential are. If you are applying for a job, ask yourself these questions: What can you do to fill a present or
                 future need? What exactly is the employer looking for (as opposed to what you are looking for)? If an employer
                  has indicated criteria for applicants, what are those criteria, and how can you show you fulfill them?
                 Keep these ideas in mind when writing an application letter. Because you are focusing on your value to a
                 company, do not start like this student did:

                              My name is Brett Ellison. I am graduating this spring and would like to apply for the position you have
                              advertised. It looks interesting and would suit me well.
                 It will take exciting and convincing writing to build interest after such a generic introduction. Your name,
                 graduation date, and opinion of the job are of little interest to a future employer. Consider the difference with
                 this opening:
                              For the job opening you have advertised online in data management, you have asked for a recent
                              graduate with skills in. . . . Four years of college with a major in computer science and an internship
                              with Coverall Insurance have given me the skills you require.
                 The applicant mentions the required skills and follows with a statement indicating they possess the skills.
                 When you begin this way, you emphasize the company's needs, not your own. The first paragraph should then
                 end with a statement that you are attaching your current résumé and that you request the company's
                 consideration.
                 In the next paragraph, highlight a specific achievement connected to that skill and your abilities. Include other
                 aspects of your background as relevant. Try to keep each paragraph to no more than six lines. If possible,
                 continue to focus on the company and its needs, showing that you know something about them. Keep it short;
                 one page will be sufficient to highlight your skills. Avoid mentioning areas of weakness or skills you do not
                 have. Conclude with an expression of gratitude for their consideration.

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      9.8 · Spotlight on ... Business and Law 295

If you have a recommendation or lead for the job, you can naturally begin with that, as this student did in the
following letter:

A current résumé should always accompany your application letter. Try to tailor your résumé to highlight
unique credentials you may have and ones that may set you apart from other applicants. Your résumé should
complement the letter, meaning the two parts should fit together and not contradict each other. A good idea is
to edit the résumé to fit the job you want by adding or highlighting parts that pertain specifically to the
position; changing the order of details; or using italics, boldface type, or bullets for listing facts or dates. The
résumé should not be a one-size-fits-all product or give the impression that it is a standard statement with no
real pertinence to the specific job. Use your résumé as a selling tool to persuade a company or organization to
grant you an interview. Actually getting the job comes later.
A key element in any résumé, following your identifying information, is a statement of your career goal.
Although it is inevitable that others will have similar plans, try to stand out by sounding decisive or presenting
a vision of what you can accomplish. Imagine being the reader of your résumé rather than the writer. That
296 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       person may devote only seconds to skimming it, and the first thing they will notice is the career goal, which
       you can change each time you send out a résumé. Your personal aim or goal gives you the chance to indicate
       something in one line that would make the reader want to continue. The following are effective statements:

         · To use my programming skills to create innovative and useful content for a growing company
         · To use what I have learned in management classes for the progress of a growing firm
         · To contribute to a sales force based on best practices of marketing
         · To work in the public sector for personal as well as social progress
         · To combine a productive work ethic with openness to change and travel
       Sample Résumé
       Below is Mikaela Rodgers's résumé:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      9.8 · Spotlight on ... Business and Law 297

Previewing a wide variety of sample résumés (https://openstax.org/r/sample) will give you plenty of ideas.

Language in Law

In the legal world, communication is equally or even more crucial. In addition to the ability to speak
convincingly, the ability to use rhetorical strategies to write persuasively is of critical importance in legal
professions and in everyday situations regarding disputes, contracts, and other matters involving legalities. In
courtrooms and behind the scenes, the ability to persuade a judge to make a decision or ruling in favor of a
particular client before or during a trial affects all aspects of a case, including the legal team's ability to
persuade a jury of its position. Furthermore, disputes between family members, buyers and sellers, renters
and landlords, and employees and managers are often settled with the help of appropriately used rhetorical
strategies.
298 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       FIGURE 9.8 Because contracts and similar binding agreements feature in many legal disputes, it is important to
       understand and interpret the language in which they are written. Arguing for your interpretation involves the use of
       rhetorical strategies. (credit: "Legal Contract & Signature - Warm Tones" by Blogtrepreneur
       [howtostartablogonline.net/legal]/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
       Language use in the legal profession relies on precedent, meaning evidence or examples of past legal cases
       and their verdicts. Legal English aims to be consistent, complete, valid, and formal. It must correspond to what
       is expected by the court to which it will be communicated. Legal briefs, for example, are documents written to
       persuade the court to agree with the writer's position, whether for a plaintiff or a defendant. To gain judicial
       agreement, legal language must avoid open-ended interpretations because ambiguity (two valid points of view
       without a single resolution) is counterproductive. Instead, lawyers and those who write for them often adapt a
       writing template already familiar to and required by a court.
       American legal English has its roots in history. It was adopted from England, where Roman rulers and later
       French invaders left an inheritance of terminology still used today. Many familiar legal terms are hundreds of
       years old. For example, the verb shall replaces must or have to ("The plaintiff shall . . ."). The word is an
       imperative, binding and unconditional, unlike its uncertain use in modern English ("Shall I do that?"). Also, the
       word consideration indicates a sum of money or settlement to be paid, not "the act of caring" ("The land shall
       be transferred for a consideration of . . ."). Antiquated expressions appear frequently--heretofore, forthwith,
       until such time that, party of the first part, party of the second part, due process--as do Latin expressions--pro
       bono, pro se, ad hoc, bona fide, de facto. Doubling of concepts is also common: null and void, breaking and
       entering, pain and suffering, legal and binding.
       However, the linguistic situation has changed somewhat with the move toward "plain English," meaning
       avoidance of the jargon and excesses of legal writing. Rather than long sentences and paragraphs with
       minimal punctuation and spacing of text, "plain English" reforms and simplifies the terminology to make it
       readily understandable for people outside the legal profession.
       Plain English
       "Plain English" was formally introduced in the United States in 2010 by President Barack Obama in the official
       Plain Writing Act of 2010 adopted by Congress. It was part of a paperwork reduction program extending to all
       areas of government communication with the goal of reducing the amount of written communication issued
       by all agencies. Common opinion recognized that what needed to be said could be done more efficiently if
       people understood the content of laws and regulations.
       As an example, the following regulations from the New Jersey state office for overseeing real estate

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      9.8 · Spotlight on ... Business and Law 299

transactions are unclear and confusing. Despite the capital letters, the text consists of long, dense paragraphs
that actually discourage reading and understanding. Because a situation in which someone breaks a lease is
likely to be stressful, language such as this, with long sentences and legal terms, only worsens the possible
confrontation. The assumption is that the tenant will have to either wade through the language independently
or rely on a lawyer as a paid guide.

On the other hand, the following document explains in plain English, with short sentences and paragraphs, the
procedures for securing federal student aid. Not only are the instructions clear, but they also explain some of
the reasoning for them.
300 9 · Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

       The plain language of this document aims to make information easily comprehensible. It is broken into brief,
       concise paragraphs with short, clear sentences. Punctuation is basic and emphatic. Students already uncertain
       about financial security are made to feel welcome and have the sense that the procedure can be done without
       their becoming mired in dense language and regulations.

      Your Turn

       Business. If you have a résumé, update and revise it according to the suggestions presented in this section. If

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                         9.9 · Portfolio: How Thinking Critically about Rhetoric Affects Intellectual Growth 301

you do not have a résumé, now is the time to create one. Select a format and complete it with your information,
including a professional objective. (You can access the site (https://openstax.org/r/site) provided earlier in this
section or consult Microsoft Word for résumé templates.) Once you have revised or completed your résumé,
find an announcement about a summer job or internship and write an appropriate application letter.

Legal. With the Plain Writing Act of 2010 in mind, rewrite the section of the New Jersey rental agreement
reproduced in this section. Change sentence and paragraph length when appropriate to simplify language and
clarify meaning. Remember that your readers consist of average people looking to rent an apartment.

9.9 Portfolio: How Thinking Critically about Rhetoric Affects Intellectual Growth

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Demonstrate, through writing, the discovery and reconsideration of ideas.
  · Reflect on the development of composing practices and how those practices influence your work.

In this reflection, think about your participation in the chapter as you learned about and completed a
rhetorical analysis assignment. Participation includes thoughtful completion of work, working with other
students in peer review, interacting with your instructor, and raising questions or concerns.

Summing Up and Looking Ahead

An effective way to reflect productively is to compose a "Sum Up" entry for yourself that you can share with
your instructor or peers. Your "Reflection on Analysis" may include what you knew of the genre before working
on this chapter and what your initial reactions were to reading about Jamil Smith as this chapter's Trailblazer.
Will you look forward to reading more of his work?

You also may note your writing of the rhetorical analysis and articulate any remaining questions about
language use. Might the experience lead you to express yourself in a similar public forum? Which issues
interest you the most?

While working through the sections of the chapter, did you find any well suited to your pace and style of
writing? As you reflect, discuss in your own terms and in any format you choose what you learned from the
material and what, specifically, you believe will be most useful for you in your education.
302 9 · Further Reading

Further Reading

Losh, Elizabeth, et al. Understanding Rhetoric: A Graphic Guide to Writing. 3rd ed. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2020.
Lunsford, Andrea A., and John J. Ruszkiewicz. Everything's an Argument. 9th ed. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2021.
Smith, Jamil. "After the NAACP." New Republic, 7 Nov. 2017, newrepublic.com/article/145430/naacp-ben-

    jealous-running-governor-maryland-campaign-say-civil-rights-organization-led.

Works Cited

Bullock, Richard H. The Norton Field Guide to Writing. W. W. Norton, 2006.
Connor, Jackson. "New Republic Editor Jamil Smith Asks for Time before Critics Declare Magazine Dead."

   HuffPost, 6 Feb. 2015, www.huffpost.com/entry/new-republic-jamil-smith-huffpost-live_n_6632458.
Lunsford, Andrea A. The Everyday Writer. 3rd ed. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2004.
Smith, Jamil. "Cleveland Native and Senior Editor at the New Republic Jamil Smith Talks about His New Job,

   the New New Republic, and How the Media Should Be Covering Race." Interview by Vince Grzegorek.
   Cleveland Scene, 29 Apr. 2015, www.clevescene.com/cleveland/cleveland-native-and-senior-editor-at-the-
    new-republic-jamil-smith-talks-about-race-his-new-job-the-new-new-republic-and-how-the-media-shou/
    Content?oid=4568641.
Smith, Jamil. "March 2018 Newsletter: Journalist Jamil Smith ('93) Returns to SHHS to Discuss His Career and
   His Time Magazine Cover Story on Black Panther." Interview. Shaker Heights Schools, Mar. 2018,
    www.shaker.org/protected/ArticleView.aspx?iid=6GUIAI0&dasi=2YB.
Smith, Jamil. "The Revolutionary Power of Black Panther." Time, 8 Feb. 2018, time.com/black-panther/.
Wydick, Richard C. Plain English for Lawyers. 3rd ed. Carolina Academic Press, 1994.

Access for free at openstax.org.
Art of Rhetoric Position Argument: Practicing the 10

FIGURE 10.1 This engraving by an unknown Italian artist from the 15th century personifies rhetoric as eloquence or
"discourse marked by force and persuasiveness." Study the details. What is the engraver suggesting about the
characteristics of rhetoric or eloquence? Why might the artist have chosen a woman to personify rhetoric or
eloquence? (credit: "Mantegna Tarocchi E23, Rhetorica" by Unknown engraver of the late 15th century/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

10.1  Making a Case: Defining a Position Argument
10.2  Position Argument Trailblazer: Charles Blow
10.3  Glance at Genre: Thesis, Reasoning, and Evidence
10.4  Annotated Sample Reading: "Remarks at the University of Michigan" by Lyndon B. Johnson
10.5  Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument
10.6  Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions
10.7  Evaluation: Varied Appeals
10.8  Spotlight on ... Citation
10.9  Portfolio: Growth in the Development of Argument

INTRODUCTION Around 350 BCE, the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322 BCE) defined rhetoric as the
ability to recognize and use different means of persuasion in writing and speaking effectively. These means of
persuasion include ethos, appeal to ethics; logos, appeal to logic; pathos, appeal to emotions; and kairos, or
timeliness. In simple terms, rhetoric is the art of persuasion--explaining a position or side of an argument in
304 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

       order to convince others to adopt the writer's or speaker's viewpoint. More deeply, rhetoric is the study of how
       language is written, spoken, and visualized. For more on rhetoric, see Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art
       of Rhetoric.

       Ethos, logos, pathos, and kairos are the foundation of persuasion strategies in Western civilization; other
       cultures rely on other types of appeals. In many Eastern civilizations, persuasive strategies are based on
       developing a sense of unity with the audience, promoting social responsibility, and working with the audience
       to increase knowledge.

       This chapter presents a biography on position writer Charles Blow (b. 1970) and a speech by an American
       president Lyndon B. Johnson (1908-1973). It is a study in rhetoric, as its purpose is to persuade the audience
       (the American public) to agree with, support, and carry out his proposal for a Great Society. Later in the
       chapter, you will learn how to apply principles of rhetoric to create a position argument of your own.

     10.1 Making a Case: Defining a Position Argument

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Apply key rhetorical concepts in presenting a position argument.
         · Articulate how position and argument conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and reasoning.

       In writing, a genre is a category of literary composition. The genre for this chapter is a position arguments. In
       a position argument, your purpose is to present a perspective, or viewpoint, about a debatable issue and
       persuade readers that your perspective is correct or at least worthy of serious consideration. A debatable issue
       is one that is subject to uncertainty or to a difference of opinion; in college classes, a debatable issue is one that
       is complex and involves critical thinking. These issues are not rooted in absolutes; instead, they invite writers
       to explore all sides to discover the position they support. In examining and explaining their positions, writers
       provide reasoning and evidence about why their stance is correct.

       Many people may interpret the word argument to mean a heated disagreement or quarrel. However, this is
       only one definition. In writing, argument--what Aristotle called rhetoric--means "working with a set of reasons
       and evidence for the purpose of persuading readers that a particular position is not only valid but also worthy
       of their support." This approach is the basis of academic position writing.

       Your instructor likely will require your position argument to include these elements, which resemble those of
       Aristotle's classical argument. However, as you continue the development of your writing identity throughout
       this course, consider ways in which you want to support these conventions or challenge them for rhetorical
       purposes.

         · Introduce the issue and your position on the issue.
         · Explain and describe the issue.
         · Address the opposition.
         · Provide evidence to support your position.
         · Offer your conclusion.

       Position arguments must provide reasoning and evidence to support the validity of the author's viewpoint. By
       offering strong support, writers seek to persuade their audiences to understand, accept, agree with, or take
       action regarding their viewpoints. In a college class, an audience is usually an instructor and other classmates.
       Outside of an academic setting, however, an audience includes anyone who might read the
       argument--employers, employees, colleagues, neighbors, and people of different ages or backgrounds or with
       different interests.

       Before you think about writing, keep in mind that presenting a position is already part of your everyday life.
       You present reasoning to frame evidence that supports your opinions, whether you are persuading a friend to
       go to a certain restaurant, or persuading your supervisor to change your work schedule. Your reasoning and

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                    10.1 · Making a Case: Defining a Position Argument 305

evidence emphasize the importance of the issue--to you. Position arguments are also valuable outside of
academia. Opinion pieces and letters to the editor are essentially brief position texts that express writers'
viewpoints on current events topics. Moreover, government organizations and political campaigns often use
position arguments to present detailed views of one side of a debatable issue.

On a larger scale, arguing in favor of a position is deeply rooted in the American political and social systems, in
which free speech and, by extension, open debate are the essence of the democratic process. They are also at
the heart of the academic process, in which scholars investigate issues dealing with science, society, and
culture, or shared values, customs, arts, and other traits of any social group. However, in the academic world,
unlike the political and legal worlds, posing position arguments is usually less about winning or losing than
about changing minds, altering perceptions, or defending beliefs and ideas.

It is most useful to look at a position argument as rational disagreement rather than as a quarrel or contest.
Rational disagreements occur most often in areas of genuine uncertainty about what is right, best, or most
reasonable. In disciplines such as literature and history, position arguments commonly take the form of
interpretation or analysis, in which the meaning of an idea or text is disputed. In disciplines such as
engineering and business, position arguments commonly examine a problem and propose a solution. For
example, a position paper in engineering might focus on improvement recommendations for systems in the oil
and gas industry; a position paper in business might focus on technological changes that would benefit a
particular company or industry.

In college, position arguments aim to persuade readers to agree with a particular viewpoint. Assignments
commonly require you to take a stance on an issue and defend your position against attacks from skeptics or
naysayers. You are asked to choose an issue, present a viewpoint about it, and support it with reasoning and
evidence. Remember these basic points:

  · Choose a debatable issue. A position argument that states, for instance, that three-year-old children can
     be left alone all evening is one with no room for debate, so the topic would not lead to an effective
      argument. Without a debate, there is no argument.

  · Present a clear, definite viewpoint. Readers do not want to guess your position. Although you present
      both sides of a position, readers must be clear about which side you support.

  · Support your viewpoint with reasoning and evidence. If, for instance, you are writing about backing a
      local proposal to remove a statute of a Civil War general who fought for the Confederacy, readers need to
      know why you favor its removal, why the statue was first erected, and how removal will help the
      community. You would then support each with cause-and-effect reasoning and evidence. For example,
      details that explain why you favor removal might include the general's support of the Southern economic
      system sustained by enslavement. Details that explain why the statue was erected might include that the
      general was from the town and that his family was rich and influential enough to fund the creation and
      placement of the statue. Details that explain how the removal of the statue will affect the community might
      include the promotion of a feeling of solidarity with local citizens of all races and the end of negative
      publicity resulting from association with the general.

  · Identify counterclaims (dissenting opinions). When you address differing or contradictory opinions,
      show empathy, the ability to understand and share the feelings of others, for those with dissenting views.
      If, for instance, people oppose a proposed new law because they think it will cost too much money, then
      explain why the money will be well spent or offset by savings in the future. Neither antagonize nor dismiss
      the opposition.
306 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

     10.2 Trailblazer

     Position Argument Trailblazer: Charles Blow

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Demonstrate critical thinking when reading in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
         · Articulate and analyze rhetorical and cultural contexts in reading.
         · Distinguish relationships between the interplay of verbal and nonverbal elements, and explain how these

             features function for different audiences and situations.

FIGURE 10.2 Charles Blow (credit: "Charles Blow    "I . . . us[e] visual
and Jillian Karanda 4-23-18" by Kelly Writers    evidence . . . charts
House/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
                                                    and maps and
                                                 diagrams to support

                                                    my positions."

Trendsetter

Trendsetting journalist Charles Blow (b. 1970) attended Grambling State University in Louisiana, where he
edited his college newspaper, founded a student magazine, and interned (worked as a trainee to gain
experience) in various positions. While a student, he heard The New York Times was participating in a job
conference in Atlanta and decided to attend. When he arrived, however, he learned he was supposed to have
preregistered, paid a fee, filled out a form, and submitted an essay. Undeterred, Blow borrowed pencil from a
guard, completed the form, paid the fee, and wrote the essay on the spot. He then gained entry into the
conference. When he got to the booth sponsored by The New York Times, he was told he would not be
interviewed because he had not signed up beforehand. Again undeterred, Blow decided to wait anyway,
thinking someone who had signed up might not appear for their interview. He waited until early evening and
eventually was granted an interview. At the end of his interview, he was told that he had been impressive but
that The New York Times had no openings at the time. The next day, however, a representative from the paper
approached him again and announced they had created an internship for him.

In 1991, Blow graduated magna cum laude (with great distinction) with a degree in mass communications and
began a journalism career, working in various cities. In 2008, he returned to The New York Times as its first
"visual" op-ed columnist, writing opinion pieces that feature graphic aids such as diagrams, charts, and tables.
In his visual op-ed column, Blow presents his position or argument, with the intent to persuade readers to
agree with him. To augment what he says in print, he includes graphic aids, which clarify and simplify data.
Blow is cautious, too, about using visuals that are too complex, for he believes his readers respond better to "a
strong point . . . in a visual nugget that they can digest right away."

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                             10.3 · Glance at Genre: Thesis, Reasoning, and Evidence 307

Blow's topics revolve around current events, and his readers--his audience--expect his columns to highlight
his positions on, or arguments about, hot-button issues in current events. Blow calls himself a "trend spotter,"
someone on the cutting edge of what is happening in the nation and the world. To discover ideas for topics
about current events, Blow keeps his office television tuned to news channels so he can learn of breaking news
or of how news is being covered. That is where his writing process usually begins.

First, when an interesting news item comes over the airwaves, Blow decides his opinion on the subject. Then
he thinks about whether his readers might care about the subject. He does not stop there, though. Because
Blow is a visual op-ed columnist, he will not pursue the topic if he cannot think of a visual hook to support his
position or argument. He then studies data about the topic and asks himself whether the data surprises him or
might surprise readers. His audience expects solid graphic aids in his columns, and it is the combination of
written prose and visual hooks that makes him stand apart from other op-ed writers.

In addition to writing for The New York Times, Blow is the author of the memoir Fire Shut Up in My Bones and
The Devil You Know: A Black Power Manifesto. Read some of Blow's columns (https://openstax.org/r/
blowscolumns) as printed in The New York Times.

Discussion Questions

1. If you were to turn on the television today, what current topics might make interesting opinion columns?

2. How might Blow's use of graphics as evidence help support a point in a column?

3. What kinds of graphics could you use to support the topic(s) you identified in question #1?

4. Do you agree or disagree with Blow's claim that visuals should be simple and easily digestible rather than
    complex? Explain your thinking.

5. Blow calls himself a "trend spotter." In your college, your town, or the country as a whole, what is a current
    trend that might interest Blow?

10.3 Glance at Genre: Thesis, Reasoning, and Evidence

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Articulate and analyze key rhetorical concepts in presenting a position or an argument.
  · Demonstrate awareness of context, audience, and purpose in a position argument.
  · Identify the thesis and supporting evidence of a position argument.
  · Distinguish different types of evidence used in a position argument.

The purpose of a position argument is to persuade readers to adopt a viewpoint. Writers of position arguments
focus on a thesis that takes a stance on a debatable issue and support that thesis with reasoning and evidence.
When writing persuasively, consider your audience and use the kinds of reasoning strategies and evidentiary
appeals you believe will be convincing. In addition, use language with which your audience is most
comfortable. In academic environments, academic language is generally most acceptable, although you may
choose to challenge this notion for rhetorical purposes. Outside academic environments, tailor your language
to connect best with your audience.

Reasoning is most effective when it is built on evidence that readers recognize as logical and practical.
Suppose you want to persuade your audience that because of the insurrection at the U.S. Capitol on January 6,
2021, additional police should be hired to protect the building and the people who work there. You could
include information about the number of police on duty that day, the number of people injured, and the
amount of damage done. You then could explain how the number of police on duty was insufficient to protect
the people and the Capitol.

Additionally, you identify and refute the counterclaims. An example of a counterclaim against hiring
308 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

       additional police officers might be that the cost is too high. Your response, then, might be that the cost could
       easily be shifted from another nationally funded source.

      Characteristics of Position Arguments

       The characteristics of a position argument include the following elements.

       Ethos (Ethical Appeal)

       You establish credibility by showing readers that your approach to the issue is fair and that you can be trusted.
       One way to demonstrate fairness and trustworthiness is to use neutral language that avoids name-calling. For
       instance, in your paper about hiring additional police to defend the Capitol, you would avoid taking political
       sides and would use neutral language when describing police, workers in the Capitol, and demonstrators.

       To show trustworthiness, always follow these guidelines:

         · Use only respected, reliable sources as evidence. Avoid sources that lean heavily to the political right or
             left or that are otherwise questionable as to accuracy. Reliable sources include scholarly, peer-reviewed
             articles and books; professional articles and books; and articles from magazines, newspapers, websites,
             and blogs. For more information about credible sources, see Research Process: Accessing and Recording
             Information and Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources.

         · Present evidence from sources in the same context in which it was originally presented. Do not change the
             original author's meaning or tone. Be especially careful of such changes when you paraphrase or
             summarize. See Spotlight on... Citation for more about paraphrasing and summarizing.

         · Cite evidence to the proper sources. Use the citation style required by your instructor, usually MLA
             Documentation and Format or APA Documentation and Format Proper citations direct readers to more
             information about your sources and show you are not plagiarizing.

         · Incorporate common ground between readers who support your position and those who do not. To do this,
             many authors use evidence pulled from patriotic or religious documents to create ethical appeal. For
             instance, regarding the activity that took place at the Capitol, both sides might find common ground in the
             First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which outlines rights of the people. The protestors might cite
             the section of the amendment that deals with freedom of assembly; those on the other side might point out
             that the amendment guarantees "the right of the people peaceably to assemble" and that the assembly was
             not peaceable.

       Logos (Logical Appeal)

       You appeal to your audience's intelligence by showing that you understand the value of sound reasoning. To do
       this, state your position clearly and support it with rational arguments, critical thinking, and credible evidence.
       Also, avoid exaggerating or making claims you cannot support with reliable evidence. Many authors use facts
       and statistics to create logical appeal.

       To appeal to logic, follow these guidelines:

         · State your position clearly with easy-to-understand language. For example, to appeal to readers'
             intelligence in your paper about hiring additional police to defend the Capitol, avoid using vocabulary that
             would feel unnatural. Instead of writing "The verbiage from the campaigners importuned the
             dispossession of their statesmen," write "The protestors demanded the resignations of their congressional
             representatives."

         · Support your position with reasoning that is neither incomplete nor faulty. Sound reasoning is that which
             all can agree makes sense. For example, you would not contend that to be ready for future protests, the
             Capitol police force must be doubled from 2,000 to 4,000 because you cannot know the number needed at
             any time. However, you could argue that the Capitol police force and government leaders should study the
             January 6, 2021, riot to determine how many additional police are needed, should such an occasion arise
             again.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                             10.3 · Glance at Genre: Thesis, Reasoning, and Evidence 309

  · Present your critical thinking through a well-constructed argument. By ordering your position argument
      in a manner that moves logically from one point to the next, you help guide readers through your thought
      process, which is reflected in the smooth flow of ideas that work together to support your thesis.

  · Incorporate credible evidence from trusted and reliable academic, government, media, and professional
      sources. Using these sources shows readers that you recognize biased material and have excluded it from
      your paper.

Pathos (Emotional Appeal)

You appeal to your audience's feelings--such as sympathy, anger, fear, insecurity, guilt, and conscience--to
support your position.

For example, to appeal to your audience's emotions in your paper about the need for more Capitol police, you
might do the following:

  · Help your readers understand feelings of fear. One way to appeal to this emotion is to quote from
      interviews with government workers and bystanders who were hiding behind locked doors and had no
      police protection.

  · Use vivid description and concrete language to recreate images that showed lone officers overwhelmed by
      crowds of people and beaten.

  · Use nonaggressive language to address the positions of readers who do not support your stance. For
      example, some readers may believe that the federal government spends too much money already and
      should not allocate more. By using language that is not inflammatory, you can show your empathy for
      others, and this may help you convince them to support your position.

Kairos (Timeliness)

The sense of timing--presenting your position at the right time--is critical in a position argument. The issue
must be worthy of attention at the time it is presented for readers to feel a sense of urgency. For example, in an
argumentative paper about the significance of the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement, you could do the
following:

  · Point out the history of the BLM movement, which began in 2013 after the acquittal of the man accused of
      killing Trayvon Martin (1995-2012) in 2012.

  · Note that today, most of the speeches delivered in BLM rallies held across the country reference the May
      2020 murder of George Floyd (1973-2020).

  · Emphasize that Floyd's killing remains front and center in the minds of rally participants. In other words,
      the topic of Floyd's death is timely, and related circumstances indicate a favorable time for action.

You can find further discussion about these appeals in Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric.

Key Terms

These are key terms and characteristics of position arguments:

  · Allusion: direct or implied reference to a person, place, work of literature, idea, event, or anything a writer
      expects readers to know about. Allusion is a frequently used literary device.

  · Citation: reference to the source of information used in a writer's research.
  · Critical thinking: ability to identify and solve problems by gathering information about a topic and then

      analyzing and evaluating evidence to form a judgment.
  · Counterclaim (dissenting opinion): statement of what the other side might say in opposition to the stance

      the writer takes about an issue.
  · Ethos: appeal to readers' ethical sense; establishing authority and credibility.
  · Evidence: facts and other information that prove or disprove the validity of something written or stated.
  · Introduction: first part of a paper. In position arguments, the writer alerts readers to the issue or problem

      discussed and often presents the thesis at the end of the introduction.
310 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

         · Kairos: appeal to timeliness of the subject matter.
         · Logos: appeal to readers' sense of logic, or reason.
         · Pathos: appeal to readers' emotions.
         · Purpose: author's reason for writing the paper. In a position argument, the purpose is to persuade readers

             to agree with the writer's stance.
         · Reasoning: logical and sensible explanation of a concept.
         · Recursive: movement back and forth from one part of the writing process to another.
         · Rhetorical appeals: methods of persuasion (ethos, logos, pathos, and kairos).
         · Rhetorical question: questions intended to make a point rather than to get an answer. Rhetorical

             questions, which often have no answers or no obvious answers, appear frequently in argument writing as a
             way of capturing audience attention.
         · Topic: subject of a paper. In this genre, the topic is a debatable issue.
         · Thesis: declarative sentence (sometimes two) that states a writer's position about the debatable issue, or
             topic, of the paper.
         · Transitional words or phrases: words and phrases that help readers connect ideas from one sentence to
             another or from one paragraph to another. Transitions establish relationships among ideas.

     10.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Remarks at the University of Michigan" by
     Lyndon B. Johnson

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Demonstrate critical thinking about a reading passage related to position and argument writing.
         · Explain and evaluate how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
         · Assess material for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in various rhetorical and cultural

             contexts.

      Introduction

       FIGURE 10.3 President Lyndon B. Johnson (credit: "Lyndon Johnson" by Arnold Newman, White House Press Office

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                        10.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Remarks at the University of Michigan" by Lyndon B. Johnson 311

                 (WHPO)/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
                  In a commencement speech at the University of Michigan (https://openstax.org/r/universityofmichigan) on
                  May 22, 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson (https://openstax.org/r/lyndonbjohnson) proposed a set of
                  domestic programs that would become one of the foundations of his administration. He called these programs
public domainthte Great Society. Today, many of the same problems that Johnson addressed continue, and programs that
                  seek to remedy them are referred to as initiatives of social justice, such as those directed toward human
                  rights, health care, alleviating poverty, and guaranteeing democratic practices. To persuade his audience to
                  agree that the programs needed to be adopted, Johnson presented his argument about why they were needed
                  and what they would achieve.

                                  end public domain t

                 FIGURE 10.4 On July 2, barely two months after the University of Michigan graduation speech, President Johnson
                 signed the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., is among the onlookers. The Act forbids
                 discrimination on the basis race, religion, gender, or national origin. Prohibiting the practice of "Jim Crow" laws, the
                 Act also strengthened the enforcement of school desegregation and voting rights. (credit: "Lyndon Johnson signing
                 Civil Rights Act, July 2, 1964" by Cecil Stoughton, White House Press Office/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS
              Testing Our Success as a Nation

            penudblpicuPdbroleimcsidaoienmnttaHinatcher, Governor Romney, Senators McNamara and Hart, Congressmen Meader and Staebler and other
                    members of the fine Michigan delegation, members of the graduating class, my fellow Americans:

                 Aanundoietantce. This speech, although given at the University of Michigan commencement, is addressed to the nation.
                 Johnson first mentions the people in attendance but ends his introduction by including in his wider audience: "my
                 fellow Americans."end annotat

                        It is a great pleasure to be here today. This university has been coeducational since 1870, but I do not believe it
                        was on the basis of your accomplishments that a Detroit high school girl said, "In choosing a college, you first
                        have to decide whether you want a coeducational school or an educational school." Well, we can find both here
                        at Michigan, although perhaps at different hours. I came out here today very anxious to meet the Michigan
                        student whose father told a friend of mine that his son's education had been a real value. It stopped his mother
                        from bragging about him.
312 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

                 I have come today from the turmoil of your Capital to the tranquility of your campus to speak about the future

                 of your country. The purpose of protecting the life of our Nation and preserving the liberty of our citizens is to

                 pursue the happiness of our people. Our success in that pursuit is the test of our success as a Nation. For a

                 century we labored to settle and to subdue a continent. For half a century we called upon unbounded invention

public domain t  and untiring industry to create an order of plenty for all of our people. The challenge of the next half century is

                 whether we have ethnedwpiusbdloicmdtoomuasien tthat wealth to enrich and elevate our national life and to advance the

                 quality of our Aemnderpicuabnliccivdiolimzaatiinont.  end public domain t

Kananirootsa.tJohnsoennndopteusbtlhicedmomooadinotf the nation and of the campus, a timeenldy preufbelriecndcoemfoarinthtose attending the

graduation ceremony.end annotat                                                             end public domain t

Canonnotetaxtt. Johnson conetenxdtupaulbizliecsdtohme cauinrrtent challenges of the country within the history of the nation. This strategy
calls upon the patriotism of his audience to take their rightful place in history.end annotat

                 Your imagination, your initiative, and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where progress
                 is the servant of our needs or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled growth.
                 For in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but
                 upward to the Great Society.

Panunrpotoaste. Johnson's purpose is to introduce the concept of the Great Society to the American public.end annotat

                 The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice, to
                 which we are totally committed in our time. But that is just the beginning. The Great Society is a place where
                 every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents.

                 It is a place where leisure is a welcome chance to build and reflect, not a feared cause of boredom and
                 restlessness. It is a place where the city of man serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of
                 commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community. It is a place where man can renew contact
                 with nature. It is a place which honors creation for its own sake and for what it adds to the understanding of the
                 race. It is a place where men are more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods.

Ranenpoettaition. Johnson repeats the clause "It is a place" to add emphasis to the various facets of the Great Society.end annotat

Danenfiontiattion. Johnson also defines for the audience what he means by the term Great Society.end annotat

Aanllnuostiaotn. Johnson mentions "the city of man," a reference--or allusion--to St. Augustine's book The City of God,
which gives ethical and religious significance to his Great Society.end annotat

                 But most of all, the Great Society is not a safe harbor, a resting place, a final objective, a finished work. It is a
                 challenge constantly renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the
                 marvelous products of our labor.

                 So I want to talk to you today about three places where we begin to build the Great Society--in our cities, in our
                 countryside, and in our classrooms.

CanlenaortaVtiewpoint. Johnson states that America needs reform and points out the three areas where the Great Society
will focus: "in our cities, in our countryside, and in our classrooms." His choice of these places emphasizes where
people live and where they learn.end annotat

                 Many of you will live to see the day, perhaps 50 years from now, when there will be 400 million Americans, four-
                 fifths of them in urban areas. In the remainder of this century urban population will double, city land will
                 double, and we will have to build homes, highways, and facilities equal to all those built since this country was
                 first settled. So in the next 40 years we must rebuild the entire urban United States.

Kananirootsa.tJohnson addresses the timeliness of the concerns these college graduates have about their lives after                          end annotat
graduation.

Access for free at openstax.org.
10.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Remarks at the University of Michigan" by Lyndon B. Johnson 313

Laongnosta. tJohnson will go on to provide a logical solution to the problems that Americans will face over the next 40    end annotat
years.

                        Aristotle said: "Men come together in cities in order to live, but they remain together in order to live the good

                        life." It is harder and harder to live the good life in American cities today.
public domain t

                 Qanunoottaattion from an Expert. This queontadtipounbflriocmdoamreavinerted celansdsipcuabl plichidloosmopaihnetr (Aristotle) echoes Johnson's idea,
                 giving it more strength and credibility.end annotat

                        The catalog of ills is long: there is the decay of the centers and the despoiling of the suenbdurpbusb. Tlichedroemeisnadninopttublic domain t
                        enough housing for ouernpdeoppulbeliocrdtoramnasipnotrtation for our traffic. Open land is vanishing, and old landmarks are

                        violated. Worst of all, expansion is eroding the precious and time-honored values of community with neighbors

                        and communion with nature. The loss of these values breeds loneliness and boredom and indifference.

Kananirootsa.tJohnson addresses the many concerns on Americans' minds.end annotat

Pananthootast. Using strong words like decay, despoiling, vanishing, and violated, Johnson connects his argument to
emotions--mostly fear--the audience would feel about such destruction of nature and values.end annotat

Canunltoutraet. Johnson addresses the need for a change in culture to improve the future of the country.end annotat

Our society will never be great until our cities are great. Today the frontier of imagination and innovation is
inside those cities and not beyond their borders.

Sanunpoptoartting Evidence. Johnson states that he will begin to build the Great Society in three places--cities,
countryside, classrooms. Then he gives supporting evidence for each place.end annotat

Taonnsoutpaptort the need for change the Great Society will bring to cities, Johnson offers thatend annotat

· manannoytapteople in the audience will see a time when four-fifths of the American population will live in cities;end annotat

· sainnncoetautrban population and city land will double in the coming years, America needs homes, highways, and           end annotat
   facilities;

· caintnieostasut ffer from decay, and suburbs are being despoiled;end annotat

· tahnenocotautntry must fulfill housing and transportation needs;end annotat

· oanpneontlaatnd is vanishing;end annotat

· oanldnloatnadt marks are violated; andend annotat

· vaanlnuoetsatof community and communion with nature are eroding.end annotat

New experiments are already going on. It will be the task of your generation to make the American city a place
where future generations will come, not only to live but to live the good life. I understand that if I stayed here
tonight, I would see that Michigan students are really doing their best to live the good life. This is the place
where the Peace Corps was started. It is inspiring to see how all of you, while you are in this country, are trying
so hard to live at the level of the people.

A second place where we begin to build the Great Society is in our countryside. We have always prided
ourselves on being not only America the strong and America the free, but America the beautiful. Today that
beauty is in danger. The water we drink, the food we eat, the very air that we breathe, are threatened with
pollution. Our parks are overcrowded, our seashores overburdened. Green fields and dense forests are
disappearing.

Tanrannostaittion between Paragraphs. By using the phrase "second place," Johnson alerts his audience that he is shifting
to another facet of the Great Society.end annotat

Pananthootast. Johnson appeals to the fears of his audience with examples of the tragedies that could result if the Great
314 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

Society were not adopted.end annotat

Sanunpoptoartting Evidence. To support the need for change the Great Society will bring to the countryside, Johnson
offers thatend annotat

public domain t·       tahnenobteaatuty of America is in danger;end annotat  end public domain t
                    ·
                    ·  panonlloutaiotn threatens water, food, and air;end annotat                 end public domain t
                    ·                 end public domaineentnddppuubbliclicddoommaainint t

                       pananrkostaatre overcrowded and seashores are overburdened;end annotat
                                                                    end public domain t

                       garneneontafitelds and dense forests are disappearing; andend annotat

· iafndneosttartoyed, natural splendor cannot be recaptured.end annotat

                       A few years ago, we were greatly concerned about the "Ugly American." Today we must act to prevent an ugly
                       America. For once the battle is lost, once our natural splendor is destroyed, it can never be recaptured. And
                       once man can no longer walk with beauty or wonder at nature his spirit will wither and his sustenance be
                       wasted.

Aanllnuostiaotn and Play on Words. Johnson alludes to a phrase in popular use that describes U.S. citizens as "ugly
Americans": brash, conceited, and ignorant about cultures of other societies and matters of the world. He connects
the phrase Ugly American with the phrase "ugly America," a play on how Americans are perceived with his desire
that America not be perceived as "ugly America."end annotat

                       A third place to build the Great Society is in the classrooms of America. There your children's lives will be
                       shaped. Our society will not be great until every young mind is set free to scan the farthest reaches of thought
                       and imagination. We are still far from that goal.

Tanrannostaittion between Paragraphs. With the phrase "third place," Johnson alerts his audience that he is shifting to the
third facet of the Great Society.end annotat

                       Today, eight million adult Americans, more than the entire population of Michigan, have not finished five years
                       of school. Nearly 20 million have not finished eight years of school. Nearly 54 million--more than one-quarter of
                       all America--have not even finished high school.

                       Each year more than 100,000 high school graduates, with proved ability, do not enter college because they
                       cannot afford it. And if we cannot educate today's youth, what will we do in 1970 when elementary school
                       enrollment will be five million greater than 1960? And high school enrollment will rise by five million. College
                       enrollment will increase by more than three million.

                       In many places, classrooms are overcrowded and curricula are outdated.

Santantoitsatitcs as Supporting Evidence. To support the need for change the Great Society will bring to classrooms,
Johnson uses statistics as evidence. He offers thatend annotat

· eanignhottmatillion adult Americans have not finished five years of school;end annotat

· alnmnotsatt20 million Americans have not finished eight years of school;end annotat

· manonroettahtan one-quarter of Americans have not finished high school;end annotat

· yaenanrolyta, tmore than 100,000 high school graduates do not enter college because they cannot afford it; andend annotat

· manannoytactlassrooms are overcrowded.end annotat

                       Most of our qualified teachers are underpaid, and many of our paid teachers are unqualified. So we must give
                       every child a place to sit and a teacher to learn from. Poverty must not be a bar to learning, and learning must
                       offer an escape from poverty.

Access for free at openstax.org.
10.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Remarks at the University of Michigan" by Lyndon B. Johnson 315

But more classrooms and more teachers are not enough. We must seek an educational system which grows in
excellence as it grows in size. This means better training for our teachers. It means preparing youth to enjoy
their hours of leisure as well as their hours of labor. It means exploring new techniques of teaching, to find new
ways to stimulate the love of learning and the capacity for creation.

public domain t These are three of the central issues of the Great Society. While our Governemnednptuhbalsicmdaonmyapinrotgrams directed

eantdtphuobselicisdsoumesa,iIndto not pretendetnehdnadtpwupbuelbihcliacdvodemotmhaeianifnut ltl answer toenthdopsuebplircodbolemmasin. t

end public domain t  end public domain t                                                                                                  end public domain t

TanhneostisatRestated. Johnson briefly summarizes his theseisn:dthpruebeliicssduoemsaoinf tthe Great Society.end annotat

But I do promise this: We are going to assemble the best thought and the broadest knowledge from all over the
world to find those answers for America. I intend to establish working groups to prepare a series of White
House conferences and meetings--on the cities, on natural beauty, on the quality of education, anedndonpoutbhliecrdomain t
emerging challenges. And from these meetings and from this inspiration and from these studies we will begin to
set our course toward the Great Society. The solution to these problems does not rest on a massive program in
Washington, nor can it rely solely on the strained resources of local authority. They require us to create new
concepts of cooperation, a creative federalism, between the National Capital and the leaders of local
communities.

Panronbolteamt /Solution. Johnson has pointed out the problems that America faces and now presents solutions to them.end annotat

Woodrow Wilson once wrote: "Every man sent out from his university should be a man of his Nation as well as a
man of his time." Within your lifetime powerful forces, already loosed, will take us toward a way of life beyond
the realm of our experience, almost beyond the bounds of our imagination.

Qanunoottaattion from an Authority. This quotation from a political expert leads into Johnson's idea and acts as a
transition, linking Wilson's and Johnson's audiences across time.end annotat

For better or for worse, your generation has been appointed by history to deal with those problems and to lead
America toward a new age. You have the chance never before afforded to any people in any age. You can help
build a society where the demands of morality, and the needs of the spirit, can be realized in the life of the
Nation.

Eanthnosta. tJohnson uses ethos to appeal to the patriotic ideals his audience possesses for dealing with and finding a
solution to America's problems.end annotat

So, will you join in the battle to give every citizen the full equality which God enjoins and the law requires,
whatever his belief, or race, or the color of his skin?

Will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape from the crushing weight of poverty?

Will you join in the battle to make it possible for all nations to live in enduring peace--as neighbors and not as
mortal enemies?

Will you join in the battle to build the Great Society, to prove that our material progress is only the foundation on
which we will build a richer life of mind and spirit?

Ranhneototartical Questions. Johnson uses rhetorical questions (questions intended to make a point rather than to get an
answer) to encourage the audience to get involved in the Great Society.end annotat

There are those timid souls who say this battle cannot be won, that we are condemned to a soulless wealth. I
do not agree. We have the power to shape the civilization that we want. But we need your will, your labor, your
hearts, if we are to build that kind of society.

Aandndorteastsing a Counterclaim. Johnson identifies a counterclaim to the Great Society and then refutes it.end annotat
316 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

public domain t  Those who came to this land sought to build more than just a new country. They sought a new world. So I have
                 come here today to your campus to say that you can make their vision our reality. So let us from this moment
                 begin our work so that in the future men will look back and say: It was then, after a long and weary way, that
                 man turned the exploits of his genius to the full enrichment of his life.

                 Theanndkpyuobul.icGdooomdbayin. t

Discussion Questions                                        end public domain t

1. For what purpose might Johnson have chosen to address the American people under the guise of a
    graduation address?

2. What parts of Johnson's speech show that he is trying to connect with the students in the audience?

3. For what reasons has Johnson singled out the cities, countrysides, and schools as the locations of his Great
    Society?

4. Johnson acknowledges one main counterclaim to the ideas proposed in the Great Society. How does
    Johnson address that counterclaim?

5. In today's political climate, Johnson's Great Society might be labeled by some as socialism, an economic
    system in which production, distribution, and exchange of goods are owned or governed by the community
    as a whole rather than by individuals. In what way might Johnson have responded to this counterclaim?

6. Johnson ends with a reference to the founders of the country and says, "You can make their vision our
    reality." In your opinion, does he adequately explain what he means by "our reality"? Why or why not?

10.5 Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Demonstrate brainstorming processes and tools as means to discover topics, ideas, positions, and details.
  · Apply recursive strategies for organizing drafting, collaborating, peer reviewing, revising, rewriting, and editing.
  · Compose a position argument that integrates the writer's ideas with those from appropriate sources.
  · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.
  · Apply or challenge common conventions of language or grammar in composing and revising.

Now is the time to try your hand at writing a position argument. Your instructor may provide some possible
topics or a singular topic. If your instructor allows you to choose your own topic, consider a general subject you
feel strongly about and whether you can provide enough support to develop that subject into an essay. For
instance, suppose you think about a general subject such as "adulting." In looking back at what you have
learned while becoming an adult, you think of what you wish you had known during your early teenage years.
These thoughts might lead you to brainstorm about details of the effects of money in your life or your friends'
lives. In reviewing your brainstorming, you might zero in on one topic you feel strongly about and think it
provides enough depth to develop into a position argument. Suppose your brainstorming leads you to think
about negative financial concerns you or some of your friends have encountered. Thinking about what could
have helped address those concerns, you decide that a mandated high school course in financial literacy would
have been useful. This idea might lead you to formulate your working thesis statement--first draft of your
thesis statement--like this: To help students learn how to make sensible financial decisions, a mandatory class
in financial literacy should be offered in high schools throughout the country.

Once you decide on a topic and begin moving through the writing process, you may need to fine-tune or even
change the topic and rework your initial idea. This fine-tuning may come as you brainstorm, later when you
begin drafting, or after you have completed a draft and submitted it to your peers for constructive criticism.
These possibilities occur because the writing process is recursive--that is, it moves back and forth almost

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 317

simultaneously and maybe even haphazardly at times, from planning to revising to editing to drafting, back to
planning, and so on.

FIGURE 10.5 Because the writing process is recursive, you can go from any step to another at any time to improve
your paper. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Summary of Assignment

Write a position argument on a controversial issue that you choose or that your instructor assigns to you. If you
are free to choose your own topic, consider one of the following:

  · The legal system would be strengthened if ______________________.
  · The growing use of technology in college classrooms is weakening _____________.
  · For safety reasons, public signage should be _________________.
  · For entrance into college, standardized testing _________________________.
  · In relation to the cost of living, the current minimum wage _______________________.
  · During a pandemic, America __________________________.
  · As a requirement to graduate, college students __________________________.
  · To guarantee truthfulness of their content, social media platforms have the right to _________________.
  · To ensure inclusive and diverse representation of people of all races, learning via virtual classrooms

      _________________.
  · Segments of American cultures have differing rules of acceptable grammar, so in a college classroom

      ___________________.
In addition, if you have the opportunity to choose your own topic and wish to search further, take the lead from
trailblazer Charles Blow and look to media for newsworthy "trends." Find a controversial issue that affects you
or people you know, and take a position on it. As you craft your argument, identify a position opposing yours,
and then refute it with reasoning and evidence. Be sure to gather information on the issue so that you can
support your position sensibly with well-developed ideas and evidence.
Another Lens. To gain a different perspective on your issue, consider again the people affected by it. Your
position probably affects different people in different ways. For example, if you are writing that the minimum
wage should be raised, then you might easily view the issue through the lens of minimum-wage workers,
especially those who struggle to make ends meet. However, if you look at the issue through the lens of those
who employ minimum-wage workers, your viewpoint might change. Depending on your topic and thesis, you
may need to use print or online sources to gain insight into different perspectives.
For additional information about minimum-wage workers, you could consult

  · printed material available in your college library;
  · databases in your college library; and
  · online sources. For instance, you could use a search engine to find details about

      pros and cons of raising the minimum wage;
   318 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

    what happens after the minimum wage is raised;
    how to live on a minimum-wage salary;
    how a raise in minimum wage is funded; and
    minimum wage in various U.S. states.

s  To gain more insight about your topic, adopt a stance that opposes your original position and brainstorm ideas

   from that viewpoint. Begin by gaethnedrsing evidence that would help you refute your previous stance and appeal

   to your audience.

         Quick Launch: Working Thesis Frames and Organization of Ideas

   After you have decided on your topic, the next step is to arrive at your working thesis. You probably have a
   good idea of the direction your working thesis will take. That is, you know where you stand on the issue or
   problem, but you are not quite sure of how to word your stance to share it with readers. At this point, then, use
   brainstorming to think critically about your position and to discover the best way to phrase your statement.

   For example, after reading an article discussing different state-funded community college programs, one
   student thought that a similar program was needed in Alabama, her state. However, she was not sure how the
   program worked. To begin, she composed and answered "reporters' questions" such as these:

     · What does a state-funded community college program do? pays for part or all of the tuition of a two-year
         college student

     · Who qualifies for the program? high school graduates and GED holders
     · Who benefits from this? students needing financial assistance, employers, and Alabama residents
     · Why is this needed? some can't afford to go to college; tuition goes up every year; colleges would be more

         diverse if everyone who wanted to go could afford to go
     · Where would the program be available? at all public community colleges
     · When could someone apply for the program? any time
     · How can the state fund this? use lottery income, like other states

   The student then reviewed her responses, altered her original idea to include funding through a lottery, and
   composed this working thesis:

         To provide equal educational opportunities for all residents, the state of Alabama should create a lottery to
         completely fund tuition at community colleges.

   Remember that a strong thesis for a position should

     · state your stance on a debatable issue;
     · reflect your purpose of persuasion; and
     · be based on your opinion or observation.

   When you first consider your topic for an argumentative work, think about the reasoning for your position and
   the evidence you will need--that is, think about the "because" part of your argument. For instance, if you want
   to argue that your college should provide free Wi-Fi for every student, extend your stance to include "because"
   and then develop your reasoning and evidence. In that case, your argument might read like this: Ervin
   Community College should provide free Wi-Fi for all students because students may not have Internet access
   at home.

   Note that the "because" part of your argument may come at the beginning or the end and may be implied in
   your wording.

   As you develop your thesis, you may need help funneling all of your ideas. Return to the possibilities you have
   in mind, and select the ideas that you think are strongest, that recur most often, or that you have the most to
   say about. Then use those ideas to fill in one of the following sentence frames to develop your working thesis.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 319

Feel free to alter the frame as necessary to fit your position. While there is no limit to the frames that are
possible, these may help get you started.
________________ is caused/is not caused by ________________, and _____________ should be done.
Example: A declining enrollment rate in college is caused by high tuition rates, and an immediate freeze on
the cost of tuition should be applied.
______________ should/should not be allowed (to) ________________ for a number of reasons.
Example: People who do not wear masks during a pandemic should not be allowed to enter public buildings
for a number of reasons.
Because (of) ________________, ___________________ will happen/continue to happen.
Example: Because of a lack of emphasis on STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, the Arts, and
Mathematics) education in public schools, America will continue to lag behind many other countries.
_____________ is similar to/nothing like ________________ because ______________.
Example: College classes are nothing like high school classes because in college, more responsibility is on the
student, the classes are less frequent but more intense, and the work outside class takes more time to
complete.
______________ can be/cannot be thought of as __________________ because ______________.
Example: The Black Lives Matter movement can be thought of as an extension of the Civil Rights movement
from the 1950s and 1960s because it shares the same mission of fighting racism and ending violence against
Black people.
Next, consider the details you will need to support your thesis. The Aristotelian argument structure, named for
the Greek philosopher Aristotle, is one that may help you frame the draft of your position argument. For this
method, use something like the following chart. In Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument, you will find
a similar organizer that you can copy and use for your assignment.

FIGURE 10.6 Position argument essay planning chart. Follow the numbers sequentially to plan your draft.
320 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

       (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

           Drafting: Rhetorical Appeals and Types of Supporting Evidence

       To persuade your audience to support your position or argument, consider various rhetorical appeals-- ethos,
       logos, pathos, and kairos--and the types of evidence to support your sound reasoning. See Reasoning
       Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking for more information on reasoning strategies and types of evidence.

       Rhetorical Appeals

       To establish your credibility, to show readers you are trustworthy, to win over their hearts, and to set your issue
       in an appropriate time frame to influence readers, consider how you present and discuss your evidence
       throughout the paper.

         · Appeal to ethos. To establish credibility in her paper arguing for expanded mental health services, a
             student writer used these reliable sources: a student survey on mental health issues, data from the
             International Association of Counseling Services (a professional organization), and information from an
             interview with a campus mental health counselor.

         · Appeal to logos. To support her sound reasoning, the student writer approached the issue rationally, using
             data and credible evidence to explain the current situation and its effects.

         · Appeal to pathos. To show compassion and arouse audience empathy, the student writer shared the
             experience of a student on her campus who struggled with anxiety and depression.

         · Appeal to kairos. To appeal to kairos, the student emphasized the immediate need for these services, as
             more students are now aware of their particular mental health issues and trying to deal with them.

       The way in which you present and discuss your evidence will reflect the appeals you use. Consider using
       sentence frames to reflect specific appeals. Remember, too, that sentence frames can be composed in
       countless ways. Here are a few frames to get you thinking critically about how to phrase your ideas while
       considering different types of appeals.

         · Appeal to ethos: According to __________________, an expert in ______________, __________________
             should/should not happen because ________________________.

             Appeal to ethos: Although ___________________is not an ideal situation for _________________, it does
             have its benefits.

         · Appeal to logos: If ____________________ is/is not done, then understandably, _________________ will
             happen.

             Appeal to logos: This information suggests that ____________________ needs to be investigated further
             because ____________________________.

         · Appeal to pathos: The story of _____________________ is uplifting/heartbreaking/hopeful/tragic and
             illustrates the need for ____________________.

             Appeal to pathos: ___________________ is/are suffering from ________________, and that is something
             no one wants.

         · Appeal to kairos: _________________ must be addressed now because ________________.

             Appeal to kairos: These are times when ______________ ; therefore, _____________ is appropriate/
             necessary.
       Types of Supporting Evidence

       Depending on the point you are making to support your position or argument, certain types of evidence may
       be more effective than others. Also, your instructor may require you to include a certain type of evidence.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 321

Choose the evidence that will be most effective to support the reasoning behind each point you make to
support your thesis statement. Common types of evidence are these:

  · Anecdotes: short narrative.
            Renada G., a junior at Powell College South, worked as a waitress for 15 hours a week during her
            first three semesters of college. But in her sophomore year, when her parents were laid off during
            the pandemic, Renada had to increase her hours to 35 per week and sell her car to stay in school.
            Her grades started slipping, and she began experiencing symptoms of depression and anxiety.
            When she called the campus health center to make an appointment for counseling, Renada was
            told she would have to wait two weeks before she could be seen.

  · Definition: explanation that emphasizes the meaning of an idea, term, or concept.
            Here is part of how Lyndon B. Johnson defined the Great Society: "But most of all, the Great
            Society is not a safe harbor, a resting place, a final objective, a finished work. It is a challenge
            constantly renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the
            marvelous products of our labor."

  · Description: evidence that portrays a person, place, thing, or idea with sensory or other vivid details.
            Bowen Lake is nestled in verdant foothills, lush with tall grasses speckled with wildflowers.
            Around the lake, the sweet scent of the purple and yellow flowers fills the air, and the fragrance of
            the hearty pines sweeps down the hillsides in a westerly breeze. Wood frogs' and crickets' songs
            suddenly stop, as the blowing of moose calling their calves echoes across the lake's soundless
            surface. Or this was the scene before the deadly destruction of fires caused by climate change.

  · Example: evidence that illustrates an idea.
            When elaborating on America's beauty being in danger, Johnson says, "The water we drink, the
            food we eat, the very air that we breathe, are threatened with pollution. Our parks are
            overcrowded, our seashores overburdened. Green fields and dense forests are disappearing."

  · Expert opinion: evidence or viewpoints provided by a professional in the field or someone whose ideas
      are respected on the subject.
            Speaking about President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Vietnam War, noted historian and Johnson
            biographer Doris Kearns Goodwin said, "It seemed the hole in his heart from the loss of work was
            too big to fill."

  · Fact: information that is true and can be proven correct or accurate.
           Charles Blow has worked at the Shreveport Times, The Detroit News, National Geographic, and
           The New York Times.

  · Interview: evidence gathered firsthand from a source person, usually in a person-to-person conversation,
      by phone, or through a remote meeting.
            When interviewed by George Rorick and asked about the identities of his readers, Charles Blow
            said that readers' emails do not elaborate on descriptions of who the people are. However, "the
            kinds of comments that they offer are very much on the thesis of the essay."

  · Quotation: exact words repeated by someone other than the original author or speaker.
            In his speech, Lyndon B. Johnson says, "The Great Society is a place where every child can find
            knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents."

  · Statistics: numerical fact or item of data, usually from a study.
            To support the need for change in classrooms, Johnson uses these statistics: "Each year more
            than 100,000 high school graduates, with proved ability, do not enter college because they cannot
            afford it. And if we cannot educate today's youth, what will we do in 1970 when elementary school
            enrollment will be five million greater than 1960?"
322 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

         · Visuals: graphs, photographs, charts, or maps used in addition to written or spoken information.

       FIGURE 10.7 Bar graph of gene counts. Graphics like this one present information visually and concisely. (credit:
       "Between a Chicken and a Grape: Estimating the Number of Human Genes," by Pertea, Mihaela, and Steven L.
       Salzberg/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Brainstorm for Supporting Points
       Use one or more brainstorming techniques, such as a web diagram as shown in Figure 10.8 or the details
       generated from "because" statements, to develop ideas or particular points in support of your thesis. Your goal
       is to get as many ideas as possible. At this time, do not be concerned about how ideas flow, whether you will
       ultimately use an idea (you want more ideas than will end up in your finished paper), spelling, or punctuation.

                   FIGURE 10.8 Idea web (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
       When you have finished, look over your brainstorming. Then circle three to five points to incorporate into your
       draft. Also, plan to answer "reporters' questions" to provide readers with any needed background
       information. For example, the student writing about the need for more mental health counselors on her
       campus created and answered these questions:

         · What is needed? More mental health counseling is needed for Powell College South.
             Who would benefit from this? The students and faculty would benefit.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 323

  · Why is this needed? The college does not have enough counselors to meet all students' needs.
  · Where are more counselors needed? More counselors are needed at the south campus.
  · When are the counselors needed? Counselors need to be hired now and be available both day and night to

      accommodate students' schedules.
  · How can the college afford this? Instead of hiring daycare workers, the college could use students and

      faculty from the Early Childhood Education program to run the program and use the extra money to pay
      the counselors.

Using Logic

In a position argument, the appropriate use of logic is especially important for readers to trust what you write.
It is also important to look for logic in material you read and possibly cite in your paper so that you can
determine whether writers' claims are reasonable. Two main categories of logical thought are inductive
reasoning and deductive reasoning.

  · Inductive reasoning moves from specific to broad ideas. You begin by collecting details, observations,
      incidents, or facts; examining them; and drawing a conclusion from them. Suppose, for example, you are
      writing about attendance in college classes. For three weeks, you note the attendance numbers in all your
      Monday, Wednesday, and Friday classes (specific details), and you note that attendance is lower on Friday
      than on the other days (a specific detail). From these observations, you determine that many students
      prefer not to attend classes on Fridays (your conclusion).

  · Deductive reasoning moves from general to specific ideas. You begin with a hypothesis or premise, a
      general concept, and then examine possibilities that would lead to a specific and logical conclusion. For
      instance, suppose you think that opportunities for foreign students at your college are inadequate (general
      concept). You examine the specific parts of that concept (e.g., whether your college provides multicultural
      clubs, help with language skills, or work-study opportunities) and determine that those opportunities are
      not available. You then determine that opportunities for foreign students are lacking at your college.

Logical Fallacies and Propaganda

Fallacies are mistakes in logic. Readers and writers should be aware of these when they creep into writing,
indicating that the points the writers make may not be valid. Two common fallacies are hasty generalizations
and circular arguments. See Glance at Genre: Rhetorical Strategies for more on logical fallacies.

  · A hasty generalizationis a conclusion based on either inadequate or biased evidence. Consider this
      statement: "Two students in Math 103 were nervous before their recent test; therefore, all students in that
      class must have text anxiety." This is a hasty generalization because the second part of the statement (the
      generalization about all students in the class) is inadequate to support what the writer noted about only
      two students.

  · A circular argument is one that merely restates what has already been said. Consider this statement: "The
     Hate U Give is a well-written book because Angie Thomas, its author, is a good novelist." The statement
      that Thomas is a good novelist does not explain why her book is well written.

In addition to checking work for fallacies, consider propaganda, information worded so that it endorses a
particular viewpoint, often of a political nature. Two common types of propaganda are bandwagon and fear.

  · In getting on the bandwagon, the writer encourages readers to conform to a popular trend and endorse an
      opinion, a movement, or a person because everyone else is doing so. Consider this statement: "Everyone is
      behind the idea that 7 a.m. classes are too early and should be changed to at least 8 a.m. Shouldn't you
      endorse this sensible idea, too?"

  · In using fear, the writer presents a dire situation, usually followed by what could be done to prevent it.
      Consider this statement: "Our country is at a turning point. Enemies threaten us with their power, and our
      democracy is at risk of being crushed. The government needs a change, and Paul Windhaus is just the
      man to see we get that change." This quotation appeals to fear about the future of the country and implies
            324 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

                       that electing a certain individual will solve the predicted problems.

s
                      end s

                 FIGURE 10.9 Propaganda is often used during times of war or crisis and is often presented visually. This World War
                 I poster from the U.S. Navy appeals for men to enlist. It points out men in the navy have an opportunity to "see the
                 world, save money, learn a trade, and serve their country" but avoids mentioning the likelihood of being in life-
                 threatening situations during combat. (credit: "World War I Posters" by Ruttan, Charles E./Library of Congress Prints
                 and Photographs Division, Public Domain)
                 Organize the Paper
                 To begin, write your thesis at the top of a blank page. Then select points from your brainstorming and
                 reporters' questions to organize and develop support for your thesis. Keep in mind that you can revise your
                 thesis whenever needed.
                 To begin organizing her paper on increased mental health services on her college campus, the student wrote
                 this thesis at the top of a page:

                       Because mental health is a major concern at Powell College South, students could benefit from expanding the
                       services offered.
                 Next she decided the sequence in which to present the points. In a position or an argument essay, she could
                 choose one of two methods: thesis-first organization or delayed-thesis organization.
                 Thesis-First Organization
                  Leading with a thesis tells readers from the beginning where you stand on the issue. In this organization, the
                  thesis occupies both the first and last position in the essay, making it easy for readers to remember.
                   · Introduce the issue and assert your thesis. Make sure the issue has at least two debatable sides. Your
                       thesis establishes the position from which you will argue. Writers often state their thesis as the last
                       sentence in the first paragraph, as the student writer has done:

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                     10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 325

   The problem of mental health has become front-page news in the last two months. Hill's Herald, Powell
   College South's newspaper, reported 14 separate incidents of students who sought counseling but could
   not get appointments with college staff. Since mental health problems are widespread among the
   student population, the college should hire more health care workers to address this problem.

s  · Summarize thenedcosuntercleanimd ss. Before elaborating on yeonudrsclaims, explain the opposition's claims.

   Incleundedinnsdgsthis informeantdieonsndast the beginneinngd gsiveseynodusr argument something to focus on--and

   refute--throughout the paper. If you ignore counterclaims, your argument may appear incomplete, and
   readers may think you have not researched your topic sufficiently. When addreensdesnisndgsa counterclaim, state

   it clearly, show empathy for those who have that view, and then immediately refute it with support

   developed through reasoning and evidence. Squeezing the counterclaims between the thesis and the

   evidence reserves the strongest places--the opening and closing--for your position.

   Counterclaim 1: Powell College South already employs two counselors, and that number is sufficient to
   meet the needs of the student population.

   Counterclaim 2: Students at Powell College South live in a metropolitan area large enough to handle their
   mental health needs.

   · Refute the counterclaims. Look for weak spots in the opposition's argument, and point them out. Use
      your opponent's language to show you have read closely but still find problems with the claim. This is the
      way the writer refuted the first counterclaim:

   While Powell College South does employ two counselors, those counselors are overworked and often have
   no time slots available for students who wish to make appointments.

   · State and explain your points, and then support them with evidence. Present your points clearly and
      precisely, using Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking to explain and cite your evidence. The
      writer plans to use a problem-solution reasoning strategy to elaborate on these three points using these
      pieces of evidence:

   Point 1: Wait times are too long.

   Kay Payne, one of the campus counselors, states that the wait time for an appointment with her is
   approximately 10 days.

   Point 2: Mental health issues are widespread within the student community.

   In a recent on-campus student survey, 75 percent of 250 students say they have had some kind of mental
   health issues at some point in their life.

   Point 3: The staff-to-student ratio is too high.

   The International Accreditation of Counseling Services states that the recommended ratio is one full-time
   equivalent staff member for every 1,000 to 1,500 students.

   · Restate your position as a conclusion. Near the end of your paper, synthesize your accumulated evidence
      into a broad general position, and restate your thesis in slightly different language.

   The number of students who need mental health counseling is alarming. The recent news articles that
   attest to their not being able to schedule appointments add to the alarm. While Powell College South offers
   some mental health counseling, the current number of counselors and others who provide health care is
   insufficient to handle the well-being of all its students. Action must be taken to address this problem.

   Delayed-Thesis Organization

   In this organizational pattern, introduce the issue and discuss the arguments for and against it, but wait to
   take a side until late in the essay. By delaying the stance, you show readers you are weighing the evidence, and
   326 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

   you arouse their curiosity about your position. Near the end of the paper, you explain that after carefully
   considering both pros and cons, you have arrived at the most reasonable position.

   · Introduce the issue. Here, the writer begins with action that sets the scene of the problem.

s  Tapping  heenr dfosot  nervously, Serena  looked            at  her  watch again.  She  had  been  waiting  three  hours  to  see  a
                                  end s                                       end s

   meenndtasl health couenndseslor at Powell Ceonldlesge South, and she did not think she could wait much longer. She

       had to get to work.                                         endensd s                                   end s
   end s

   · Summarize the claims for one position. Before stating which side you support, explain how the
      opposition views the issue. This body paragraph presents evidence about the topic of more counselors:

   Powell College South has two mental health counselors on staff. If the college hires more counselors, more
   office space will have to be created. Currently Pennington Hall could accommodate those counselors.
   Additional counselors would allow more students to receive counseling.

   · Refute the claims you just stated. Still not stating your position, point out the other side of the issue.

   While office space is available in Pennington Hall, that location is far from ideal. It is in a wooded area of
   campus, six blocks from the nearest dorm. Students who would go there might be afraid to walk through
   the woods or might be afraid to walk that distance. The location might deter them from making
   appointments.

   · Now give the best reasoning and evidence to support your position. Because this is a delayed-thesis
      organization, readers are still unsure of your stance. This section should be the longest and most carefully
      documented part of the paper. After summarizing and refuting claims, the writer then elaborates on these
      three points using problem-solution reasoning supported by this evidence as discussed in Reasoning
      Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking, implying her position before moving to the conclusion, where she
      states her thesis.

   Point 1: Wait times are too long.

   Kay Payne, one of the campus counselors, states that the wait time for an appointment with her is
   approximately 10 days.

   Point 2: Mental health issues are widespread within the student community.

   In a recent on-campus student survey, 75 percent of 250 students say they have had some kind of mental
   health issues at some point in their life.

   Point 3: The staff-to-student ratio is too high.

   The International Association of Counseling Services states that one full-time equivalent staff member for
   every 1,000 to 1,500 students is the recommended ratio.

   · State your thesis in your conclusion. Your rhetorical strategy is this: after giving each side a fair hearing,
      you have arrived at the most reasonable conclusion.

   According to the American Psychological Association, more than 40 percent of all college students suffer
   from some form of anxiety. Powell College South students are no different from college students
   elsewhere: they deserve to have adequate mental health counseling.

   Compose

   Drafting begins when you organize your evidence or research notes and then put them into some kind of
   written form. As you write, focus on building body paragraphs through the techniques presented in Reasoning
   Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking that show you how to support your position and then add evidence.
   Using a variety of evidence types builds credibility with readers. Remember that the recursiveness of the

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 327

writing process allows you to move from composing to gathering evidence and back to brainstorming ideas or
to organizing your draft at any time. Move around the writing process as needed.

Keep in mind that a first draft is just a beginning--you will revise it into a better work in later drafts. Your first
draft is sometimes called a discovery draft because you are discovering how to shape your paper: which ideas
to include and how to support those ideas. These suggestions and graphic organizer may be helpful for your
first draft:

  · Write your thesis at the top of the paper.
  · Compose your body paragraphs: those that support your argument through reasoning strategies and those

      that address counterclaims.
  · Leave your introduction, conclusion, and title for later drafts.

Use a graphic organizer like Table 10.1 to focus points, reasoning, and evidence for body paragraphs. You are
free to reword your thesis, reasoning, counterclaim(s), refutation of counterclaim(s), concrete evidence, and
explanation/elaboration/clarification at any time. You are also free to adjust the order in which you present
your reasoning, counterclaim(s), and refuting of counterclaim(s).
328 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

                                                                 Composing Your First Draft
                                                                        Position Argument

         Name ________________________________________________________________________
         Thesis: In your thesis, remember to include 1) an explanation of the issue and 2) your position about what should
         happen regarding the issue.
         Issue:
         My position:
         Thesis as a single declarative sentence: ________
         Background information:
         Reporters' questions:
         ____________________________________________________________________
         Point 1 in support of thesis:
         Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:
         Concrete evidence:
         __________________________________________________________________________
         Point 2 in support of thesis:
         Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:
         Concrete evidence:
         _____________________________________________________________________________
         Point 3 in support of thesis:
         Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:
         Concrete evidence:
         ___________________________________________________________________________
         Points 4 & 5 in support of thesis:
         Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:
         Concrete evidence:
         ________________________________________________________________________
         Counterclaim:
         Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:
         __________________________________________________________________________
         Refuting of counterclaim:
         Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:

       TABLE 10.1 Position argument drafting organizer

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument 329

Develop a Writing Project through Multiple Drafts

Your first draft is a kind of experiment in which you are concerned with ideas and with getting the direction
and concept of the paper clear. Do not think that your first draft must be perfect; remind yourself that you are
just honing your work. In most serious writing, every phase of the process can be considered recursive,
helping you shape the best paper possible.

     Peer Review: Critical Thinking and Counterclaims

After you have completed the first draft, begin peer review. Peer reviewers can use these sentence starters
when thinking critically about overall strengths and developmental needs.

1. One point about your position that I think is strong is ______ because ________.
2. One point about your position that I think needs more development is _____ because _______.
3. One area that I find confusing is _____________; I was confused about _______.
4. One major point that I think needs more explanation or detail is _______.
5. In my opinion, the purpose of your paper is to persuade readers _______.
6. In my opinion, the audience for your paper is _______.
7. One area of supporting evidence that I think could use more development is _______.
8. One counterclaim you include is ________________.
9. Your development of the counterclaim is __________________ because ________________.

Refuting Counterclaims

Peer reviewers are especially helpful with position and argument writing when it comes to refuting
counterclaims. Have your peer reviewer read your paper again and look for supporting points and ideas to
argue against, trying to break down your argument. Then ask your reviewer to discuss the counterclaims and
corresponding points or ideas in your paper. This review will give you the opportunity to think critically about
ways to refute the counterclaims your peer reviewer suggests.

     Revising: Reviewing a Draft and Responding to Counterclaims

Revising means reseeing, rereading, and rethinking your thoughts on paper until they fully match your
intention. Mentally, it is conceptual work focused on units of meaning larger than the sentence. Physically, it is
cutting, pasting, deleting, and rewriting until the ideas are satisfying. Be ready to spend a great deal of time
revising your drafts, adding new information and incorporating sources smoothly into your prose.

The Revising Process

To begin revising, return to the basic questions of topic (What am I writing about?), purpose (Why am I writing
about this topic?), audience (For whom am I writing?), and culture (What is the background of the people for
whom I am writing?).

  · Questions about the topic. Be sure your topic and thesis focus on your position, and omit extra material.
      Answer these questions:

1. What is the general scope of my topic? __________________________________
2. What is my thesis? __________________________________________________
3. Does my thesis focus on my topic? ______________________________________
4. Does my thesis clearly state my position? ______________________

  · Questions about purpose. It is often easier to locate your purpose--or lack of purpose--after you have
      written a draft or two. Answer these questions:

1. What do I hope to accomplish in writing about this topic? ____________________
2. Do all parts of the paper advance this purpose? ____________________________
3. Does my paper focus on my argument or position? _________________________

  · Questions about audience. Make sure your paper is aimed accurately at your readers. Answer these
330 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

             questions:
        1. What does my audience know about this subject? _______________________
        2. What does my audience need to know to understand the point of my paper?

             _______________________________________________________________
        3. What questions or objections do I anticipate from my audience? ___________

             ________________________________________________________________

         · Questions about culture. Your paper should reflect consideration of cultural differences, if any, between
             you and your audience. Answer these questions:

        1. What is the culture of the people for whom I am writing? Do all readers share the same culture?
             ________________________________________________________

        2. How do my beliefs, values, and customs differ from those of my audience?

             ____________________________________________________________________

        3. How do the cultures of the authors of sources I cite differ from my culture or the culture(s) of my audience?
             ______________________________________________

       Because of the recursivity of the writing process, returning to these questions will help you fine-tune the
       language and structure of your writing and target the support you develop for your audience.

       Responding to Counterclaims

       The more complex the issue, the more opposing sides it may have. For example, a writer whose position is that
       Powell College South Campus should offer daycare to its students with children might find opposition for
       different reasons. Someone may oppose the idea out of concern for cost; someone else may support the idea if
       the daycare is run on a volunteer basis; someone else may support the idea if the services are offered off
       campus.

       As you revise, continue studying your peer reviewer's comments about counterclaims. If you agree with any
       counterclaim, then say so in the paragraph in which you address counterclaims. This agreement will further
       establish your credibility by showing your fairness and concern for the issue. Look over your paper and peer
       review comments, and then consider these questions:

         · In what ways do you address realistic counterclaims? What other counterclaims should you address?
             Should you add to or replace current counterclaims?

         · In what ways do you successfully refute counterclaims? What other refutations might you include?
         · Are there any counterclaims with which you agree? If so, how do you concede to them in your paper? In

             what ways does your discussion show fairness?

       After completing your peer review and personal assessment, make necessary revisions based on these notes.
       See Annotated Student Sample an example of a student's argumentative research essay. Note how the student

         · presents the argument;
         · supports the viewpoint with reasoning and evidence;
         · includes support in the form of facts, opinions, paraphrases, and summaries;
         · provides citations (correctly formatted) about material from other sources in the paper;
         · uses ethos, pathos, and logos throughout the paper; and
         · addresses counterclaims (dissenting opinions).

     10.6 Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Implement transitional words and phrases in a position argument.
         · Apply genre conventions in paragraphs and transitions for general and specific situations.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                               10.6 · Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions 331

In the initial drafts of your paper, you may have concentrated on single ideas for your body paragraphs and
single thoughts within those paragraphs. Your argument will read more smoothly, however, if you use
transitional words and phrases to show readers how your ideas are connected or opposed to each other.

Using Transitional Words and Phrases

sundeernliednenenuddnudunendrdleienrlreilninee                         end undeurnlidnernldinuenderline        undeerlnindeunduenrldineerline

To organize your paper most effectively, use transitional                                                      words or phrases, which show                   readers the
 eunndduenurdlniendreeleirnnliedneuennddeuenunrldndiendenueerdnlridnluieneredlienreline underelinde underline        eunnddserlineeenndd sunduenrdlinereline           end s

        relationship between different                       ideas--that is, how            ideas connect with or are separate                       freonmd  each other.     In  the
uennddeuerlnindeeurnlidneurlnindeereliennndedsuennddesrline  undenruldinnduenerdleinreline       enduunndedneerdrlilesnineed underluinnedeenrldinse           underline

paragraph below, transitional words and phrases are underlined.
                                                undeenrdlinuenderline  underlinend underulinndeerlienned underline end s end s

To get a copy of your transcript from Abbott Community College, first log on to the college web site. Next, click

the "Transcript" link to the left of the college logo. When the link opens, fill out the information requested in the

boxes. Then upload a copy of your student ID and pay $10 electronically. Finally, submit your form. Your

transcript will be emailed to you, but you may have to wait up to three days before you receive it.

The transitional words and phrases show readers the sequence of steps they need to follow to get a transcript.
If you remove the transitional words and phrases, the paragraph would be choppy, and readers might not
follow the steps as easily.

Transitions also help guide readers between paragraphs. Below are the body paragraphs a student wrote about
the need for a traffic light at a street that leads into his college. The first version has no transitions.

Many vehicles speed through the intersection without regard to the posted speed limit. A traffic signal would
make vehicles slow down. They would not be able to speed through the signal.

Pedestrian safety is a problem. Many students and others cross this intersection when coming to or leaving
campus, and they must dodge traffic to get across. A traffic signal would allow them to cross at appropriate
times.

The amount of traffic has increased dramatically. A manufacturing plant opened four blocks from the
intersection. The number of businesses in the strip mall at the intersection has grown by 50 percent. The
college has changed its traffic routing for football games. Fans must enter via this intersection.

The most compelling reason to install a traffic signal is that the number of accidents has risen far past an
acceptable limit. According to recent police reports, a traffic accident occurs at least three times a month. One
accident resulted in a loss of life.

The student then added transitions and changed the wording accordingly to help readers follow his ideas. The
underlined transitions at the beginning of each paragraph alert readers to the four reasons he presents and to
where he changes from one to another. The underlined transitions within the paragraphs help readers
understand the relationship of ideas.

First, many vehicles speed through the intersection without regard to the posted speed limit. A traffic signal
would make vehicles slow down, for they would not be able to speed through the signal.

Second, pedestrian safety is a problem. Many students and others cross this intersection when coming to or
leaving campus, and now they must dodge traffic to get across. A traffic signal, therefore, would allow them to
cross at appropriate times.

Another reason to install the traffic signal has to do with the amount of traffic, which has increased dramatically
in recent years. Two years ago, a manufacturing plant opened four blocks from the intersection. In the past 16
months, the number of businesses in the strip mall at the intersection grew by 50 percent. Furthermore, the
college has changed its traffic routing for football games, and now fans must enter via this intersection.

Finally, the most compelling reason to install a traffic signal is that the number of accidents has risen far past
an acceptable limit. According to recent police reports, a traffic accident occurs at that intersection at least
three times a month. In fact, one of those accidents resulted in a loss of life.
332 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

      Frequently Used Transitional Words and Phrases

       Addition: again, and, further, in addition, next, then, also, as well as
       Cause-and-effect: accordingly, consequently, for this reason, hence, therefore, thus, as a result
       Amplification: again, also, apparently, first (second, third), moreover, indeed, more, most, in fact
       Chronological order: after, before, during, earlier, finally, first (second, third), immediately, last, next, then,
       later
       Concession or agreement: although, at least, at any rate, certainly, (even) though, in spite of, of course, still,
       nevertheless, nonetheless
       Compare and contrast: at the same time, comparatively, conversely, however, instead, likewise, moreover,
       nevertheless, on the contrary, on the other hand, rather, similarly, still, yet, despite
       Detail: including, in particular, namely, specifically, to list
       Emphasis or clarification: above all, again, certainly, especially, furthermore, in fact, particularly, indeed
       Example: chiefly, for example (instance), in other words, in particular, mainly, specifically
       Intention: for this purpose, in order to do this, to this end, with this in mind
       Location: above, along, behind, below, here, near, next to, opposite, to the left (right) of, under
       Summary: finally, in conclusion, in short, in other words, thus
       For more information about paragraphs and transitions, see Paragraphs and Transitions.

     10.7 Evaluation: Varied Appeals

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Evaluate feedback regarding rhetorical choices and conventions of position writing.
         · Demonstrate an understanding of the structure of a position argument as it relates to credibility, logic, and

             emotions.
       Have a peer evaluate your final draft using the following rubric. Although you might not agree with all the
       feedback or evaluation, peer reviewers bring a fresh perspective. At the end of the rubric is a section for your
       peer to offer additional feedback or expand on the reasoning behind their assessment. Listen to or read your
       peer's feedback closely, asking any questions you have. Then, revise your paper again, according to the
       feedback you think is helpful.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                   10.7 · Evaluation: Varied Appeals 333

Rubric        Critical Language Awareness      Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical Choices

       Score  The text always adheres to       The writer's position or claim      The paper identifies and
              the "Editing Focus" of this      on a debatable issue is stated      expertly refutes realistic
 5            chapter: using transitional      clearly and expertly supported      counterclaims; the paper's
 Skillful     words and phrases, as            with credible evidence. The         structure demonstrates the
              discussed in Section 10.6.       paper reflects careful attention    writer's fairness and
              The text also shows ample        to either thesis-first or thesis-   advanced skill at appealing to
              evidence of the writer's intent  last organization; in either        readers' logic and emotions.
              to consciously meet or           case, the claims and evidence       The writer pays close
              challenge conventional           support the structure.              attention to the rhetorical
              expectations in rhetorically                                         situation.
              effective ways.

4             The text usually adheres to      The writer's position or claim      The paper identifies and
Accomplished  the "Editing Focus" of this      on a debatable issue is stated      refutes realistic
              chapter: using transitional      clearly and usually supported       counterclaims; the paper's
              words and phrases, as            with credible evidence. The         structure usually
              discussed in Section 10.6.       paper reflects attention to         demonstrates the writer's
              The text also shows some         either thesis-first or thesis-last  fairness and skill at appealing
              evidence of the writer's intent  organization; in either case, the   to readers' logic and
              to consciously meet or           claims and evidence support         emotions. The writer
              challenge conventional           the structure.                      demonstrates awareness of
              expectations in rhetorically                                         the rhetorical situation.
              effective ways.

3             The text generally adheres to    The writer's position or claim      The paper identifies and
Capable       the "Editing Focus" of this      on a debatable issue is stated      partially refutes realistic
              chapter: using transitional      clearly and generally               counterclaims; the paper's
              words and phrases, as            supported with some credible        structure generally
              discussed in Section 10.6.       evidence. The paper reflects        demonstrates the writer's
              The text also shows limited      some attention to either            fairness and some ability in
              evidence of the writer's intent  thesis-first or thesis-last         appealing to readers' logic
              to consciously meet or           organization; in either case, the   and emotions. The writer
              challenge conventional           claims and evidence give            shows inconsistent
              expectations in rhetorically     limited support to the              awareness of the rhetorical
              effective ways.                  structure.                          situation.

TABLE 10.2
334 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

       Score  Critical Language Awareness                   Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical Choices

 2            The text occasionally adheres                 The writer's position or claim      The paper may not identify
 Developing   to the "Editing Focus" of this                on a debatable issue is             counterclaims or may identify
              chapter: using transitional                   occasionally stated clearly and     them and not address them
 1            words and phrases, as                         occasionally supported with         further. The paper's structure
 Beginning    discussed in Section 10.6.                    limited credible evidence. The      minimally demonstrates the
              The text also shows emerging                  paper reflects limited attention    writer's awareness of fairness
 Comments:    evidence of the writer's intent               to either thesis-first or thesis-   or skill at appealing to
TABLE 10.2    to consciously meet or                        last organization; in either        readers' logic and emotions.
              challenge conventional                        case, the claims and evidence       The writer shows little
              expectations in rhetorically                  give little support to the          awareness of the rhetorical
              effective ways.                               structure.                          situation.

              The text does not adhere to                   The writer's position or claim      The paper does not identify
              the "Editing Focus" of this                   on a debatable issue is not         and refute a realistic
              chapter: using transitional                   stated clearly and is minimally     counterclaim; the paper's
              words and phrases, as                         supported with credible             structure does not
              discussed in Section 10.6.                    evidence. The paper reflects        demonstrate that the writer
              The text also shows little to                 minimal or no attention to          has any awareness of fairness
              no evidence of the writer's                   either thesis-first or thesis-last  or an ability to appeal to
              intent to consciously meet or                 organization; in either case, the   readers' logic and emotions.
              challenge conventional                        claims and evidence give little     The writer shows little or no
              expectations in rhetorically                  to no support to the structure.     awareness of the rhetorical
              effective ways.                                                                   situation.

10.8 Spotlight on ... Citation

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply citation conventions systematically in your work.
  · Demonstrate an understanding of the concepts of intellectual property that motivate documentation

      conventions.

Academic writing relies on evidence and support. When this evidence or support comes from others, you must
cite it properly to give credit where credit is due. Citing information to its source will build your credibility. See
Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and MLA Documentation and Format and APA
Documentation and Format for more information on citations.

Types of Citation

In a position argument, you are expected to provide evidence that supports your stance and addresses
counterclaims to it. You may use one of three types of citation: quoting, paraphrasing, or summarizing. If you
are quoting the exact words of a person or a written work, you must

  · use quotation marks around the words;
  · credit the source of your quotation; and
  · use the formatting style mandated in the style guide your instructor assigns.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                           10.8 · Spotlight on ... Citation 335

   If you are paraphrasing, you are shaping someone else's words into your own words, but you are conveying the
   same meaning as the original speaker or writer. When you are paraphrasing in academic writing, provide
   formatted information about the original source so that readers know from whom the idea originates.

   If you are summarizing, you are condensing the words of someone else into a shorter form but still retaining

s  the main point and major details. As with quoting and paraphrasing, provide formatted information about the

   original source when you are summarizing.

                         end s

   For  more  information about quoting,  paraphrasing,  and  summarizing,  see  Research  Process:  Accessing  and
                        end s end s

   Recording Information.
   end s

   Examples of Types of Citation

   American author Jack London (1876-1916) began his novel The Call of the Wild (1903) with this paragraph:

        Buck did not read the newspapers, or he would have known that trouble was brewing, not alone for
        himself, but for every tide-water dog, strong of muscle and with warm, long hair, from Puget Sound to
        San Diego. Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow metal, and because
        steamship and transportation companies were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing into
        the Northland.

   Quoting in MLA style

   If you are quoting from that paragraph using MLA style, you might have something like this:

        The Call of the Wild sets the contrasting tone for the story with its second sentence, highlighting the differences
        between nature and industrialization: "Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow metal,
        and because steamship and transportation companies were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing
        into the Northland" (London 1).

   Quoting in APA style

   If you are quoting from that paragraph using APA style, you might have something like this:

         The Call of the Wild sets the contrasting tone for the story with its second sentence, highlighting the differences
         between nature and industrialization: "Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow metal,
         and because steamship and transportation companies were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing
         into the Northland" (London, 1903, p. 1).

   Paraphrasing

   If you are paraphrasing that paragraph, you might have something like this:

         In the opening paragraph of The Call of the Wild, Jack London establishes the conflict between man and nature
         by letting readers know that because Buck doesn't read, he doesn't know that trouble is at hand for himself and
         every other dog on the west coast of the United States. The trouble occurs because gold has been discovered in
         the Arctic and thousands of men are rushing to the Northland by land and sea so that they can also take part in
         the discovery.

   Summarizing

   If you are summarizing that paragraph, you might have something like this:

         In the opening paragraph of The Call of the Wild, Jack London establishes the conflict between man and nature
         by telling readers that neither Buck nor any other dog knows that trouble at hand because of the gold
         discovered and men rushing to find it.
336 10 · Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

      Intellectual property

       When you create a written work, you do not want someone else to take credit for it. It is your intellectual
       property, an original idea resulting from your creativity and work and that, consequently, you own. If you look
       at a book, for instance, you will see a copyright symbol (©) somewhere in the opening pages, usually along with
       other publication information. This symbol gives the copyright owner legal protection against those who try to
       plagiarize (steal material and publish it as their own). Plagiarism can refer to entire works or parts of works
       that are not cited as being created by someone else, whether the work is copyrighted or not. If writers or
       speakers use someone else's words, ideas, or information, they must cite the source. For detailed information
       about what plagiarism is and is not, see Spotlight on ... Ethical Research.

     10.9 Portfolio: Growth in the Development of Argument

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Reflect on and articulate how you used the steps of the writing process and how they affected your work.
         · Reflect on and write about your use of reasoning and critical-thinking skills in developing your paper.
       As you complete each writing assignment, you complete another part of your portfolio. After each paper, think
       critically about your writing process, reflecting on what you created from the first steps of discovering ideas to
       the last steps of composing and editing the final paper.

      Lessons Learned

       As you reflect on writing your position argument, answer these questions about your writing process.

         · What factors helped you determine the topic for your paper?
         · Which brainstorming method worked best for you to develop ideas for your topic?
         · How did you arrive at a workable thesis?
         · How did you use ethos, pathos, and logos in your paper?
         · How did you use kairos in your paper?
         · What outside sources did you consult to get information to support your topic or to understand

             counterclaims?
         · How did you determine which counterclaims to address?
         · What type of citation did you use for giving credit to material you did not write?
         · How did collaboration with others help you as you wrote and revised your paper?
         · In collaboration, what specific constructive criticism did you receive that helped you?
         · In what ways was this paper easier or harder to write than others you have written?
         · What could you have done differently to make writing your paper easier or more effective?
         · What insights about your topic did you gain from writing your paper?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      10 · Further Reading 337

Further Reading

The following titles are well-known examples of position speeches or papers.

Grimke, Francis J. "Equality of Rights for All Citizens, Black and White Alike." Masterpieces of Negro
   Eloquence, edited by Alice Moore Dunbar, 1914. Project Gutenberg, www.gutenberg.org/files/22240/
    22240-8.txt. Accessed 10 Dec. 2020.

Henry, Patrick. "Convention of Delegates, March 28, 1775." American Eloquence: Studies in American Political
   History, Vol. 1, edited by James Albert Woodburn, G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1896. Project Gutenberg,
    www.gutenberg.org/files/15391/15391-h/15391-h.htm#link2H_4_0006. Accessed 10 Dec. 2020.

Mandela, Winnie. "Speech made by Mrs. Winnie Mandela to Mark the Creation of the Black Parents'
   Association." 1978. South African History Online, www.sahistory.org.za/archive/speech-made-mrs-winnie-
    mandela-mark. Accessed 6 Feb 2021.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. "Speech by Franklin D. Roosevelt, New York Transcript." 1941. Library of Congress,
    www.loc.gov/item/afccal000483/.

Roosevelt, Theodore. "New Nationalism Speech." 1910. Teaching American History,
    teachingamericanhistory.org/library/document/new-nationalism-speech/. Accessed 6 Feb. 2021.

Truth, Sojourner. "Ain't I a Woman?" 1851. National Park Service, www.nps.gov/articles/sojourner-truth.htm.
    Accessed 10 Dec. 2020

Works Cited

Johnson, Lyndon B. "May 22, 1964: Remarks at the University of Michigan." Miller Center, 28 Apr. 2017,
    millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/may-22-1964-remarks-university-michigan.

London, Jack. Call of the Wild. Macmillan, 1903.

Quinn, Sara Dickenson. "NYT Columnist Uses Visual Evidence to Support Persuasive Arguments." Poynter, 24
    Nov. 2014, www.poynter.org/reporting-editing/2008/nyt-columnist-uses-visual-evidence-to-support-
    persuasive-arguments/.

Thurman, Susan Sommers, and William L. Gary, Jr. Ticket to Write: Writing College Essays. Pearson Education,
    2017.
338 10 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Critical Thinking Reasoning Strategies: Improving 11

FIGURE 11.1 Throughout their college careers and beyond, students use a number of different reasoning strategies
in academic and professional writing. (credit: "Howard Tilton Library Computers 2010" by Tulane Public Relations/
Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

11.1  Developing Your Sense of Logic
11.2  Reasoning Trailblazer: Paul D. N. Hebert
11.3  Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words
11.4  Annotated Sample Reading: from Book VII of The Republic by Plato
11.5  Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence

INTRODUCTION The ways in which you approach and discuss debatable topics incorporate critical thinking,
critical reading, and critical writing. The reasoning strategies discussed in this chapter reflect the patterns
people use to think critically and the structures with which writers and speakers commonly build their
arguments. These strategies are also the ones you will use in most of your college writing projects, including
your assignments for Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric and Argumentative Research:
Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence. Each strategy is a building block of logic; that is, each is built on a
pattern of thought, which you use out of the classroom as well. For instance, you might approach a text or real-
life situation in some of the following ways:

  · Explain it in terms of something unrelated but more familiar.
340 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

         · Compare or contrast it with other texts or situations.
         · Group it in a category with similar texts or situations.
         · Consider it as a problem that needs to be solved.
         · Examine the reasons something happens or what happens as a result.
         · Explain what the text or situation means to you.

       These thought patterns exemplify active critical thinking, which translates into critical writing. In other words,
       writing patterns reflect thinking patterns. By applying these reasoning patterns appropriately and effectively,
       you will be able to incorporate the evidence you need to support a thesis and persuade readers of the validity of
       your argument. Remember, too, that these are skills, and like other skills, the more you practice, the better you
       will get at using them effectively. (You can read more about argument and logic in Rhetorical Analysis:
       Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric.)

     11.1 Developing Your Sense of Logic

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify key rhetorical concepts and thought patterns in a variety of texts.
         · Explain how patterns of thought function for different audiences, purposes, and situations.

       For the purposes of this course, logic means "reasoning based on thought and evidence." In practical terms,
       logic is the ability to analyze and evaluate persuasive or argument writing for effectiveness. By extension, it
       also means that you can learn to use logic in your own argumentative writing. Like any other new skill, you are
       likely to learn best when you have a starting point. Here are some suggestions for how to begin thinking and
       writing logically:

         · Approach a topic with an open mind.
         · Consider what you already know about the topic.
         · Consider what you want to know about the topic.
         · Find credible information about the topic.
         · Base your judgments of the topic on sound reasoning and evidence.

       Once you have formed your opinions on a particular debatable subject, you must decide on the best way to
       organize them to share with others. Developing your skills in six widely used reasoning strategies, or patterns
       for thinking and writing, can help you determine the most logical and effective means of organizing
       information to make your points.

       In this chapter, you will examine these six reasoning strategies--analogy, cause and effect, classification and
       division, comparison and contrast, problem and solution, and definition--that are often used in college classes.
       In addition, you will consider how writers' personal views, cultural backgrounds, and purposes for writing help
       determine

         · which reasoning strategy suits their needs; and
         · what they decide to include in their writing.

       As you progress in your college classes and beyond, you will find these reasoning strategies used in all genres
       of writing, both nonfiction (e.g., textbooks, how-to books) and fiction (e.g., novels, short stories). Understanding
       how these strategies work can help you recognize their common formats and analyze what you read; likewise,
       as a writer, understanding how these strategies work to reflect your thinking can help you determine the
       strategy you need to use.

      Analogy

       Writers frequently use analogy as a strategy to compare two unlike subjects--one subject is familiar to
       readers, whereas the other is not. To explain or clarify the unfamiliar subject, the writer emphasizes the way
       or ways in which the two subjects are similar, even though they are dissimilar and unrelated in all other ways.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                              11.1 · Developing Your Sense of Logic 341

   Analogies are basically long forms of similes (short comparisons of unlike elements, based on the word like or
   as) or metaphors (short comparisons without signal words). In the example paragraph, the writer explains
   unfamiliar aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic by comparing it with the more familiar concept of a robbery
   spree.

s  Model Paragraph

   Examining COVID-19 is like examining a robbery case in this way: both require a great deal of investigation.

   Those investigating the causes behind the pandemic look for the history of how the virus spread, and those

   investigating a crime look for the backstory that might connect the victims and criminals. In addition, the two

   groups of investigators look at the reasons behind the focus of their study. Medical investigators look at why the

   virus spread throughout the world; police investigators look at why the ecnridmse spree took place in a particular
   area. Also, both types of investigators are trying to stop whatever or whoever is the focus of their investigation.

   Medical  investigators  want  to  stop the  virus;  police  investigators  want  to  stop  the  crimes.
                                       end s

   Cause and Effect

   Cause-and-effect writing identifies and examines the reasons (causes) for and consequences (effects) of an
   action, event, or idea. Cause-and-effect writing often answers the question "Why?" and helps readers
   understand the connections between what happens because of--or as a result of--something else.

   Model Paragraph

   Ray's grocery, Artie's Hardware store, and Cradle and Teen department store all went out of business because a
   well-known superstore opened in Springdale. Customers who frequented Ray's, an establishment that had
   been run by the same family for four generations, used to drive many miles to take advantage of the high quality
   of items in the meat and deli departments. After the opening of the superstore, however, those same customers
   found they could get similar items at a savings, even if the quality was not as high as the products at Ray's.
   Customers at Artie's Hardware often talked with owner Artie Shoeman about their hardware needs, but the
   store did not offer the same variety of items they could find in the superstore. The same was true for those who
   shopped at Cradle and Teen. The superstore featured lower prices and more variety, even if the items did not
   match the quality of the items at Cradle and Teen.

   FIGURE 11.2 Small retailers often lose out to superstores. (credit: "Fort Bragg CA Storefront" by Ellin Beltz/
   Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
   342 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

   Classification and Division

   Classification and division are actually two closely related strategies, generally discussed together because of

   their similarity. When using the strategy of division, the writer identifies a single subject or group and explains

   categories within that subject or group. In other words, the writer divides the larger unit into component parts.

s  When using the strategy of classification, writers do the opposite. They group various elements and place them

   into larger, more comprehensive categories rather than divide the whole into parts. In general, the reasoning

   strategy of classification and division looks at smaller elements as parts of a larger element and thus helps

   readers understand a general concept and the elements that it comprises.

   Model Paragraphs                                                  end s
                                                               end s

   Extra material in the textbook can be divided into photographs, quotations, and tables. The photographs were
   all taken by the author and focus on various parts of the life cycle of the plants highlighted in the chapter. In
   addition, to add color and more information about the subject matter of each chapter, the author has inserted
   sidebar quotations from both famous and non-famous people. The tables the author has included help readers
   see more details about the progression of the plants' spread across the country.

   After three months of training, the young dogs were placed into three categories: those who would go directly
   to permanent homes, those who would repeat the course, and those who would advance to the next level. The
   dogs that would be homed immediately were those who were far too social or far too active to be service dogs.
   The dogs that would repeat the course had possibilities as service dogs but needed more discipline and
   instruction. Their futures were yet to be decided. Those that advanced to the next level were obedient and
   focused and learned quickly. They displayed great promise as service dogs.

   Comparison and Contrast

   Compare and contrast, one of the most frequently used reasoning strategies, analyzes two (sometimes more)
   subjects, examining the similarities (comparisons) and differences (contrasts) between them. Nearly
   everything you can think of can be a subject for comparison and contrast: objects, people, concepts, places,
   movies, literature, and styles, to name a few. To elaborate on the separate points, writers provide details about
   each element being compared or contrasted. Comparison and contrast helps readers analyze and evaluate
   subjects.

   This strategy is helpful when the similarities or differences are not obvious and when a significant common
   thread exists between the subjects. For example, a contrast between an expensive, elegant restaurant and a
   fast-food restaurant would be useless because the differences are clearly obvious, despite the common
   thread--both are restaurants. However, not so obvious might be some similarities.

   When subjects have no common thread or have obvious shared characteristics, any comparison or contrast
   makes little sense--like contrasting a fish and a shoe (no common thread) or comparing two fast-food
   restaurants (obvious similarities). However, a writer actually might find a common thread between a fish and a
   shoe (perhaps shine or texture or color), and a valid topic of contrast might be differences between the two
   fast-food restaurants.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                    11.1 · Developing Your Sense of Logic 343

   Model Paragraph

   Although they seem different on the surface, one way in which Romantic-period poetry and 1980s rap music

   are alike is the desire the writers had to create a new approach to their art. They wanted to represent simpler

   values that were more connected to the natural world, values to which a general audience could relate. For

s  example, in William Wordsworth's "Daffodils," the speaker can escape the depressing, industrialized urban

   world to find peace in nature by contemplating a field of flowers. Similarly, in the Sugarhill Gang's 1979

   "Rapper's Delight," the band sings of how their beats can lift spirits and cause listeners to dance and forget

   their woes. However, Romantic-period poetry and 1980s rap music are different in the delivery style and form

   of the art; "Rapper's Delight" is set to music, which is an integral part of the piece, but "Daffodils" is not.

   Problem and Solution

                                                                                                                             end s
   When using this reasoning strategy, writers introduce a predicament or challenging issue (the problem) and
   offer information about what was done or what should be done to remedy the predicament or issue (the

                                                        end s
   solution). Problem-and-solution writing helps readers understand the complexities of some predicaments and
   the actions that can improve or eliminate them.

   Model Paragraph

         The issue of combating the spread of hate speech and misinformation on social media can be addressed if
         more social media providers improve their monitoring services. Aside from creating more algorithms that
         search for linked key words and phrases, social media providers should increase the number of professional
         monitors conducting active searches. Additionally, while many platforms such as Twitter and Facebook respond
         within a few days to reports of posts that violate their policies, more monitors could lessen the amount of time
         these posts are available. According to Facebook, inappropriate posts are investigated and removed within 24
         to 48 hours (Facebook "Community Standards"). Some offenders have been reported multiple times for their
         platform violations, and social media sponsors should increase their monitoring of those offenders. Although
         such surveillance would increase the burden on the social media providers, it would help solve the growing
         challenge of online hate speech and misinformation.

   FIGURE 11.3 Social Media Icons (credit: "Social Media Mixed Icons - Banner" by Blogtrepreneur/Wikimedia
   Commons, Creative Commons, CC BY 2.0)

   Definition

   When using the reasoning strategy of definition, writers elaborate on the meaning of an idea, a word, or an
   expression, usually one that is controversial or that can be viewed in multiple ways. Beginning writers tend to
   think that definition writing looks only at the denotation, or dictionary definition. However, definition writing
   entails much more than relaying a dictionary definition. It also explains and elaborates on the connotations,
   the emotions and implications the topic evokes. Definition writing is especially useful for explaining and
   interpreting terms, ideas, or concepts that are easily or often confused or that have meanings beyond their
   denotations. Sometimes these meanings are personal interpretations and thus reflect a writer's particular
   viewpoint. Additionally, this strategy is beneficial when writers want to explain or reinforce a term before
   making an argument about a larger concept.
   344 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

   Model Paragraph

   In everyday speech, the word critical is often used to highlight negative aspects of a topic. If someone says a

   friend was critical of a new haircut, the implication is that the friend did not like the cut. However, when used in

   college classes, critical has an expanded meaning: noting both the negative and positive aspects of a topic,

s  examining those aspects in depth, and then making decisions about the discoveries. Students directed to use

   critical thinking, critical reading, or critical writing should know they are expected to examine all sides of a topic

   fully, evaluate the validity of those sides, and then make sound judgments on the basis of their evaluation.

   In this chapter, you have learned about various reasoning strategies that you may use in academic and

   professional  writing.  Utilizing  these  strategies        when  you  write  can  help  you  both  evaluate and     analyze  text  that
                                                                                                                 end s

   you read and create more logical and persuasive arguments.

   11.2 Trailblazer

   Reasoning Trailblazer: Paul D. N. Hebert

   LEARNING OUTCOMES
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:

     · Read for inquiry, learning, and critical thinking.
     · Identify reasoning strategies and explain their functions.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    11.2 · Trailblazer 345

                                       "[R]esearchers will find
                                       a barcode linked to just

                                           about anything...
                                       encountered anywhere

                                            on the planet."

    FIGURE 11.4 Paul D. N. Hebert, 2015 (credit: "Paul
    Hebert- Revealing Planetary Biodiversity through
    DNA Barcodes" by Åge Hojem, NTNU
    Vitenskapsmuseet/NTNU University Museum/
    Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

Reasoning Strategies in Science

Born in Kingston, Ontario, Canada, Paul Hebert (b. 1947) earned his bachelor of science degree from Queen's
University, a public research university in his hometown. He then pursued graduate studies at the University
of Cambridge (United Kingdom), where he received his PhD in genetics (a branch of biology dealing with
heredity and the variation of inherited characteristics). He spent three years at Sydney University in Australia
and then another year in London at the Natural History Museum. Returning to Canada, he began research at
the University of Windsor, followed by a directorship at the Great Lakes Institute at Windsor. In 1990, he joined
the faculty of Ontario's University of Guelph, where he became director of the Centre for Biodiversity Genomics
(a branch of biotechnology that strives to apply concepts of genetics and molecular biology to genetic mapping
and DNA sequencing), and he holds a Canada Research Chair in molecular biodiversity (the study of the variety
of life found on Earth or in a particular place on Earth).
Interestingly, Dr. Hebert, a well-known genetic scientist, uses reasoning strategies to organize his research. In
2019, a team he led launched a multimillion-dollar effort to identify more than two million new species of
creatures. Because the world is losing species faster than species are being discovered, his initiative comes at
an opportune time and adds to the value of his work. Experts in the field of biodiversity estimate that Earth is
home to 8.7 million to 20 million different kinds of plants, animals, and fungi. To date, however, only 1.8
million of them have been formally described.
In 2003, Dr. Hebert first proposed the concept of using DNA (abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid, which
346 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

       codes genetic information for the transmission of inherited traits from a specimen) to create what is called
       DNA barcoding (https://openstax.org/r/barcode). This strategy is a method of identifying and classifying
       species by using a specific section of genetic code. In his groundbreaking paper, he proposed DNA barcoding
       as a solution to differentiate species by using the same small piece of DNA for every organism. A similarity
       today is the way in which scanners at groceries and other stores use UPC barcodes on items to determine
       prices.

       The idea behind the barcode thinking is that it creates a unique sequence that can be used in myriad ways.
       Two of these ways include identifying an organism as part of a larger species and identifying a previously
       unknown species. Hebert proposed that animal species could be distinguished by sequencing fewer than
       1,000 bases of mitochondrial (dealing with a subcellular structure found in many organisms) DNA from a
       given specimen.

       Dr. Hebert was the founding director of the Biodiversity Institute of Ontario. Its goals are to

         · advance the knowledge of what makes up biodiversity;
         · protect biodiversity; and
         · help boost the global collaboration of biodiversity researchers.

       In addition to his work with the Biodiversity Institute of Ontario, Dr. Hebert heads the International Barcode of
       Life, which began in 2008 as a reference library of known species with their identifying sequences. The
       barcodes have helped identify organisms and document how they interact with other species.

       One research program of the International Barcode of Life is BIOSCAN (https://openstax.org/r/bioscan).
       BIOSCAN's areas of research are threefold. The first is to speed the discovery of species. BIOSCAN will use new
       means to increase the identification of the millions of species yet to be discovered by analyzing hundreds of
       millions of specimens from freshwater, saltwater, and land sources. The second area is interaction of species,
       which will investigate the complex ecosystem of species, a topic that, for the most part, remains shrouded in
       mystery. The third area is species dynamics, which will study many of the world's areas as they are defined by
       their environmental conditions. Researchers will use that data to compile comprehensive starting points for
       comparisons about biodiversity.

       In its ongoing efforts, BIOSCAN hopes to more than double the reference library, using specimens and species
       interactions at 2,500 sites around the world, a nod to the international impact of DNA technology. Almost all
       the new barcode records will come from undescribed species. A primary goal will be discovery of species. A
       sample barcode sequence will be taken. If it does not match an existing species, researchers will examine the
       specimen more closely, hoping to find a new species. In the past, this process would have taken years before a
       specimen was, indeed, confirmed as a new species.

       Dr. Hebert hopes that by 2030, students can take handheld barcoders into the wild and use them to identify
       plants and animals instantly.

      Discussion Questions

       1. Does the comparison between DNA barcoding and UPC barcodes used in grocery stores help you
            understand the concept of DNA barcoding? Why or why not?

       2. How might BIOSCAN's use of interactions from more than 2,500 sites around the world help the program
            realize its goals?

       3. How does Dr. Hebert use the cause-and-effect reasoning strategy in the initiative launched by the team he
            led? What is the cause of the initiative, and what is its effect?

       4. How does Dr. Hebert use the reasoning strategy of problem and solution in his proposal about DNA
            barcoding? What problem does Dr. Hebert address, and what is its solution?

       5. How would the reasoning strategy of classification and division be useful to a researcher like Dr. Hebert?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                   11.3 · Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 347

    Support your response with examples from the text.

6. In what ways might researchers use a comparison-and contrast reasoning strategy to discover a new
    species?

11.3 Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify and define reasoning strategies and signal words.
  · Determine how the rhetorical situation influences the content and reasoning strategies of written works.

As you read in The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to Respond Critically, rhetorical
situation are shaped by the conditions of the communication and the agents involved in that communication.
To help you determine the conditions and the agents, you can examine purpose, culture, and audience
expectation.

The purpose, or intention, for your writing determines the reasoning strategies you use. For example, if your
purpose is to explain why one restaurant is better than another, you likely would use comparison and contrast.

Writers of essays and other formal papers usually support their ideas by using more than one reasoning
strategy. For example, within comparison and contrast, they may include description, such as sensory details
about the food at the two restaurants; narration, such as an anecdote about why they and their companions
went to the restaurants or about something that happened at one of the restaurants; and sequencing, such as
the order in which they received their food or the directions to get to the restaurants.

Alternatively, writers may combine some of the six strategies already mentioned. For instance, within the
larger structure of comparison and contrast, they may use classification and division when discussing the
restaurants' menus, sorting by main dishes, side dishes, appetizers, soups, salads, and desserts. Therefore,
while the essay's primary purpose may be to compare and contrast, individual strategies within an essay or
even within a paragraph may differ.

Recognizing Purpose

Throughout your paper, your purpose for writing should be clear and focused. Your introduction, thesis, topic
sentences, body paragraphs (which include reasoning and evidence), and conclusion should all reflect your
argumentative or persuasive purpose.

To support and clarify your purpose, you are likely to use the following:

  · Analogy: to explain to readers a subject with which they are unfamiliar by comparing a specific trait or
      traits with those of a more familiar subject.

  · Cause-and-effect: to provide a clear understanding of the relationship between an event or situation and/
      or what happened because of it, why it occurred, and what might continue to happen.

  · Classification and division: to explain a subject by breaking it into smaller parts and explaining the
      distinctions of the smaller parts or by grouping individual, disparate elements on the basis of certain
      characteristics to form larger units.

  · Compare and contrast: to examine the similarities and/or differences of subjects in order to explain a
      specific point about their similarity or difference (often an unexpected similarity or difference).

  · Problem-and-solution: to indicate a predicament or difficulty and suggest ways to deal with or eliminate
      it.

  · Definition: to illustrate to readers an idea, word, or expression, allowing you to explain a unique meaning
      of a topic through details and analysis.
348 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

      Recognizing Audience

       Critically thinking about the culture, or common beliefs and lived experiences, of your audience, the people
       who will read your work, can help you choose an appropriate vocabulary and level of detail.
       The culture and audience expectation determine the language you use, the amount and type of information
       you include, and the way you deliver that information. Determine first what your readers want to know (their
       expectations), what they already know, and what they do not know. Determining--or at least making an
       educated guess about--the culture of your audience will aid you in deciding how to use the reasoning strategy
       you choose and the way in which you present your paper.
       Suppose, for instance, your purpose is to persuade your audience to vote for a proposed local ordinance. First,
       consider the culture of your audience to ensure the language you use clearly explains the terms of ordinance
       for those who know nothing about it. Also, be sure that you fully understand the issues surrounding the
       ordinance and how it might have different effects on different groups of people so that what you assert is
       accurate. Next, again consider the culture of your audience members and what they may or may not know
       about your topic. For example, they may not know the reason for the proposed ordinance, what might happen
       if it is passed or not passed, or how it might affect them personally or culturally. If they are not as informed as
       you are, then include the background information they need to know about it in order for your reasoning
       strategy and overall argument to be effective.

       FIGURE 11.5 Considering the needs and expectations of an audience is key to effective writing. In college, an
       audience often may consist of your instructor and classmates, but in other situations it may consist of people of
       more varying ages and backgrounds, like this audience at a town hall meeting. (credit: "Youth and Tobacco Town
       Hall Meeting" by The U.S. Food and Drug Administration/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
       Depending on your audience, you may want to include an analogy to help readers understand connections and
       particular points in certain ways. An analogy is also useful if the subject is complex. You can make a complex
       subject more accessible for your audience by comparing it to something familiar.

      Recognizing Points

       Every point you make in a paper should be meaningful and should relate to the paper's thesis, its overarching
       claim or angle. How you make each point is determined by your reason for making that point. In most
       academic writing, you will use structures that present a thesis at the beginning of the essay. Readers should
       recognize your thesis because of

         · its prominent placement in the essay;
         · the language you use leading up to it; and

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                   11.3 · Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 349

  · the language you use following it.

For example, if your thesis is that the first two years of college should be tuition free for students (that is,
tuition should be subsidized by the state), then you might begin your essay with an attention-getting fact
stating that the current national student debt is over $1.7 trillion. After that, you might share evidence about
the number of students who do not finish a bachelor's degree but have accrued student loan debt. Finally, you
might preview your reasons for the position advocating for free tuition for the first two years of college.

Readers will recognize your supporting points as stated in your paragraph-level topic sentences because of
how you discuss them in relation to your thesis. In all of your academic writing, choose language and
reasoning strategies that guide readers back to your thesis.

When you present facts, whether in your thesis or in your evidence, remember to cite them properly according
to the format your instructor requires. For more about proper citations, see MLA Documentation and Format
and APA Documentation and Format.

Structuring Your Reasoning Strategies

To present your reasoning, which is the main part of your essay, try these suggestions for using the six
strategies:

Analogy paragraphs often begin with a statement of comparison between two unlike subjects, followed by
reasons, explanations, or analyses of their similarities.

  · Example topic 1: compare enrolling as a first-year student to visiting an amusement park for the first time

      Example sentence: Enrolling as a first-year student is like visiting an amusement park for the first time in
      this way: the inexperienced students and park goers must pay a high fee, abide by strict rules, and choose
      how they spend their adventure.

  · Example topic 2: compare increasing the federal deficit to eating salted peanuts

      Example sentence: Increasing the federal deficit is like eating salted peanuts: the higher the increase, the
      more will be demanded. When you eat salted peanuts, the more you eat, the more you want.

Paragraphs explaining cause-and-effect often begin in one of these two ways: (1) an explanation of the
cause(s), followed by an explanation of the effect(s) that happened as a result of the cause(s); or (2) an
explanation of the effect(s), followed by an explanation of the cause(s) that led to the effect(s).

  · Example topic 1: how an oil spill affected animals, waterways, and environmental costs

      Example sentence: Because an oil spill occurred off the coast of California, the fur and feathers of animals
      became dangerously matted, waterways were damaged, and the cost of maintaining a clean environment
      skyrocketed.

  · Example topic 2: how the pandemic affected the population

      Example sentence: Because of the pandemic, gas consumption dropped, indoor dining at restaurants
      declined, and online shopping rose.

  · Example topic 3: how animals, waterways, and environmental costs were affected by an oil spill

      Example sentence: The fur and feathers of animals became dangerously matted, waterways were
      damaged, and the cost of maintaining a clean environment skyrocketed as the result of an oil spill off the
      coast of California.

  · Example topic 4: how the pandemic affected the population

      Example sentence: Gas consumption dropped, indoor dining at restaurants declined, and online
      shopping rose because of the pandemic.
350 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

       Classification-and-division paragraphs often begin in either of two ways: (1) Classification paragraphs
       identify individual items and place them in a larger group; and (2) Division paragraphs break a large group or a
       single unit into smaller parts.

         · Example classification topic: essential workers during the pandemic included employees in several fields
             Example sentence: During the pandemic, essential workers not under quarantine included employees in
             the fields of health care, childcare, transportation, water and wastewater, and agriculture and food
             production.

         · Example division topic: how the new superstore will be divided
             Example sentence: The layout for the new superstore will be divided into furniture (third floor),
             household goods and kitchenware (second floor), and men's, women's, and children's clothing (first floor).

       When using compare and contrast reasoning, you have choices about the structure to use. Comparison-and-
       contrast paragraphs identify two subjects and address their similarities and then their differences; or
       comparison-and-contrast paragraphs identify two subjects and address their similarities and then their
       differences.

         · Example topic 1: reality television and scripted television
             Example sentence: Reality television and scripted television are alike in that both should make money for
             the network that airs them; however, they differ in the predictability of what the characters do in their
             roles.

         · Example topic 2: printed book and audio book
             Example sentence: A printed book and an audio book are alike in that both present the material the
             author wrote; one way they differ is that listeners--as opposed to readers--cannot make notes on text in a
             printed book.

         · Example topic 3: reality television and scripted television
             Example sentence: Reality television and scripted television differ in the predictability of what the
             characters do in their roles, but they are alike in that they both should make money for the network that
             airs them.

         · Example topic 4: printed book and audio book
             Example sentence: One way a printed book and an audio book differ is that listeners--as opposed to
             readers--cannot make notes on material in the printed book; however, both present the material the
             author wrote.

       You can develop a problem-and-solution paragraph in one of two ways: (1) identify the problem, and then
       explain a way to solve it; or (2) explain the solution to a problem, and then identify the problem(s) that
       necessitated it.

         · Example topic 1: student loans
             Example sentence: The issue of defaulting on repayment of student loans would be solved by increasing
             the time the students are given to repay the loans.

         · Example topic 2: campus parking
             Example sentence: The issue of the increased need for parking on campus would be solved by paving the
             area on the corner of Twelfth and Locust Streets to allow parking on that lot.

         · Example topic 3: student loans

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                   11.3 · Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 351

      Example sentence: By increasing the time in which student loans must be repaid, the issue of defaulting
      on repayment of student loans would be solved, and students could have more ease of mind to pursue
      their careers.

  · Example topic 4: campus parking

      Example sentence By paving the area on the corner of Twelfth and Locust Streets to allow parking on that
      lot, the issue of the increased need for parking on campus would be solved, an eyesore would be
      beautified, and more students and faculty would get to class on time.

Definition paragraphs often begin by noting the dictionary definition (denotation) of the topic and then
illustrating and explaining its unique or extended meaning.

  · Example topic 1: patriotism

      Example sentence: Most people think patriotism is showing devotion to their country; to me, however, it is
      conducting myself in ways that are respectful to everyone.

  · Example topic 2: independence

      Example sentence: Independence means freedom from outside control, but college students often find it
      brings personal responsibility they had not considered.

Integrating Evidence from Appropriate Sources

Most academic writing is built on the writer's own ideas as supported by the ideas of others. Regardless of the
reasoning strategies you use in an essay, you will usually need to integrate others' ideas to

  · help you explore a topic;
  · define, illustrate, explain, or prove an idea;
  · help readers think critically about an idea; and
  · give strength or credibility to your ideas.

These ideas from others could come from a variety of sources such as print or electronic media or in-person
conversations. Similarly, these sources could be either personal (e.g., a conversation you had with someone or
an email you received) or public (e.g., available online or in a printed publication). You can read more about
finding and using credible sources in Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and Annotated
Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources.

These models show how writers integrate ideas from appropriate sources into their reasoning strategies.

Analogy

Enrolling as a first-year student is like going to an amusement park for the first time: the inexperienced
students or park goers must pay a high fee, abide by many rules, and choose their adventures. Like the cost for
riding roller coasters, the cost for taking college classes is great and must be paid before the students start
their journey. However, even after paying tuition, students do not have immediate access to whatever class
they want to take, just as the park visitor cannot jump on any ride at any time. In the park, certain rides have
warnings, such as "You must be at least 60 inches tall to go on this ride." In college, many classes have
prerequisites or require students to have earned a minimum placement score. Also, even though park goers
have paid their entrance fees and received armbands that allow them to go anywhere in the park, they are not
guaranteed a place on that one awesome ride they have heard so much about. They may have to choose
between waiting in a line for hours or doing something else and trying to catch that ride another time.
Similarly, college classes have a limited number of seats. Like the roller coaster that everyone wants to ride,
college classes close, and students must make another choice. So, while students may not be able to pick up
352 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

       that class that semester, they can try again the next term. Like those starting an adventure at an amusement
       park, those starting the college journey should have a plan of how they want to fill their time and have a backup
       plan should they be unable to get every class they want, according to Max Vega, a first-year adviser. Similarly,
       park goers should use a map to plan their adventure.
       Cause and Effect
       Because an oil spill occurred off the coast of California, the fur and feathers of many animals became
       dangerously matted, waterways were damaged, and the cost of maintaining a clean environment skyrocketed.
       In May 2015, a ruptured pipeline in Santa Barbara County spilled oil along 20 miles of coastline. According to
       information published by the University of California-Davis, wildlife rescuers were able to save 49 coastal
       birds, 25 sea lions, and 6 elephant seals (Kerlin, "Wildlife Experience High Price of Oil"). Helping ecosystems
       recover from oil spills is difficult and can take decades and billions of dollars to recover even partially.
       Classification and Division
       The layout for the new superstore can be divided into furniture (third floor), household goods and kitchenware
       (second floor), and men's, women's, and children's clothing (first floor). This arrangement allows customers to
       feel they have control over their shopping experience. Customers shopping for clothes are not distracted by
       household goods or furniture displays. "By categorizing our merchandise in this manner, we can further
       subdivide the merchandise on each floor, developing a logical system of separation that repeat customers will
       learn easily," said Carla Dawkins, general manager for Hometown Corner Store, in a Curtisville News report
       (Thurston 2). These subdivisions, Thurston stated, would allow individual floor managers to design the
       footprint of their floors to create an originality distinct and separate from the other floors (8).
       Comparison and Contrast
       One way Romeo and Juliet and Macbeth are alike is that both are tragedies written by William Shakespeare;
       one way they differ is that they explore different themes. In Romeo and Juliet, almost all action centers on the
       theme of love, whether it is the innocent love between two young people or the protective love of parents for
       their children. In Macbeth, however, the action centers on ambition. The characters act on their ambitions for
       themselves and for their country, but excessive ambition is condemned and severely punished (Royal
       Shakespeare Company, "Macbeth Analysis").
       Problem and Solution
       The issue of the increased need for parking on campus would be solved by paving the area on the corner of
       Twelfth and Locust Streets to allow parking on that lot. According to an email sent to all students from the
       provost, Dr. Sandra Kuryakin, the college purchased the corner lot two years ago with the intent of creating
       more parking spaces. In the email, Dr. Kuryakin adds, "We will break ground in June and plan to have the lot
       finished before students are back on campus in August, thus solving our parking problem on the west end of
       campus."

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                 11.3 · Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 353

FIGURE 11.6 Empty lot to be converted to parking spaces (credit: "Columbus-Whittier Peninsula - Northern Tier
(BRLF)" by Ohio Redevelopment Projects--ODSA/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Definition

Most people think patriotism means showing devotion to their country; to me, however, it is conducting myself
in ways that are respectful to everyone. Too often, people proclaim themselves as patriots when they are
actively seeking to withhold liberties from their fellow citizens or even harm them. When those claiming to be
patriots condemn and physically harm others because they do not agree on political issues, they are not
showing any reverence for their country. Instead, they dishonor their country by dishonoring its people.
Respecting America should mean more than saluting the flag or singing the national anthem. It should mean
respecting others' rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. In light of all this, for me, patriotism
means respecting others not only because they are fellow Americans but because they are fellow human
beings.

Signal Words and Phrases

Writers use signal words and phrases to steer readers in certain directions. You might use signal words and
phrases to give readers clues about

  · how one idea connects with another;
  · how one paragraph connects with another;
  · how one idea supports or refutes another;
  · what is to come;
  · points you want to emphasize;
  · illustrations of your topic; or
  · similarities or differences you want to emphasize.

Common signal words and phrases for reasoning strategies include these:

Analogy

accordingly        for instance  in relation to
as has been shown  given that    in the same way (that)

TABLE 11.1
354 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

                  as noted                                  granted that            in this way

                  as previously discussed having established that ironically

                  as previously mentioned in addition                               paradoxically

                  as . . . so                               in contrast             similarly

                  by extension                              in fact                 specifically

                  compared with                             in parallel             the aforementioned

                  for example                               in particular           thus

                  TABLE 11.1

Cause-and-effect

                                  because (of)                       in order to since

                                  begins with                        in that  the reason is

                                  for                                is caused by this led to

                                  for this reason                    leads (led) to for this reason

                                  if this (that) happens reason

                                  TABLE 11.2

Effect

                                       as a consequence for this reason outcome

                                       as a result (of)              hence          result

                                       as expected                   it follows that so (that)

                                       because (of)                  namely         therefore

                                       consequently                  on account of thus

                                  TABLE 11.3

Classification

                                       aspects                       feature(s) part(s)

                                       characteristics field                  rank

                                       classes                       form(s) second

                                       TABLE 11.4

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                       11.3 · Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 355

                             classify           genre(s) set(s)
                             comprises
                             consists of        group(s) several
                             dimension(s)
                             element(s)         kinds  sort(s)
                             various
                                                methods stage(s) of

                                                numbers types

                                                ways

                             TABLE 11.4

Division

                      another              is composed of style(s)

                      category(-ies) kind(s)           type(s)

                      contain(s)           one         variety(-ies)

                      first                other

                      include(s)           sort(s)

                      TABLE 11.5

Compare and contrast

                      alike                compared with same (as)

                      along the same lines in comparison share

                      as well as           in like manner similar(ly)

                      both                 in the same way similar (to)

                      each                 is comparable to the same as

                      equal(ly)            just as             too

                      in common            likewise

                      TABLE 11.6

Contrast

                       although   but                  difference
                       and yet    by (in) contrast     different (from)
                      TABLE 11.7
356 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

                                  as opposed to compared with either/or

                                  better                    conversely     even though

                                  however                   on the contrary yet

                                  instead (of)              on the other hand so (that)

                                  more/less than unequal                   therefore

                                  neither/nor               vary

                                  nevertheless whereas

                                  TABLE 11.7

Problem                           catch                     factors (include) puzzle
Solution
                                  challenge hitch                          quandary

                                  conundrum issue                          riddle

                                  crisis                    obstruction    situation

                                  difficulty pose                          snag

                                  dilemma predicament                      the question is

                                  enigma                    problem(atic)

                                  TABLE 11.8

                                   a (one) solution         cure                   one answer is
                                   address
                                   alleviate                deal with              option
                                   ameliorate
                                   amend                    ease                   possibility
                                   answer
                                   correct                  explain/explanation probability
                                   reason
                                   remedy                   fix                    propose
                                  TABLE 11.9
                                                            improve                proposition

                                                            lighten                prospect

                                                            solution               treat(ment)

                                                            solve                  way out

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                  11.3 · Glance at Genre: Reasoning Strategies and Signal Words 357

                   resolution (resolve) take care of
                  TABLE 11.9

Definition

            according to (source) for this reason (purpose) not only . . . but also

            also                  further(more)       on the contrary

            as a result           however             on the other hand

            at the same           in addition to      otherwise

            because               in brief            rather

            besides               in conclusion       similarly

            but                   in fact             since

            consequently          in other words      so

            conversely            in particular       such as

            equally important     likewise            then

            finally               namelyx             therefore

            first (second, etc.)  nevertheless        to illustrate

            for example (instance) next

            TABLE 11.10

Frequently Used Reasoning Strategies Terms

  · Audience: the people who will read your paper.
  · Description: writing in which the author attempts to depict certain characteristics of a person, place, or

      object. Writers describe their subjects by carefully noting details and sensory impressions, such as what
      the subject looks, sounds, smells, tastes, or feels like.
  · Metaphors: comparison of two unlike elements. For example, the arguing protestors were volcanic,
      spewing hot, inflammatory speech.
  · Narration: telling a story or relating events.
  · Point: an important idea to share with the audience.
  · Purpose: reason for writing.
  · Sequencing: relating information in the order in which something happened or in which steps should be
      followed.
  · Similes: comparison of two unlike elements. The word as or like appears in a simile. For example, the
      protestors' arguments were as heated as an erupting volcano.
  · Thesis: the overarching and unifying idea of a piece of writing.
358 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

     11.4 Annotated Sample Reading: from Book VII of The Republic by Plato

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify reasoning strategies and explain their function in a written text.
         · Explain how reasoning strategies are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
         · Read and respond critically to a text.

      Introduction

       FIGURE 11.7 Bust of Plato (credit: "Plato Pio-Clemetino" by Marie-Lan Nguyen (2006)/Vatican Museums/
       Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
       The following excerpt is an example of classical rhetoric. It comes from Book VII of The Republic
       (https://openstax.org/r/therepublic) by Plato (c. 424 BCE-c. 347 BCE), written in the latter part of the fourth
       century BCE.
       In this section, Socrates, Plato's teacher, and Glaucon, Plato's older brother, discuss the relationship between
       education and the human soul. Socrates argues that education is what moves the philosopher's soul toward its
       destination of enlightenment, or what he calls "the Form of Good."
       Socrates explains this relationship through a famous allegory, "The Allegory of the Cave." An allegory is a
       written or pictorial work that can be interpreted to reveal a hidden meaning, typically a moral, religious, or
       political one. A literary allegory is a fictional narrative in which characters and actions are symbols of truth or
       ideas about life. While an allegory is a concrete representation of abstract ideas--a comparison between the
       real and the abstract--an analogy creates a comparative relationship between two conditions, people, or items.
       Socrates's literary allegory concerns characters he refers to as prisoners who were born into captivity in an
       underground cave and who have never seen daylight. He asks his student Glaucon to assume that one of the
       underground prisoners escapes and then asks Glaucon to consider how the other prisoners would react if the
       escaped prisoner returned and explained to them that what they had believed to be real is, in fact, false. The
       allegory and questions Socrates poses illustrate that everyone is capable of knowing the truth; however, when

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                         11.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Book VII of The Republic by Plato 359

                 someone has known a skewed reality for so long, learning the truth can be as blinding and difficult to fathom
                 as seeing the sun for the first time.
                 To contemporary readers, this tale may seem archaic. Consider, however, a modern-day scenario that mirrors
                 many of the same elements. Suppose a child is born into a commune run by a group of racial supremacists and
public domainratised into adulthood by those people. The child is taught only doctrines the adults support and is allowed to
                 view only particular Internet sites and television shows that reinforce the group's racist views. Like the
                 prisoners in the cave, the child has been kept from the realities of the outside world. The prisoners in the cave
                 know about the outside world only through shadows. Similarly, the child knows about the outside world only
                 through stories told by the adults. In "The Allegory of the Cave," one of the prisoners leaves the cave,
                 experiences the outside world, and returns with truths discovered during the time away. This experience
                 would be analogous to the now-grown child fromethned cpoumblmic udnome easincatping, living in the real world, learning that
                 the "truths" they had been taught were, in fact, falsehoods, and then returning to the commune to let others
                 know about the discoveries.

                 FIGURE 11.8 This illustration of Plato's "Allegory of the Cave" shows the prisoner chained to the wall and looking at
                 the shadow of a manipulated image projected in front of him. The prisoner is unaware of anything about the outside
                 world other than the shadow he sees on the wall. (credit: "Platos-Allegory-of-the-Cave-Featured-Image" by Carter
                 Watkins/flickr, CC BY 2.0

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS
              Thinking Through Allegory

                        (Socrates) And now, I said, let me show in a figure how far our nature is enlightened or
                        unenlightened:--Behold! human beings living in an underground den, which has a mouth open towards the light
                        and reaching all along the den; here they have been from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained
                        so that they cannot move, and can only see before them, being prevented by the chains from turning round
                        their heads. Above and behind them a fire is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the prisoners there
                        is a raised way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette
                        players have in front of them, over which they show the puppets.
                 Nananroratatiton. This narration relates the dialogue between Socrates and Glaucon.end annotat
                 Danensoctraipt tion. Throughout the excerpt, Socrates uses description to paint a picture of the changing life of humans
                 moving from living underground in darkness to living above ground in light.end annotat
                 Panronbolteamt and Solution. Plato uses the problem-and-solution reasoning strategy to offer a way to solve people's
                 ignorance. The problem is how to get people who are uneducated (living in darkness) to know the truth (see the
                 light) and accept it. The solution is to rise from the cave (use effort) and face the harsh light (attain knowledge)
360 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

about truth (the idea of good).end annotat

Sanimnoiltea.tHere Socrates, the speaker, uses a simile to compare a low wall to a screen that is in front of marionette  end annotat
players.

public domainPanltonetonStdautepmnumdbenlpaiecdurnydbp.doluiScmpbouldacibcorinlamdiecttoenadmsidnosapmthiunaabrtilneicst dwoitmhaGinlatucon an allegory that cenetenrds pounbaligcrdooumpeaonifdnppteuobpllieecndwdohpmouawbinleicrtedboomraneinnindttopublic domain t
                 captivity in a deep ecnavdepaunbdlichadvoemnaeeinvedtrpsuebelnicddaoymligahint.tInstead, they are chained in a position so thatetnhdepyucbalniclodookmain t
                 only straightenadhepaudbalitcsdhoamdoawinstthat appear on a wall in front of them. Behind them is another wall with puppetlike
                 images of people, animals, and trees; behind this wall is a fire. Another group of people manipulate the images, and

                 the fire causes the images' shadows to project onto the large wall in front of the prisoners. The stories acted out by

                 these shadows are all that the prisoners ever see of the outside world.end annotat

(Glaucon) I see.

(Socrates) And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying all sorts of vessels, and statues and
figures of animals made of wood and stone and various materials, which appear over the wall? Some of them
are talking, others silent.

(Glaucon) You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange prisoners.

(Socrates) Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows, or the shadows of one another, which
the fire throws on the opposite wall of the cave?

Canonmoptaatrison and Contrast. Socrates compares Glaucon and himself to the prisoners in that they too can know only
that which they see or experience; thus, they are similar to the prisoners in how they achieve knowledge.end annotat

(Glaucon) True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows if they were never allowed to move their
heads?

(Socrates) And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would only see the shadows?

(Glaucon) Yes, he said.

(Socrates) And if they were able to converse with one another, would they not suppose that they were naming
what was actually before them?

(Glaucon) Very true.

(Socrates) And suppose further that the prison had an echo which came from the other side, would they not be
sure to fancy when one of the passers-by spoke that the voice which they heard came from the passing
shadow?

(Glaucon) No question, he replied.

(Socrates) To them, I said, the truth would be literally nothing but the shadows of the images.

(Glaucon) That is certain.

PanlontoStautmmary. Glaucon agrees with Socrates that the prisoners would think the shadows on the wall represented
real life and that the statues and figures of animals made of wood and stone are real.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                         11.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: from Book VII of The Republic by Plato 361

                        (Socrates) And now look again, and see what will naturally follow if the prisoners are released and disabused of
                        their error. At first, when any of them is liberated and compelled suddenly to stand up and turn his neck round
                        and walk and look towards the light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him, and he will be unable
                        to see the realities of which in his former state he had seen the shadows; and then conceive someone saying to
public domain t himeenn,ddtheppanuutdbbwllpiichcuadbdtoloihmcmedaasoiiannmwtetanbindeftpoureblwicadsoamn aililnustion, but that now, when he is approaching nearer to being and his eye
                        is turned towards more real existence, he has a clearer vision,--whaetnwdilpl ubbelhicisdroempalyi?n At nd you may further
                        imagine that his instructor is pointing to the objeecntds apsubthliecydpoamsasianntd requiring him to name them,--will he not
                    endbepupbelripcledxoemda?inWtill he not fancy that tehnedsphuabdloicwdsowmhaicinh the formerly saw are truer than the objects which are
                        now shown to him?

                 Cananuosteatand Effect. Here Plato uses the cause-and-effect reasoning strategy. The causes of the prisoners' ignorance
                 are the restrictions placed on them in the cave. The effect of the restrictions is the prisoners' ignorance of reality, or
                 lack of knowledge.end annotat

                          end public domain t
                        (Glaucon) Far truer.

                        (Socrates) And if he is compelled to look straight at the light, will he not have a pain in his eyes which will make
                        him turn away to take refuge in the objects of vision which he can see, and which he will conceive to be in
                        reality clearer than the things which are now being shown to him?

                 Cananuosteatand Effect. Here Plato uses the cause-and-effect reasoning strategy. The effect of the prisoner looking
                 directly at the light will be pain. The effect of the pain will be the prisoner's turning away from the light.end annotat

                        (Glaucon) True, he said.

                 PanlontoStautmmary. Glaucon agrees that a prisoner would suffer if he were suddenly released from the chains that held
                 him and were then shown the reality of how the shadows were made. He would suffer physical pain from being held
                 stiffly and then suddenly allowed to move and would experience eyestrain from being exposed to real sunlight for
                 the first time. He would suffer mental anguish and confusion as he struggled to accept that what he had seen
                 previously was not real, so he would turn his vision to look at the things he believed to be real.end annotat

                        (Socrates) And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep and rugged ascent, and held fast
                        until he is forced into the presence of the sun himself, is he not likely to be pained and irritated? When he
                        approaches the light, his eyes will be dazzled, and he will not be able to see anything at all of what are now
                        called realities.

                        (Glaucon) Not all in a moment, he said.

                        (Socrates) He will require to grow accustomed to the sight of the upper world. And first he will see the shadows
                        best, next the reflections of men and other objects in the water, and then the objects themselves; then he will
                        gaze upon the light of the moon and the stars and the spangled heaven; and he will see the sky and the stars by
                        night better than the sun or the light of the sun by day?

                        (Glaucon) Certainly.

                        (Socrates) Last of all he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflections of him in the water, but he will see
                        him in his own proper place, and not in another; and he will contemplate him as he is.

                        (Glaucon) Certainly.

                 PanlontoStautmmary. Socrates then poses that the prisoner be dragged up a hill so high that he is near the sun. The bright
                 sunlight would prevent him from seeing anything, including what he thought was real. In getting accustomed to the
                 brightness of the light, the prisoner would first see the shadows, then reflections in the water, then actual objects,
                 and finally the moon and other celestial beings. Socrates ends by stating that only after the prisoner takes these
                 steps to accepting his new reality can he understand his place in this new world.end annotat
362 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

                 (Socrates) He will then proceed to argue that this is he who gives the season and the years, and is the guardian
                 of all that is in the visible world, and in a certain way the cause of all things which he and his fellows have been
                 accustomed to behold?

                 (Glaucon) Clearly, he said, he would first see the sun and then reason about him.

public domain t      eennednddppupubublbliicclidcdodommomaaiinanintt t                                end public domain t

                 (Socrates) And    when he remembered                   his  old    habitation, and the wisdom of the den        and  his  fellow-prisoners,
                       end public  domain t                                             end public domeanind tpublic domain t

                 do  you not suppose that  the  would                   felicitate  himself  on  the  change,  and  pity  them?
                        end public domain

                 (Glaucon) Certainly, he would.
                                                                                                                                                            end public domain t

                 (Socrates) And if they were in the habit of conferring honors among themselves on those who were quickest to
                                                                      end public domain t

                 observe the passing shadows and to remark which of them went before, and which followed after, and which
                 were together; and who were therefore best able to draw conclusions as to the future, do you think that he

                                                                                                                                                    end public domain t
                 would care for such honors and glories, or envy the possessors of them? Would he not say with Homer, "Better
                 to be the poor servant of a poor master," and to endure anything, rather than think as they do and live after their
                 manner?

                 (Glaucon) Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything than entertain these false notions and live in
                 this miserable manner.

PanlontoStautmmary. Through a series of questions, Socrates asks if the prisoner would claim that the sun is what makes
all things possible and if he would remember his life in the cave and feel sorry for the other prisoners who do not
have this knowledge that he has. Socrates then quotes the Greek poet Homer, saying that the prisoner would think it
is better to be poor and have knowledge than to be rich and know nothing. Glaucon agrees with what Socrates poses
in all his questions.end annotat

                 (Socrates) Imagine once more, I said, such an one coming suddenly out of the sun to be replaced in his old
                 situation; would he not be certain to have his eyes full of darkness?

                 (Glaucon) To be sure, he said.

                 (Socrates) And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in measuring the shadows with the prisoners
                 who had never moved out of the den, while his sight was still weak, and before his eyes had become steady
                 (and the time which would be needed to acquire this new habit of sight might be very considerable), would he
                 not be ridiculous? Men would say of him that up he went and down he came without his eyes; and that it was
                 better not even to think of ascending; and if any one tried to loose another and lead him up to the light, let them
                 only catch the offender, and they would put him to death.

                 (Glaucon) No question, he said.

                 (Socrates) This entire allegory, I said, you may now append, dear Glaucon, to the previous argument; the
                 prison-house is the world of sight, the light of the fire is the sun, and you will not misapprehend me if you
                 interpret the journey upwards to be the ascent of the soul into the intellectual world according to my poor
                 belief, which, at your desire, I have expressed--whether rightly or wrongly God knows. But, whether true or
                 false, my opinion is that in the world of knowledge the idea of good appears last of all, and is seen only with an
                 effort; and, when seen, is also inferred to be the universal author of all things beautiful and right, parent of light
                 and of the lord of light in this visible world, and the immediate source of reason and truth in the intellectual; and
                 that this is the power upon which he who would act rationally either in public or private life must have his eye
                 fixed.

Manentoatpahtor. In two metaphors, Socrates says (1) the prison-house is the world of sight and (2) the light of the fire is
the sun.end annotat

Aannnaolotagty. Plato compares the prisoners' climb from the cave into the light of day to people learning reality.end annotat

PanlontoStautmmary. In the end of this excerpt, Socrates tells Glaucon to consider the prisoner being returned to the dark

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                           11.5 · Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 363

cave. He asks Glaucon if the prisoner, after his eyes had previously adjusted to the light of day, would be scorned by
the other prisoners for being unable to see underground now. Socrates then suggests that in the allegory, light
represents knowledge and the journey from below ground to above ground represents the intellectual growth of the
individual. Those who have little knowledge--dim light from a fire that can only cast shadows--know little of the real
world and of truth. Thus, he suggests that the prisoners' fear of the knowledge (of that which they do not
comprehend rightly) is so profound that they would kill anyone who attempted to drag them out of the cave.end annotat

Discussion Questions

1. What purpose might Plato have had for using an allegory to impart his message?

2. In his allegory, Plato compares the prisoners' climb from the cave into the light of day to people learning
    what reality is. Explain the allegory and how the prisoners' emerging from the cave is similar to learning
    that what they thought previously was not real.

3. In this excerpt, written around 375 BCE, Plato begins a discussion about what education ought to do. In the
    21st century CE, what do you think education ought to do?

4. In the last paragraph, Plato says that "in the world of knowledge the idea of good appears last of all." Think
    critically think about whether you agree with that statement. Then explain your stance.

11.5 Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Use organizational and reasoning strategies to compose texts that integrate the writer's ideas with those from
      appropriate sources.

  · Implement varying language structures in the process of composing.
  · Develop flexible strategies for drafting and revising.

In this section you will practice writing paragraphs that demonstrate your ability to use the reasoning
strategies discussed.

Summary of Assignment

Using three of the strategies for reasoning (analogy, cause and effect, classification and division, comparison
and contrast, definition, or problem and solution), write at least three body paragraphs for your Position
Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric assignment. Write at least one single paragraph for each strategy you
choose. You may write additional paragraphs in which you combine strategies.

Another Lens. Make a visual draft of your assignment by using photos you take, images you find online (be
sure to adhere to copyright guidelines), images you create, or a combination of these. Your instructor will tell
you whether to substitute visuals for all three paragraphs or just one or two. Put the title at the top of your
poster and, if necessary, include explanations of your images. The images you use and the manner in which
you arrange them should convey the same ideas you want to express about your subject in writing. The
selected images should reflect your critical thinking on your subject and should invite the viewer also to think
critically about your subject. You can read more about understanding various aspects of visual rhetoric in
Image Analysis: Writing About What You See. Although the design arrangements, or layouts, for a poster are
numerous, consider using one of these:

  · Centered image--nucleus idea: The primary image is in the center of the poster. Other secondary images
      radiate outward from the primary image or are arranged around it another meaningful way.

  · Left-to-right flow--horizontal: Images progress across the poster like lines of text, from left to right.
  · Left-to-right flow--vertical: Images progress across the poster like lines of text in a column. Depending on

      the size of your poster, you could include from three to five columns of images.
364 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

         · Two contrasting fields: Images are divided into two sections of the poster, some on the left and some on
             the right.

       FIGURE 11.9 This cause-and-effect poster with two contrasting fields indicates the possible result of working
       without eye protection in a lab. (credit: "A flask exploding, a left eye open without protection" by Science Museum
       Group/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0)

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                           11.5 · Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 365

FIGURE 11.10 In this centered-image poster illustrating the strategy of definition, the sentence indicates a
requirement of communication, and the images indicate ways ii,koln which people communicate. (credit:
"Communication affirmation poster, USAF" by Dave Ahlschwede/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      Quick Launch: Structural Paragraph Frames

Once you have determined your reasoning strategy and purpose for a particular paragraph, consider how to
develop the evidence within that paragraph through a topic sentence, explanation, and analysis. To do this
task, choose the most appropriate structure for a given paragraph from the structures below, and complete the
frame according to the prompts. You may alter the frames as needed. Remember that each paragraph that you
develop should support your thesis. In other words, make sure that each topic sentence ties back to your
thesis.
First, record your working thesis: ________

                 Analogy
                   · Working topic sentence ______________ is like _________________ in many ways.

                 Structure
                   · explanation:
                   · analysis:

                TABLE 11.11
366 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

         Cause-and-Effect
           · Working topic sentence for Structure #1
               Because (cause/s) ____________ (what had happened), (effect/s) ____________ (what happened as a
               result).
               Structure #1 for cause-and-effect paragraph
               cause(s):
               effect(s):
           · Working topic sentence for Structure #2
               (effect/s) _______________ (what happened as a result) because (cause/s)____________ (what had
               happened).
               Structure #2 for cause-and-effect paragraph
               cause(s):
               effect(s):

       TABLE 11.12

         Classification and Division
           · Working topic sentence for Structure #1 (general subject) _____________ can be divided into (smaller
               categories) ______________, _______________, and _____________.
               Structure #1 for classification-and-division paragraphs: division
               larger subject:
               first category:
               second category:
               third category:
           · Working topic sentence for Structure #2
               (smaller category) _______________, ______________, and _____________ are (types) of (larger subject)
               ___________.
               Structure #2 for classification-and-division paragraph: classification
               smaller category:
               smaller category:
               smaller category:
               larger subject:

       TABLE 11.13

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                           11.5 · Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 367

 Comparison and Contrast
   · Working topic sentence for Structure #1
       One way in which (subject 1)__________ and (subject 2)__________ are alike is (similarity) ________; one
       way in which they differ is (difference) ________.
       Structure #1 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph
       Subject 1:
       Subject 2:
       Similarity(-ies) of subject 1 and subject 2:
       Difference(s) of subject 1 and subject 2:
   · Working topic sentence for Structure #2
       One way in which (subject 1) _________ and (subject 2) _________ are different is (difference)________;
       one way in which they are similar is (similarity)________.
       Structure #2 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph
       Subject 1:
       Subject 2:
       Difference(s) of subject 1 and subject 2:
       Similarity(-ies) of subject 1 and subject 2:

TABLE 11.14

 Problem-and-Solution
   · Working topic sentence for Structure #1
       The issue of (predicament or challenge) _____________________ was/can be solved by (what was/should
       be done)______________________.
       Structure #1 for problem-and-solution paragraph
       problem(s):
       solution:
   · Working topic sentence for Structure #2
       By (what was/should be done) ______________________, the issue of (predicament/challenge)
       __________________ was/could be solved.
       Structure #2 for problem-and-solution paragraph
       solution:
       problem(s):

TABLE 11.15
368 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

         Definition
           · Working topic sentence Most people think ______________ means ______________; to me, however,
               _____________ means ____________________.
               Structure
               Common definition or denotation:
               Expanded definition from writer:

       TABLE 11.16

           Drafting: Reasoning Strategies

       As you write, keep in mind the reasoning strategy you are using. Then begin your draft by using the applicable
       frame for the paragraph. Beginning in this way will help you focus the details of the paragraph to ensure they
       support the thesis and provide the reasoning you need. Note that when you revise, you may choose to reword
       your frame and the sentences that develop it. Revisions like these are part of the recursive nature of the
       writing process.
       Below are frames for types of writing, sample sentences of filled-in frames, patterns for the six reasoning
       strategies, and sample paragraphs. In the sample paragraphs, topic sentences are underlined, and transitional
       words and phrases are italicized.
       Analogy

         · Frame for analogy topic sentence: (subject 1) _______________ is like (subject 2) _______________ in
             this way: (way in which they are similar)_____________________.
             Luenadrenrilningea foreign languageeins dlikuenludeneardrlneinrinleigneto ride a bicycleeindthuinsdwearyli:nyueonudemrluinstelearn to perform
             multiple tasks, some at the same time.end underline

         · Structure for analogy paragraph comparing learning a foreign language and learning to ride a
             bicycle:
             comparison: learning a foreign language compared to learning to ride a bicycle
             reason/explanation/analysis: must learn the basic parts
             reason/explanation/analysis: must learn how parts work together
             reason/explanation/analysis: must learn multiple actions without thinking about them

       Model analogy paragraph
       Luenadrenrilningea foreign language is like learning to ride a bicycle: you must learn to perform multiple tasks, some at
       the same time.eYnoduufinrdstehrlainve to develop a foundational knowledge by learning how the individual parts of the
       bike work and how to use them, just as you learn the parts of speech of a language. Then you must learn how
       these parts work together. For example, through the action of pedaling the bike, you transfer energy to the
       wheels, causing them to rotate, thus moving the bike forward. Similarly, by learning how to use verbs in
       another language, you learn how to apply meaning that expresses an action or state of being. To steer the
       direction of the bike, you learn to change its path by turning the handlebars. To change the direction of a
       sentence, you learn how to control prepositions and modifiers. Most important, though, you must get to the
       point at which the actions of pedaling, steering, and balancing happen simultaneously and with little thought
       to the individual actions, just as you must do when speaking a foreign language.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                           11.5 · Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 369

Cause and Effect

  · Frame for cause-and-effect topic sentence (Structure #1):
      Because (cause/s) _______________ (what had happened), then (effect/s) ____________ (what happened).
      Because vuenhdiecrlelisnseped without regard to the speed limit, pedestrians dodged traffic and accidents
      increased;efnodr uthnodseerlrienaesons, auntrdaefrfilcinseignal was installed.end underline

  · Structure #1 for cause-and effect paragraph about reasons for installing a traffic signal:
      explanation of the cause(s), followed by an explanation of the effect(s) that happened as a result of the
      cause(s)
      cause: vehicles sped without regard to the speed limit
      cause: pedestrians had to dodge traffic
      cause: number of accidents increased
      effect: traffic signal was installed

Model cause-and-effect paragraph about reasons for installing a traffic signal (Structure #1)
Munadneyrvlienheicles raced through the intersection of Clay Street and Eagle Avenue without regard to the posted
speed limit.ePneddeusntdriearnlisn,emany of whom were students, crossed the intersection to get to and from campus, but
they had to dodge in and out of constant traffic. The number of accidents rose far past an acceptable limit.
Indeed, one recent accident caused a loss of life. For these reasons, a traffic signal was installed at the
intersection of Clay Street and Eagle Avenue.

  · Frame for a cause-and-effect topic sentence (Structure #2):
      (effect/s) __________________ (what happened) because (cause/s) ________________ (what had
      happened).
      Auntdraefrfliicnseignal was installedebnedcauunsdeevurelnihndiecrlelisnseped, people had to dodge traffic, and accidents increased.end underline

  · Structure #2 for cause-and effect paragraph about reasons for installing a traffic signal:
      explanation of the effect(s), followed by an explanation of the causes(s) that led to the effect
      effect: traffic signal was installed
      cause: vehicles sped without regard to speed limit
      cause: pedestrians had to dodge traffic
      cause: number of accidents increased

Model cause-and-effect paragraph about reasons for installing a traffic signal (Structure #2)
Auntdraefrfliicnseignal was installed at the intersection of Clay Street and Eagle Avenue.eBnedfournediterwlianseinstalled, many
vehicles raced through the intersection without regard to the posted speed limit. Pedestrians, many of whom
were students, crossed the intersection to get to and from campus, but they had to dodge in and out of constant
traffic. The number of accidents rose far past an acceptable limit. Indeed, one recent accident resulted in a loss
of life.
Classification and Division

Notice that these paragraphs do not separate classification from division. Rather, they look at the same larger
unit (sports drinks) from two angles: types of drinks that could be classified and the larger unit--sports
drinks--broken down into smaller units contained within it.
370 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

         · Frame for classification-and-division topic sentence (Structure #1): (general subject) ____________
             can be divided into (smaller categories) _______________, ______________, and ______________.
             Supnodretrslidnreinksecnadnubneddeirvliidneed into huynpdoetrolinniec,eiunsndodtuoennrdliicen,ereanlindndeuhunyndpdeerrlitlnoineneic.end underline

         · Structure #1 for classification-and-division paragraph about types of sports drinks:
             identification of the general subject followed by categories of that general subject
             general subject: sports drinks
             first category: hypotonic
             second category: isotonic
             third category: hypertonic

       Model classification-and-division paragraph about types of sports drinks (Structure #1)
       Aunlldseprolirntsedrinks are designed to increase hydration before, during, and after exercise or athletic involvement.end underline
       They do this by replacing minerals such as sodium and potassium lost through sweat and by replacing
       electrolytes and carbohydrates. However, not all sports drinks are created equally. The first type of sports
       drink, hypotonic (having a lower concentration of dissolved content than the human body), includes drinks
       that have both a low number of carbohydrates and a higher concentration of salt and sugar than the human
       body. Isotonic (having the same concentration of dissolved content as the human body) drinks have salt and
       sugar concentrations similar to the human body but have higher carbohydrate content. Last, hypertonic
       (having a higher concentration of dissolved content than the human body) drinks are designed to supplement
       daily carbohydrate intake and therefore have high levels of carbohydrates to provide quick energy
       replacement. Their salt and sugar concentration is significantly lower than the human body's.

         · Frame for classification-and-division topic sentence (Structure #2):
             (smaller categories) ______________, _______________, and ____________ are divisions /types of
             (general subject)___________.
             Hunydpeortloiniec,eiunsndodtuoennrdliicen,ereanlindndeuhunyndpdeerrlitlnoineneiceanrde tuynpdeesrolifnsuepnodretrslidnreinks.end underline

         · Structure #2 for classification-and-division paragraph about types of sports drinks:
             categories of general subject followed by identification of the general subject
             smaller category: hypotonic
             smaller category: isotonic
             smaller category: hypertonic
             general subject: sports drinks

       Model classification-and-division paragraph about types of sports drinks (Structure #2)
       Hypotonic (having a lower concentration of dissolved content than the human body) drinks include beverages
       that have both a low number of carbohydrates and a concentration of salt and sugar higher than the human
       body. Isotonic (having the same concentration of dissolved content as the human body) beverages have salt
       and sugar concentrations similar to the human body but have higher carbohydrate content. Last, hypertonic
       (having a higher concentration of dissolved content than the human body) beverages are designed to
       supplement daily carbohydrate intake and therefore have high levels of carbohydrate to provide quick energy
       replacement. Their salt and sugar concentration is significantly lower than the human body's. What do these
       beverages have in common? Aunlldaerrelitnyepes of sports drinks, designed to increase hydration before, during, and
       after exercise or athletic involvement.end underline

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                           11.5 · Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 371

Comparison and Contrast
  · Frame for a comparison-and-contrast topic sentence (Structure #1):
      One way (subject 1) __________ and (subject 2) __________ are alike is (similarity) __________; one way
      they differ is (difference) __________.
      One way vuinrdtuearlilneearningeannddufuanncddeee-rtrloliin-nfeaece learningeanrde aulnikdeerislintuhenadtesrtluindent responsibility is a key element
      in both;eonndeuwnadyertlhineye differ is iunntdheerlmineethods students choose to be attentive.end underline
  · Structure #1 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual learning and face-to-face
      learning:
      identification of two subjects followed by a point-by-point discussion
      point 1: discussion of a similarity of virtual learning and face-to-face learning
      point 2: discussion of a difference between virtual learning and face-to-face learning

Model comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual learning and face-to-face learning (Structure #1)
Sutnuddeernlitnreesponsibility is a key factor in both virtual learning and face-to-face learning.eInndbuonthdesreltitniengs, a
student must be attentive in order to understand what is happening in the classroom and what is expected
regarding readings, lab work, and other outside assignments. Differences occur in virtual classes and face-to-
face classes, though, in how students choose to be attentive. Depending on how the virtual classes are set up,
students' attention can range from complete to nonexistent, and the instructor might never know how much
attention a particular student is paying. With in-person classes, on the other hand, an instructor can see a
student's body language more closely and determine whether that student is attentive.

FIGURE 11.11 Informal face-to-face instruction (credit: "Creative writing class-fine arts center" by Leesa/
Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

  · Frame for a comparison-and-contrast topic sentence (Structure #2):
      One way (subject 1) ________ and (subject 2) _________ are different is (difference) _________; a way they
      are alike is (similarity) _________.
      One way vuinrdtuearlilneearningeannddufuanncddeee-rtrloliin-nfeaece learningeanrde duinffdeerrelninteis iunntdheerlwinaey students choose to be
      attentive;eandwuayndtheerlyinaere alike is tuhnadtesrtluindent responsibility is a key element.end underline
372 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

         · Structure #2 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual learning and face-to-face
             learning:
             identification of two subjects followed by a point-by-point discussion
             point 1: discussion of a difference between virtual learning and face-to-face learning
             point 2: discussion of a similarity of virtual learning and face-to-face learning

       Model comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual learning and face-to-face learning (Structure #2)
       Oundeewrlaiynethat virtual learning and face-to-face learning are different is in the methods students choose to be
       attentive, but they are alike in that student responsibility is a key factor in both.eWndituhnvdiretrulianlelearning, students
       must clear their study space of distractions and be sure to have reliable Internet connections. Alternatively, in
       face-to-face learning, the study area and Internet connections are already in place and are provided by the
       school. However, in both styles of classes, students have the responsibility to be attentive in order to
       understand what is happening in the classroom and what is expected as far as readings, lab work, and other
       outside assignments.
       Problem and Solution

         · Frame for problem-and-solution topic sentence (Structure #1):
             The issue of (predicament/s or challenging issue/s) _____________________ was solved/can be solved by
             (what was done/what should be done) _____________________.
             The issue of juunvdeenrilienserepeatedly committing crimesecnadnubnedseorllviende by turnedaetirnlignjeuvenile offenders as adults.end underline

         · Structure #1 for problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles as adults:
             an explanation of problem(s), followed by the solution
             problem: number of juveniles committing serious crimes is rising
             problem: facilities to which these juveniles are sent have failed to rehabilitate them
             problem: youths continue their life of crime
             solution: juveniles should be tried as adults

       Model problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles as adults (Structure #1)
       Auncrdoesrslitnhee country, the number of juveniles committing serious crimes is rising dramatically.eTnhdeufnadceilriltinese to
       which these juveniles are sent have failed to rehabilitate them, and a high percentage of the youths continue
       with their life of crime. Law-abiding citizens of the country, however, realize that this situation must change.
       By trying juveniles as adults, the issue of juveniles repeatedly committing crimes can be solved.

         · Frame for problem-and-solution topic sentence (Structure #2):
             By (what was done/what should be done) ____________________, the issue of (predicament/s or
             challenging issue/s) ___________________ would be solved/was solved.
             By turnydinegrljiunveeniles as adults,etnhdeuisnsdueerloifnjueunvdeenrilienserepeatedly committing crimesecnadnubnedseorllviende.

         · Structure #2 for problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles as adults:
             an explanation of a solution, followed by the problems that necessitated it
             solution: juveniles are tried as adults
             problem: number of juveniles committing serious crimes is rising
             problem: facilities to which these juveniles are sent have failed to rehabilitate them

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                           11.5 · Writing Process: Reasoning Supported by Evidence 373

      problem: youths continue their life of crime
Model problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles as adults (Structure #2)
Juunvdeenrillienseshould be tried as adults.eAndcruonssdethrleinceountry, the number of juveniles committing serious crimes is
rising dramatically. The facilities to which these juveniles are sent have failed to rehabilitate them, though, and
a high percentage of the youths continue with their life of crime. Because of this lack of success, law-abiding
citizens of the country realize that these problems must be addressed immediately.
Definition

  · Frame for definition topic sentence:
      To most people, (subject) is _______________; however, it really is ______________________.
      To most people, a hero is aunfadmeroliunseperson who is admired or idealized;ehnodwuenvdeer,rlauinhedeerorlins ereally anyone
      who goes out of the way to help others.end underline

  · Structure for definition paragraph:
      common definition or denotation: a famous person who is admired or idealized
      writer's expanded definition or connotation: anyone who goes out of the way to help others
      explanation/examples/details: healthcare professionals
      explanation/examples/details: grocery and convenience store workers

Model definition paragraph
Tuondmeorlsitnpeeople, a hero is a famous person who is admired or idealized; however, it really is anyone who goes
out of the way to help others.eFnodr uexnadmerplilne,eduring the pandemic that began in 2020, a number of people with
everyday jobs suddenly became heroes. First, the need for healthcare went up sharply, and healthcare
professionals worked many overtime hours and risked their lives to diagnose and treat others, with the hope of
saving them. Consequently, these people became heroes. Also, because most people stayed at home and
restaurants were closed, people purchased more food from grocery stores. Therefore, the people who
delivered the food to grocery stores and the essential workers at the grocery stores became heroes to those
who depended on their services.

FIGURE 11.12 Health care workers in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic (credit: "Healthcare workers wearing
PPE" by Javed Anees/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

Checking Validity

After you have completed your paragraphs, check the validity, or soundness, of their logic. To perform this
check, begin by assessing the logical connection of your topic sentences to your thesis statement. Because the
374 11 · Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking

       topic sentences are the major supporting statements for your thesis, each one should support it. Ask and
       answer the following questions of each topic sentence:
        1. Does this topic sentence reflect the reasoning strategy you are using?
        2. Does this topic sentence directly support the thesis statement?
        3. Does the topic sentence make a sensible point?
        4. What is the topic sentence's purpose? Is it to provide
          background information;
          a reason;
          an illustration;
          an explanation; or
          a response to a counterclaim? (See Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric for more information

             about counterclaims.)
       If you have trouble answering any of the questions and cannot establish the sentence's validity, consider
       revising the topic sentence.
       Next, check the validity of your body paragraphs' development. To perform this check, copy and paste to a new
       page one topic sentence and the sentences that develop it. Then, answer these questions on all the major
       supporting ideas that you develop for each topic sentence:
        1. Does this body paragraph reflect the reasoning strategy you are using?
        2. Does developing the idea in this body paragraph directly support its topic sentence?
        3. Does this idea make a sensible point?
        4. What is the purpose of developing this idea? Is it to provide

          background information;
          a reason for the topic sentence's claim;
          an illustration of the topic sentence's point;
          an explanation of the sentence's point; or
          evidence demonstrating the topic sentence's point?
       If you have trouble answering any of the questions and cannot establish a supporting idea's validity, consider
       revising or replacing the idea with one that you can logically develop to prove, illustrate, or explain the topic
       idea.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      11 · Further Reading 375

Further Reading

The following titles are well-known examples of writings that use the reasoning strategies of analogy, cause
    and effect, classification and division, comparison and contrast, problem and solution, and definition.

Kennedy, John. "Inaugural Address." John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, 20 Jan. 1961,
    https://www.jfklibrary.org/learn/about-jfk/historic-speeches/inaugural-address. Accessed 25 Jan. 2021.

King, Martin Luther, Jr. "Letter from a Birmingham Jail [King, Jr.]." African Studies Center--University of
   Pennsylvania, 16 April 1963, https://www.africa.upenn.edu/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html.
    Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.

Lincoln, Abraham. "The Gettysburg Address." Abraham Lincoln Online, 19 Nov. 1863,
    http://www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm. Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.

Yousafzai, Malala. "Nobel Peace Prize Acceptance Speech." Malala.org, 10 Dec. 2014, https://www.malala.org/
    newsroom/archive/malala-nobel-speech. Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.

Works Cited

Kerlin, Kat. "Wildlife Experience High Price of Oil." UC Davis, 2 June 2015, www.ucdavis.edu/news/wildlife-
    experience-high-price-oil/. Accessed 5 Mar. 2021.

Pennisi, Elizabeth. "$180 Million DNA `Barcode' Project Aims to Discover 2 Million New Species." Science, 6
    Jun. 2019, https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/06/180-million-dna-barcode-project-aims-
    discover-2-million-new-species. Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.

Plato. "Book VII." The Republic. E-book, Translated by B. Jowett, Project Gutenberg, 2016.
    https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1497/1497-h/1497-h.htm#link2H_4_0010.

"Poster Design Guide." Cain Project, 2003. Rice University, www.owlnet.rice.edu/~cainproj/designing.
    Accessed 25 Jan. 2021.

Royal Shakespeare Company. Macbeth, https://www.rsc.org.uk/shakespeare-learning-zone/macbeth. Accessed
    26 Apr. 2021.

Thurman, Susan Sommers, and William L. Gary, Jr. Critical Literacy: Integrating Critical Thinking, Reading,
   and Writing. Cognella, Inc., 2019.

"World's First Centre for Rapid DNA Species Identification Opens in Guelph." CBC News, 9 May 2007,
    https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/world-s-first-centre-for-rapid-dna-species-identification- opens-in-
    guelph-1.663503. Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.
376 11 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Argumentative Research:             12
Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with
Evidence

FIGURE 12.1 In 2008, a protestor in London's Parliament Square uses researched evidence to support their claim
against the Iraq War (2003-2011). On the sign, the protestor cites several statistics. Numerical data, such as
statistics, is evidence that helps persuade an audience. (credit: "Iraq War Protesters in Parliament Square" by
ljanderson977/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

12.1  Introducing Research and Research Evidence
12.2  Argumentative Research Trailblazer: Samin Nosrat
12.3  Glance at Genre: Introducing Research as Evidence
12.4  Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran
12.5  Writing Process: Integrating Research
12.6  Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations
12.7  Evaluation: Effectiveness of Research Paper
12.8  Spotlight on ... Bias in Language and Research
12.9  Portfolio: Why Facts Matter in Research Argumentation

INTRODUCTION The term research is used widely and regularly and may have different--sometimes
contradictory--meanings. Therefore, it is important to clarify what research is, why it is a key tool for academic
success, and how using research-based evidence can enhance a writer's rhetorical abilities and effectiveness.

No matter what academic subjects you study, at some point you will need to conduct research. Although
378 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

       research is an integral part of all disciplines, even those primarily related to art or performance, the product of
       the research will vary. Even if your coursework does not require formal, documented research, it will, at
       minimum, include regular research behaviors. Every day, whether deciding which movie to watch or
       choosing a new technology product, everyone participates in basic, informal research behaviors: a process of
       seeking information, testing it against other forms of collected information, and analyzing as much "data" as
       possible before making decisions or being persuaded. Although more formal, the same process applies to
       academic writing. You may be required to conduct research, gather evidence (data), and present your ideas
       and findings in a range of genres.

       Like all communication, conducting and citing research is rhetorically situated and thus has a purpose, the
       reason or goal for the research; an audience, the recipient of the research findings; a genre, the structure of
       reported research; a stance, the position, or viewpoint, supported by research; a context, the situation in
       which the research or subject occurs; and a culture, the groups of people who share common beliefs and lived
       experiences, reflected by the author, audience, and subject. Furthermore, the researcher uses effective
       rhetorical strategies, such as reasoning supported by evidence. Therefore, it is important to match your
       research to the elements of the rhetorical situation, as indicated. For example, for a political science course,
       you may find that current unrest on campus regarding politics or race functions as a context for conducting
       formal research (through surveys or interviews) on students' responses to that unrest. Your purpose might be
       to provide evidence that supports your stance in proposing a change of campus policies. Your audience may
       include university administrators and student representatives. Your genre may be a persuasive speech, an
       article in the student newspaper, a poster, or a public service video. Cultural elements include the unrest and
       its relation to the university environment for both students and faculty. The supporting evidence is the
       resulting data and analysis from the surveys or interviews. But before you consider how to use evidence in
       reporting research, it is important to understand the research process itself.

       With a focus on the role of evidence collection in research, this chapter presents methods for introducing
       research as evidence, examines the genre and writing processes associated with argumentative research
       papers, and addresses the use of unbiased language in creating and reporting effective research.

     12.1 Introducing Research and Research Evidence

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Articulate how research evidence and sources are key rhetorical concepts in presenting a position or an
             argument.

         · Locate and distinguish between primary and secondary research materials.
         · Implement methods and technologies commonly used for research and communication within various fields.

       The writing tasks for this chapter and the next two chapters are based on argumentative research. However,
       not all researched evidence (data) is presented in the same genre. You may need to gather evidence for a
       poster, a performance, a story, an art exhibit, or even an architectural design. Although the genre may vary, you
       usually will be required to present a perspective, or viewpoint, about a debatable issue and persuade readers
       to support the "validity of your viewpoint," as discussed in Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric.
       Remember, too, that a debatable issue is one that has more than a single perspective and is subject to
       disagreement.

      The Research Process

       Although individual research processes are rhetorically situated, they share some common aspects:

         · Interest. The researcher has a genuine interest in the topic. It may be difficult to fake curiosity, but it is
             possible to develop it. Some academic assignments will allow you to pursue issues that are personally
             important to you; others will require you to dive into the research first and generate interest as you go.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                   12.1 · Introducing Research and Research Evidence 379

  · Questions. The researcher asks questions. At first, these questions are general. However, as researchers
      gain more knowledge, the questions become more sharply focused. No matter what your research
      assignment is, begin by articulating questions, find out where the answers lead, and then ask still more
      questions.

  · Answers. The researcher seeks answers from people as well as from print and other media. Research
      projects profit when you ask knowledgeable people, such as librarians and other professionals, to help you
      answer questions or point you in directions to find answers. Information about research is covered more
      extensively in Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information and Annotated Bibliography:
      Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources.

  · Field research. The researcher conducts field research. Field research allows researchers not only to ask
      questions of experts but also to observe and experience directly. It allows researchers to generate original
      data. No matter how much other people tell you, your knowledge increases through personal observations.
      In some subject areas, field research is as important as library or database research. This information is
      covered more extensively in Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information.

  · Examination of texts. The researcher examines texts. Consulting a broad range of texts--such as
      magazines, brochures, newspapers, archives, blogs, videos, documentaries, or peer-reviewed journals--is
      crucial in academic research.

  · Evaluation of sources. The researcher evaluates sources. As your research progresses, you will double-
      check information to find out whether it is confirmed by more than one source. In informal research,
      researchers evaluate sources to ensure that the final decision is satisfactory. Similarly, in academic
      research, researchers evaluate sources to ensure that the final product is accurate and convincing.
      Previewed here, this information is covered more extensively in Research Process: Accessing and
      Recording Information.

  · Writing. The researcher writes. The writing during the research process can take a range of forms: from
      notes during library, database, or field work; to journal reflections on the research process; to drafts of the
      final product. In practical research, writing helps researchers find, remember, and explore information. In
      academic research, writing is even more important because the results must be reported accurately and
      thoroughly.

  · Testing and Experimentation. The researcher tests and experiments. Because opinions vary on
      debatable topics and because few research topics have correct or incorrect answers, it is important to test
      and conduct experiments on possible hypotheses or solutions.

  · Synthesis. The researcher synthesizes. By combining information from various sources, researchers
      support claims or arrive at new conclusions. When synthesizing, researchers connect evidence and ideas,
      both original and borrowed. Accumulating, sorting, and synthesizing information enables researchers to
      consider what evidence to use in support of a thesis and in what ways.

  · Presentation. The researcher presents findings in an interesting, focused, and well-documented product.

Types of Research Evidence

Research evidence usually consists of data, which comes from borrowed information that you use to develop
your thesis and support your organizational structure and reasoning. This evidence can take a range of forms,
depending on the type of research conducted, the audience, and the genre for reporting the research.

Primary Research Sources

Although precise definitions vary somewhat by discipline, primary data sources are generally defined as
firsthand accounts, such as texts or other materials produced by someone drawing from direct experience or
observation. Primary source documents include, but are not limited to, personal narratives and diaries;
eyewitness accounts; interviews; original documents such as treaties, official certificates, and government
documents detailing laws or acts; speeches; newspaper coverage of events at the time they occurred;
observations; and experiments. Primary source data is, in other words, original and in some way conducted or
collected primarily by the researcher. The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources and
380 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

       Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography contain more information on both primary and secondary
       sources.
       Secondary Research Sources

       Secondary sources, on the other hand, are considered at least one step removed from the experience. That is,
       they rely on sources other than direct observation or firsthand experience. Secondary sources include, but are
       not limited to, most books, articles online or in databases, and textbooks (which are sometimes classified as
       tertiary sources because, like encyclopedias and other reference works, their primary purpose might be to
       summarize or otherwise condense information). Secondary sources (https://openstax.org/r/
       secondarysources1) regularly cite and build upon primary sources to provide perspective and analysis.
       Effective use of researched evidence usually includes both primary and secondary sources. Works of history,
       for example, draw on a large range of primary and secondary sources, citing, analyzing, and synthesizing
       information to present as many perspectives of a past event in as rich and nuanced a way as possible.
       It is important to note that the distinction between primary and secondary sources depends in part on their
       use: that is, the same document can be both a primary source and a secondary source. For example, if Scholar
       X wrote a biography about Artist Y, the biography would be a secondary source about the artist and, at the
       same time, a primary source about the scholar.

     12.2 Trailblazer

     Argumentative Research Trailblazer: Samin Nosrat

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify and explain key rhetorical concepts.
         · Analyze how authors make claims and support them with evidence in a range of activities outside of academic

             writing.

FIGURE 12.2 Fresh produce in markets like this one in     "I love doing the
France continue to inspire Samin Nosrat                homework on recipes
(https://openstax.org/r/saminnosrat)'s recipes and     and traditions . . . [I'm]
ideas about food. (credit: "Légumes" by Arnaud 25/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)                        excited to . . . read
                                                           and research."

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    12.2 · Trailblazer 381

Food writer, chef, and TV host Samin Nosrat (b. 1979) was born in San Diego, California, to Iranian parents
who, as followers of the Baha'i faith, immigrated to the United States to avoid religious persecution in their
native country. When she was a student at the University of California, Berkeley, Nosrat became interested in
cooking after a dinner at Berkeley's well-known Chez Panisse, the restaurant belonging to award-winning chef,
author, and food activist Alice Waters (b. 1944). Indeed, Nosrat became so interested that she got a job bussing
tables at the restaurant several months later. After a year, she "moved up" to the kitchen, where she became a
cook, working with Chez Panisse chef Cal Peternell.

Nosrat is well known for her cookbook Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat: Mastering the Elements of Good Cooking (2017),
which won the prestigious James Beard Award in 2018 and also reached the New York Times best seller list
that year. In the book, Nosrat claims that "like a scholar in search of primary sources," she wanted "to
experience authentic versions of the dishes" she loved. In addition to being a chef and writer, she has hosted
an award-winning Netflix docuseries based on her book and until February 2021 was a regular columnist for
The New York Times Magazine.

The underlying thesis of Nosrat's Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat (https://openstax.org/r/saltfatacid) is that one should
trust their senses in the kitchen, building confidence and developing the knowledge to gain this trust. Nosrat
emphasizes an intuitive, elemental approach to cooking. "Anyone can cook anything and make it delicious,"
Nosrat claims in the book's introduction, establishing that excellent cooking is based on skill in using and
balancing the four basic elements named in the title. She found solid evidence for this stance in Japan, where
the cuisine features salt; in Italy, where the cuisine features fat; in Mexico, where the cuisine features acid; and
in California, where the cuisine features heat. Nosrat explains these four elements in detail and supports her
premise with research, interviews, and internships with talented cooks in different countries.

When talking about her television show, Nosrat says, "Good food around the world is more similar than it is
different." She considers how the chemistry and the culture of cooking work together around the world to
create universally good food and, at the same time, create empathy and common ground.

Nosrat's audience can thus discern a persuasive purpose to her research into cooking. She argues that in
addition to food, cooking is about people, and she hopes that by eating the food of a particular culture, readers
and viewers will develop compassion for the people of that culture, despite politics or history. Seeking answers
to important questions, Nosrat asks, "Does [food] really matter? Can food make a difference?"

As she continues her mission of research and writing, Nosrat feels the responsibility of her calling: to provide
greater cross-cultural understanding and to center minoritized voices and traditions. She wants readers to feel
safe inside her book, supported by the context she provides and her sensitivity to culture.

Discussion Questions

1. Consider the rhetorical situation: In what ways does Samin Nosrat's writing respond to purpose, audience,
    genre, stance, culture, and context?

2. In what ways does Nosrat aim to make the cookbook genre persuasive or argumentative?

3. What is Nosrat's claim in Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat?

4. In what ways does Nosrat present reasoning and evidence?

5. In what ways does Nosrat use research to support her claim?
382 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

     12.3 Glance at Genre: Introducing Research as Evidence

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify key terms and characteristics of evidence-based research writing.
         · Participate effectively in a continuing scholarly conversation by synthesizing research and discussing it with

             others.
         · Identify and analyze genre conventions as shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
       Good writing satisfies audience expectations in genre, style, and content. Similarly, careful research,
       conducted according to the scope and method of each discipline, is a precondition of good research writing. In
       the humanities, research usually focuses on texts, individual ideas, speculations, insights, and imaginative
       connections. On the other hand, research in the social and physical sciences tends to focus on data and ideas
       that can be verified through observation, measurement, and testing. However, regardless of differences in
       disciplines and preferences of varying audiences, certain principles of research, writing, and supporting a
       position hold true across the curriculum.

      The Genre of Research: Joining Scholarly Conversations

       Conducting research on topics about which you have limited knowledge can be intimidating. To feel more
       comfortable with research, you can think of it as participating in a scholarly conversation, with the
       understanding that all knowledge on a particular subject is connected. Even if you discover only a small
       amount of information on your topic, the conversations around it may have begun long before you were born
       and may continue beyond your lifetime. Your involvement with the topic is your way of entering a conversation
       with other students and scholars at this time, as you discuss and synthesize information. After you leave the
       conversation, or finish your research, others are likely to pick it up again.

       FIGURE 12.3 Students participate in scholarly conversations as they share their ideas and research. (credit:
       "Visitas - SMAC - Volta Redonda, RJ" by maistelecentros/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       What you find through research helps you provide solid evidence that empowers you to add productively to the
       conversation. Thinking of research in this way means understanding the connections among your topic, your
       course materials, and larger historical, social, political, and economic contexts and themes. Understanding
       such connectedness begins with choosing your topic and continues through all phases of your research.

      Key Terms in Research Writing

       These are key terms and characteristics of evidence-based research writing:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                   12.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran 383

  · Citation. When reporting research, writers use citations to acknowledge and give credit for all borrowed
      materials. Citation also strengthens the credibility, or ethos, of the researcher. Citations always have two
      parts. Internal citations are short references that lead readers to more detailed information about how to
      find the sources. External citations are the entries listed, with publishing information, on the Works Cited
      or References page of the paper. Formatting of both internal and external citations is disciplinary specific.
      See the Handbook for specific information about MLA Documentation and Format and APA
      Documentation and Format.

  · claim. Claims are the points you make in your report. They are based on and supported by research and
      evidence.

  · Counterclaims. When it comes to research, the counterclaim is the writer's thoughtful consideration and
      addressing of the other side's objections to claims made or even to the topic itself. Counterclaims may
      need to be supported by further research and evidence.

  · Evidence. Within the genre of research, evidence is either findings from original research or, more often,
      borrowed information that helps you develop your thesis and support your organizational structure and
      line of reasoning.

  · Field research. Field research is basically primary research you conduct through observation or
      experimentation. Depending on your research question, you may need to seek answers by visiting
      museums or businesses, attending concerts, conducting interviews, observing classrooms or
      professionals at work, performing experiments, or following leads. Field research is covered extensively in
      Research Process: How to Create Sources.

  · Research question. Your research question dictates your general line or lines of inquiry that ultimately
      guide your research. In developing your research question(s), you are narrowing the scope of your topic.
      Your research question(s) will come from the purpose of your research, the audience of your research
      product, and the genre for reporting your research.

  · Thesis. The thesis is the claim, position, or hypothesis by which you attempt to answer your formulated
      research question(s).

  · Reasoning. Similar to an argumentative essay, the line of reasoning in a research essay, report, or
      presentation is the organizational arrangement of the supports and evidence that back up your thesis.

  · Topic. The topic is the general subject or content area of your research. Strong topics are usually those
      that involve some controversy or debate. Topics that are not debatable or have no nuanced perspectives do
      not make for strong research questions or lines of inquiry.

12.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can
Save the Earth" by Lily Tran

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Analyze how writers use evidence in research writing.
  · Analyze the ways a writer incorporates sources into research writing, while retaining their own voice.
  · Explain the use of headings as organizational tools in research writing.
  · Analyze how writers use evidence to address counterarguments when writing a research essay.

Introduction

In this argumentative research essay for a first-year composition class, student Lily Tran creates a solid,
focused argument and supports it with researched evidence. Throughout the essay, she uses this evidence to
support cause-and-effect and problem-solution reasoning, make strong appeals, and develop her ethos on the
topic.
384 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

              Food as Change

public domain t For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the way food is produced, processed, and
                        distributed are necessaryeonndapgulbolbicaldsocmalaein. t

Panunrpotoaste. Lily Tran refers to what she sees as the general purpose for writing this paper: the problem of current

global practices in food production, processing, and distribution. By presenting the "problem," she immediately
                                  end public domain etnd public domain t
prepares readers for her proposed solution.end annotat
end public domain t                                                           end public domain t

The required changes will affect nearly all aspects of life, including not only world hunger but also health and

welfare, land use and habitats, water quality and availability, energy use and production, greenhouse gas

emissions and climate change, economics, and even cultural and social values. These changes may not be

popular, but they are imperative. The human race must turn to sustainable food systems that provide healthy

diets with minimal environmental impact--and starting now.

Tanhneostisa.t Leading up to this clear, declarative thesis statement are key points on which Tran will expand later. In doing
this, she presents some foundational evidence that connects the problem to the proposed solution.end annotat

THE COMING FOOD CRISIS

      The world population has been rising exponentially in modern history. From 1 billion in 1804, it doubled to
      approximately 2 billion by 1927, then doubled again to approximately 4 billion in 1974. By 2019, it had nearly
      doubled again, rising to 7.7 billion ("World Population by Year"). It has been projected to reach nearly 10 billion
      by 2050 (Berners-Lee et al.). At the same time, the average life span also has been increasing. These situations
      have led to severe stress on the environment, particularly in the demands for food. It has been estimated, for
      example, that by 2050, milk production will increase 58 percent and meat production 73 percent (Chai et al.).

Eanvnidoetantce. In this first supporting paragraph, Tran uses numerical evidence from several sources. This numerical
data as evidence helps establish the projection of population growth. By beginning with such evidence, Tran
underscores the severity of the situation.end annotat

Theoretically, the planet can produce enough food for everyone, but human activities have endangered this
capability through unsustainable practices. Currently, agriculture produces 10-23 percent of global greenhouse
gas emissions. Greenhouse gases--the most common being carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and water
vapor-- trap heat in the atmosphere, reradiate it, and send it back to Earth again. Heat trapped in the
atmosphere is a problem because it causes unnatural global warming as well as air pollution, extreme weather
conditions, and respiratory diseases.

Aanundoietantce. With her audience in mind, Tran briefly explains the problem of greenhouse gases and global warming.end annotat

It has been estimated that global greenhouse gas emissions will increase by as much as 150 percent by 2030
(Chai et al.). Transportation also has a negative effect on the environment when foods are shipped around the
world. As Joseph Poore of the University of Oxford commented, "It's essential to be mindful about everything
we consume: air-transported fruit and veg can create more greenhouse gas emissions per kilogram than
poultry meat, for example" (qtd. in Gray).

Tanrannostaittion. By beginning this paragraph with her own transition of ideas, Tran establishes control over the
organization and development of ideas. Thus, she retains her sources as supports and does not allow them to
dominate her essay.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
                   12.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran 385

                        Current practices have affected the nutritional value of foods. Concentrated animal-feeding operations,                   end annotat
                        intended to increase production, have had the side effect of decreasing nutritional content in animal protein
                        and increasing saturated fat. One study found that an intensively raised chicken in 2017 contained only one-
                        sixth of the amount of omega-3 fatty acid, an essential nutrient, that was in a chicken in 1970. Today the
public domain t majority of calories in chicken come from fat rather than protein (World Wildlife Fund).
                 Eanxnaomtaptle. By focusing on an example (chicken), Tran uses speceifnicdrpeusbelaicrcdhodmaataintot develop the nuance of the
                 argument.

Current  policies  such  as  government  subsidies  that  divert  food  to  biofuels are counterproductive to        the  goal  of
                                                                               end public ednodmpauinbltic domain t

achieving  adequate global nutrition. Some  trade   policies  allow     "dumping"  of  below-cost,  subsidized       foods  on
                      end public domain t

developing countries that should instead be enabled to protect their farmers and meet their own nutritional

needs (Sierra Club). Too often, agriculture's objectives are geared toward maximizing quantities produced per

acre rather than optimizing output of critical nutritional needs and protection of the environment.

AREAS OF CONCERN                                                        end public domain t

Hunger and Nutrition

Hanenaodtiantgs and Subheadings. Throughout the essay, Tran has created headings and subheadings to help organize
her argument and clarify it for readers.end annotat

More than 820 million people around the world do not have enough to eat. At the same time, about a third of all
grains and almost two-thirds of all soybeans, maize, and barley crops are fed to animals (Barnard). According to
the World Health Organization, 462 million adults are underweight, 47 million children under 5 years of age are
underweight for their height, 14.3 million are severely underweight for their height, and 144 million are stunted
("Malnutrition"). About 45 percent of mortality among children under 5 is linked to undernutrition. These
deaths occur mainly in low- and middle-income countries where, in stark contrast, the rate of childhood obesity
is rising. Globally, 1.9 billion adults and 38.3 million children are overweight or obese ("Obesity").
Undernutrition and obesity can be found in the same household, largely a result of eating energy-dense foods
that are high in fat and sugars. The global impact of malnutrition, which includes both undernutrition and
obesity, has lasting developmental, economic, social, and medical consequences.

In 2019, Berners-Lee et al. published the results of their quantitative analysis of global and regional food
supply. They determined that significant changes are needed on four fronts:

Food production must be sufficient, in quantity and quality, to feed the global population without
unacceptable environmental impacts. Food distribution must be sufficiently efficient so that a diverse
range of foods containing adequate nutrition is available to all, again without unacceptable environmental
impacts. Socio-economic conditions must be sufficiently equitable so that all consumers can access the
quantity and range of foods needed for a healthy diet. Consumers need to be able to make informed and
rational choices so that they consume a healthy and environmentally sustainable diet (10).

BanloncoktaQt uote. The writer has chosen to present important evidence as a direct quotation, using the correct format
for direct quotations longer than four lines. See Section Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations for more
information about block quotes.end annotat

Among their findings, they singled out, in particular, the practice of using human-edible crops to produce meat,
dairy, and fish for the human table. Currently 34 percent of human-edible crops are fed to animals, a practice
that reduces calorie and protein supplies. They state in their report, "If society continues on a `business-as-
usual' dietary trajectory, a 119% increase in edible crops grown will be required by 2050" (1). Future food
production and distribution must be transformed into systems that are nutritionally adequate, environmentally
sound, and economically affordable.
386 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

Land and Water Use

public domain t  Agriculture occupies 40 percent of Earth's ice-free land mass (Barnard). While the net area used for producing
                 food has been fairly constant since the mid-20th century, the locations have shifted significantly. Temperate
                 regions of North America, Europe, and Russia have lost agricultural land to other uses, while in the tropics,
                 agricultural land has expanded, mainly as a result of clearing forests and burning biomass (Willett et al.).
                 Seventy percent of the rainforest that has been cut down is being used to graze livestock (Münter). Agricultural
                 use of water is of critical concern both quantitatively and qualitatively. Agriculture accounts for about 70
                 percent of freshwater use, making it "the world's largest water-consuming sector" (Barnard). Meat, dairy, and
                 egg production causes water pollution, as liquid wastes flow into rivers and to the ocean (World Wildlife Fund
                 and Knorer nFdoopdusb)l.icAcdcoomrdaiinngtto the Hertwich et al., "the impacts related to these activities are unlikely to beend public domain t
                 reduced, but rather enhanced, in a business-as-usual scenario for the future" (13).

Santantoitsatitcal Data. To develop her points related to land and water use, Tran presents specific statistical data
throughout this section. Notice that she has chosen only the needed weonrddpsuobfltihcedsoemkaeiynptoints to ensure that she
controls the development of the supporting point and does not overuse borrowed source materiael.nedndpuabnlnicotdaotmain t

Danenfiontiantg Terms. Aware of her audience, Tran defines monocropping, a term that may be unfamiliar.end annotat

                 Earth's resources and ability to absorb pollution are limited, and many current agricultural practices undermine
                 these capacities. Among these unsustainable practices are monocropping [growing a single crop year after year
                 on the same land], concentrated animal-feeding operations, and overdependence on manufactured pesticides
                 and fertilizers (Hamilton). Such practices deplete the soil, dramatically increase energy use, reduce pollinator
                 populations, and lead to the collapse of resource supplies. One study found that producing one gram of beef for
                 human consumption requires 42 times more land, 2 times more water, and 4 times more nitrogen than staple
                 crops. It also creates 3 times more greenhouse gas emissions (Chai et al.). The EAT-Lancet Commission calls
                 for "halting expansion of new agricultural land at the expense of natural ecosystems . . . strict protections on
                 intact ecosystems, suspending concessions for logging in protected areas, or conversion of remaining intact
                 ecosystems, particularly peatlands and forest areas" (Willett et al. 481). The Commission also calls for land-
                 use zoning, regulations prohibiting land clearing, and incentives for protecting natural areas, including forests.

Sanynothtaetsis. The paragraphs above and below this comment show how Tran has synthesized content from several
sources to help establish and reinforce key supports of her essay.end annotat

Greenhouse Gas and Climate Change

                 Climate change is heavily affected by two factors: greenhouse gas emissions and carbon sequestration. In
                 nature, the two remain in balance; for example, most animals exhale carbon dioxide, and most plants capture
                 carbon dioxide. Carbon is also captured, or sequestered, by soil and water, especially oceans, in what are called
                 "sinks." Human activities have skewed this balance over the past two centuries. The shift in land use, which
                 exploits land, water, and fossil energy, has caused increased greenhouse-gas emissions, which in turn
                 accelerate climate change.

                 Global food systems are threatened by climate change because farmers depend on relatively stable climate
                 systems to plan for production and harvest. Yet food production is responsible for up to 30 percent of
                 greenhouse gas emissions (Barnard). While soil can be a highly effective means of carbon sequestration,
                 agricultural soils have lost much of their effectiveness from overgrazing, erosion, overuse of chemical fertilizer,
                 and excess tilling. Hamilton reports that the world's cultivated and grazed soils have lost 50 to 70 percent of
                 their ability to accumulate and store carbon. As a result, "billions of tons of carbon have been released into the
                 atmosphere."

DanirneocttaQt uotation and Paraphrase. While Tran has paraphrased some content of this source borrowing, because of
the specificity and impact of the number-- "billions of tons of carbon"--she has chosen to use the author's original
words. As she has done elsewhere in the essay, she has indicated these as directly borrowed words by placing them

Access for free at openstax.org.
         12.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran 387

within quotation marks. See Section 12.5 for more about paraphrasing.end annotat

                        While carbon sequestration has been falling, greenhouse gas emissions have been increasing as a result of the
                        production, transport, processing, storage, waste disposal, and other life stages of food production. Agriculture
                        alone is responsible for fully 10 to 12 percent of global emissions, and that figure is estimated to rise by up to
public domain t 150 percent of current levels by 2030 (Chai et al.). Münter reports that "more greenhouse gas emissions are
                        produced by growing livestock for meat than all the planes, trains, ships, cars, trucks, and all forms of fossil
                        fuel-based transportation combined" (5). Additional greenhouse gases, methane and nitrous oxide, are
                        produced by the decomposition of organic wastes. Methane has 25 times and nitrous oxide has nearly 300
                        times the global warming potential of carbon dioxide (Curnow). Agricultural and food production systems must
                        be reformed to shift agriculture from greenhouse gas source to sink.

                                                                                  end public domain t
                 Social andeCndulptuurbalilcVdaolumeasin t

                                                                                            end public domain t
                        As the Sierra Club has pointed out, agriculture is inherently cultural: all systems of food production have "the

                                                                                                                                      end public domain t
                        capacity to generate . . . economic benefits and ecological capital" as well as "a sense of meaning and
                        connection to natural resources." Yet this connection is more evident in some cultures and less so in others.
                        Wealthy countries built on a consumer culture emphasize excess consumption. One result of this attitude is
                        that in 2014, Americans discarded the equivalent of $165 billion worth of food. Much of this waste ended up
                        rotting in landfills, comprised the single largest component of U.S. municipal solid waste, and contributed a
                        substantial portion of U.S. methane emissions (Sierra Club). In low- and middle-income countries, food waste
                        tends to occur in early production stages because of poor scheduling of harvests, improper handling of
                        produce, or lack of market access (Willett et al.). The recent "America First" philosophy has encouraged
                        prioritizing the economic welfare of one nation to the detriment of global welfare and sustainability.

Sanynothtaetsis and Response to Claims. Here, as in subsequent sections, while still relying heavily on facts and content

from borrowed sources, Tran provides her synthesized understanding of the information by responding to key                                                 end annotat

points.

In response to claims that a vegetarian diet is a necessary component of sustainable food production and
consumption, Lusk and Norwood determined the importance of meat in a consumer's diet. Their study
indicated that meat is the most valuable food category to consumers, and "humans derive great pleasure from
consuming beef, pork, and poultry" (120). Currently only 4 percent of Americans are vegetarians, and it would
be difficult to convince consumers to change their eating habits. Purdy adds "there's the issue of philosophy. A
lot of vegans aren't in the business of avoiding animal products for the sake of land sustainability. Many would
prefer to just leave animal husbandry out of food altogether."

At the same time, consumers expect ready availability of the foods they desire, regardless of health
implications or sustainability of sources. Unhealthy and unsustainable foods are heavily marketed. Out-of-
season produce is imported year-round, increasing carbon emissions from air transportation. Highly processed
and packaged convenience foods are nutritionally inferior and waste both energy and packaging materials.
Serving sizes are larger than necessary, contributing to overconsumption and obesity. Snack food vending
machines are ubiquitous in schools and public buildings. What is needed is a widespread attitude shift toward
reducing waste, choosing local fruits and vegetables that are in season, and paying attention to how foods are
grown and transported.

TanhneostisatRestated. Restating her thesis, Tran ends this section by advocating for a change in attitude to bring about                                  end an
sustainability.

DISSENTING OPINIONS

Canonuonttaetrclaims. Tran uses equally strong research to present the counterargument. Presenting both sides by
addressing objections is important in constructing a clear, well-reasoned argument. Writers should use as much
rigor in finding research-based evidence to counter the opposition as they do to develop their argument.end annotat
388 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

public domain t  Transformation of the food production system faces resistance for a number of reasons, most of which dispute
                 the need for plant-based diets. Historically, meat has been considered integral to athletes' diets and thus has
                 caused many consumers to believe meat is necessary for a healthy diet. Lynch et al. examined the impact of
                 plant-based diets on human physical health, environmental sustainability, and exercise performance capacity.
                 The results show "it is unlikely that plant-based diets provide advantages, but do not suffer from
                 disadvantages, compared to omnivorous diets for strength, anaerobic, or aerobic exeenrdcipseubpleicrfdoormmaanincet " (1).

                 A second objection addresses the claim that land use for animal-based food production contributes to pollution
                 and greenhouse gas emissions and is inefficient in terms of nutrient delivery. Berners-Lee et al. point out that
                 animal nutrition from grass, pasture, and silage comes partially from land that cannot be used for other
                 purpeonsedsp, usbulcihc daosmpraoindutcing food directly edible by humans or for other eencodspyustbelimc dsoemrvaicineesnt sdupcuhebanlisdcbpdiuoobmfuliaecilndot main t
                 proednudctpiounb.liCcodnosmeqauinetntly, nutritional losses from such land use do not fully translate into losses of human-
                 available nutrients (3).

Pananraoptahtrase. Tran has paraphrased the information as support. Though she still cites the source, she has changed
the words to her own, most likely to condense a larger amount of original text or to make it more accessible.end annotat

                 While this objection may be correct, it does not address the fact that natural carbon sinks are being destroyed
                 to increase agricultural land and, therefore, increase greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere.

                 Another significant dissenting opinion is that transforming food production will place hardships on farmers and
                 others employed in the food industry. Farmers and ranchers make a major investment in their own operations.
                 At the same time, they support jobs in related industries, as consumers of farm machinery, customers at local
                 businesses, and suppliers for other industries such as food processing (Schulz). Sparks reports that "livestock
                 farmers are being unfairly `demonized' by vegans and environmental advocates" and argues that while farming
                 includes both costs and benefits, the costs receive much more attention than the benefits.

FUTURE GENERATIONS

      The EAT-Lancet Commission calls for a transformation in the global food system, implementing different core
      processes and feedback. This transformation will not happen unless there is "widespread, multi-sector,
      multilevel action to change what food is eaten, how it is produced, and its effects on the environment and
      health, while providing healthy diets for the global population" (Willett et al. 476). System changes will require
      global efforts coordinated across all levels and will require governments, the private sector, and civil society to
      share a common vision and goals. Scientific modeling indicates 10 billion people could indeed be fed a healthy
      and sustainable diet.

Canonnoctlautsion. While still using research-based sources as evidence in the concluding section, Tran finishes with her
own words, restating her thesis.end annotat

      For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the way food is produced, processed, and
      distributed are necessary on a global scale. The required changes will affect nearly all aspects of life, including
      not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land use and habitats, water quality and availability, energy
      use and production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, economics, and even cultural and social
      values. These changes may not be popular, but they are imperative. They are also achievable. The human race
      must turn to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact, starting
      now.

Sanonuorctaets. Note two important aspects of the sources chosen: 1) They represent a range of perspectives, and 2) They
are all quite current. When exploring a contemporary topic, it is important to avoid research that is out of date.end annotat

                                                         Works Cited

Barnard, Neal. "How Eating More Plants Can Save Lives and the Planet." Physicians Committee for Responsible
   Medicine, 24 Jan. 2019, www.pcrm.org/news/blog/how-eating-more-plants-can-save-lives-and-planet.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                   12.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran 389

    Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Berners-Lee, M., et al. "Current Global Food Production Is Sufficient to Meet Human Nutritional Needs in 2050
   Provided There Is Radical Societal Adaptation." Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene, vol. 6, no. 52, 2018,
    doi:10.1525/elementa.310. Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Chai, Bingli Clark, et al. "Which Diet Has the Least Environmental Impact on Our Planet? A Systematic Review of
   Vegan, Vegetarian and Omnivorous Diets." Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 15, 2019, duoni:d1e0r.l3in3e90/su111541e1n0d. underline
    Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Curnow, Mandy. "Managing Manure to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions." Government of Western Australia,
    Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, 2 Nov. 2020, www.agric.wa.gov.au/climate-
    change/managing-manure-reduce-greenhouse-gas-emissions. Accessed 9 Dec. 2020.

Gray, Richard. "Why the Vegan Diet Is Not Always Green." BBC, 13 Feb. 2020, www.bbc.com/future/article/
    20200211-why-the-vegan-diet-is-not-always-green. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Hamilton, Bruce. "Food and Our Climate." Sierra Club, 2014, www.sierraclub.org/compass/2014/10/food-and-our-
    climate. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Hertwich. Edgar G., et al. Assessing the Environmental Impacts of Consumption and Production. United Nations
    Environment Programme, 2010, www.resourcepanel.org/reports/assessing-environmental-impacts-
    consumption-and-production.

Lusk, Jayson L., and F. Bailey Norwood. "Some Economic Benefits and Costs of Vegetarianism." Agricultural and
   Resource Economics Review, vol. 38, no. 2, 2009, pp. 109-24, doi: 10.1017/S1068280500003142. Accessed 6
    Dec. 2020.

Lynch Heidi, et al. "Plant-Based Diets: Considerations for Environmental Impact, Protein Quality, and Exercise
   Performance." Nutrients, vol. 10, no. 12, 2018, doi:10.3390/nu10121841. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Münter, Leilani. "Why a Plant-Based Diet Will Save the World." Health and the Environment. Disruptive Women in
    Health Care & the United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2012, archive.epa.gov/womenandgirls/web/
    pdf/1016healththeenvironmentebook.pdf.

Purdy, Chase. "Being Vegan Isn't as Good for Humanity as You Think." Quartz, 4 Aug. 2016, qz.com/749443/being-
    vegan-isnt-as-environmentally-friendly-as-you-think/. Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Schulz, Lee. "Would a Sudden Loss of the Meat and Dairy Industry, and All the Ripple Effects, Destroy the
    Economy?" Iowa State U Department of Economics, www.econ.iastate.edu/node/691. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Sierra Club. "Agriculture and Food." Sierra Club, 28 Feb. 2015, www.sierraclub.org/policy/agriculture/food.
    Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Sparks, Hannah. "Veganism Won't Save the World from Environmental Ruin, Researchers Warn." New York Post, 29
    Nov. 2019, nypost.com/2019/11/29/veganism-wont-save-the-world-from-environmental-ruin-researchers-
    warn/. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Willett, Walter, et al. "Food in the Anthropocene: The EAT-Lancet Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable
   Food Systems." The Lancet, vol. 393, no. 10170, 2019. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31788-4. Accessed 6 Dec.
    2020.

World Health Organization. "Malnutrition." World Health Organization, 1 Apr. 2020, www.who.int/news-room/fact-
    sheets/detail/malnutrition. Accessed 8 Dec. 2020.

World Health Organization. "Obesity and Overweight." World Health Organization, 1 Apr. 2020, www.who.int/news-
    room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight. Accessed 8 Dec. 2020.
390 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

       World Wildlife Fund. Appetite for Destruction: Summary Report. World Wildlife Fund, 2017, www.wwf.org.uk/sites/
           default/files/2017-10/WWF_AppetiteForDestruction_Summary_Report_SignOff.pdf.

       World Wildlife Fund and Knorr Foods. Future Fifty Foods. World Wildlife Fund, 2019, www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/
           files/2019-02/Knorr_Future_50_Report_FINAL_Online.pdf.

       "World Population by Year." Worldometer, www.worldometers.info/world-population/world-population-by-year/.
           Accessed 8 Dec. 2020.

      Discussion Questions

       1. In the second paragraph, what role does statistical data as evidence play in helping Lily Tran develop the
            thesis? What other evidence would be effective in achieving this goal?

       2. In the second paragraph of the section "The Coming Food Crisis," how does Tran use research evidence to
            provide an understanding of key concepts?

       3. By reviewing the organizational tools of headings and subheadings, diagram or outline the development of
            Tran's argument.

       4. Locate places where Tran incorporates research evidence into her own ideas or words through summary or
            paraphrase. How do these examples differ from the block quote under "Areas of Concern"? Is one method
            more or less effective in establishing ethos, or credibility, for the writer? Why or why not?

       5. How convincing is Tran's use of evidence in addressing counterclaims? Explain your answer.

     12.5 Writing Process: Integrating Research

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify characteristics of and formulate a strong thesis.
         · Evaluate sources to decide what to include in a research essay.
         · Synthesize information from outside sources with your own ideas in research writing while retaining a writerly

             voice.
         · Distinguish between a quotation, summary, and paraphrase and use each appropriately.
         · Draft an argumentative research essay.
         · Experience the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
         · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

       With a clearer understanding of how to work with sources to support and develop your position, you are just
       about ready to join the conversation and begin a research writing project of your own. The rest of this chapter
       will guide you through the process.

      Summary of Assignment

       For this assignment, you will write an argumentative research essay in which you take a position on a food-
       based topic. The objective in developing this essay is to explore a topic, concept, or question with which you
       may be unfamiliar or about which you want to know more. As a first step, creating a list of possible topics will
       allow you to consider the range of possibilities. Consider the following, for example:

         · Health aspects of caffeine or alcohol
         · Vegetarian diets
         · Eating disorders
         · Food shortages
         · School lunches

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                             12.5 · Writing Process: Integrating Research 391

Next, formulating a research question will help you consider the scope of your essay by providing guidelines to
follow in your research. Consider the following, for example:

  · Is the long-term but limited consumption of caffeine or alcohol (red wine, for example) healthy or
      unhealthy for the body? Why?

  · What are the environmental benefits of a vegetarian diet?
  · What are the causes of eating disorders, and how can they be circumvented?
  · What can be done to alleviate food shortages in a particular country?
  · What is the school's responsibility in providing students with nutrition?

As you explore possible topics and develop your focus for the paper, consider significant points of
contention--that is, their debatable nature: perhaps an important viewpoint that has not been widely
addressed or a perspective that has not adequately been explored. Your thesis-driven essay should follow these
criteria:

  · 10-12 pages, double-spaced, 12-point font (standard one-inch margins)
  · 8-10 sources (reflecting a range of primary and secondary sources, both print and digital)
  · MLA or APA documentation (in-text and end-of-text citation) as assigned by your instructor

You will synthesize the information you discover during your research to make connections about the potential
significance of your topic for your audience and for further inquiry. You will develop your essay on the basis of
thorough research of multiple sources and full analysis of your findings. Use sources as evidence to support,
contradict, or expand your original ideas or thinking. Be sure to include extensive analysis or evaluation
regarding your research question.

Another Lens 1. It can be challenging to come up with topics for your research paper; however, because
research can often be a collaborative activity (several people researching different aspects of a topic to
collaboratively write a report), brainstorming possible topics with others can help you get started.

To collaborate, form a small group, and list five possible topics on a sheet of paper or your laptop. Leave space
under each topic for comments, ideas, and questions. After everyone has completed their list of topics, either
move the paper or rotate seats every 10 minutes to allow group members to provide comments, ideas, and
questions for all topic lists. If four people are in your group, you would provide comments, ideas, and question
for three other group members, as you too will receive the same.

Another Lens 2. Be as creative and inclusive as possible when thinking about topics and data source
materials. Making a list of all possible nontraditional sources that could inform your topic may help you
provide another lens. Or consider the varying viewpoints from which to explore your topic. While the
Annotated Student Sample includes a range of traditionally academic sources, it might be interesting to
consider possible nontraditional sources for researching a food- and culture-based topic. For example,
consider these as primary sources: cookbooks, food blogs, or cultural festivals at which foods are included. If
possible, consider doing field research, such as conducting interviews or observing professionals on site. As
you choose your topic and begin your research process, keep an open mind about ways to use a variety of
sources to approach your topic in different ways.

Another Lens 3. Consider working in pairs in which each partner researches and writes on an opposing view
of a single debatable issue. After researching and writing the papers as instructed, partners can set up a
debate or panel discussion in which each presents their views on the subject, offering supporting evidence
from their papers. Partners may want to enhance their presentations with PowerPoint or other media,
including graphics, other visuals, or even sound, once again using or building further on researched evidence.
392 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

      Quick Launch: Thesis Frames

The most specific way to define the scope and focus of your research paper--and, as a writer, to control the
thought and creativity of it--is through the position you take on the topic: your stance, or thesis. A thesis
statement is often (though not always) a single, clear, and concise sentence that reveals your stance early in the
essay. Keep in mind, though, that it is not the essay question restated, a topic statement, an assertion of fact, or
a step-by-step writing plan. Strong academic writing generally shows the thesis in the introductory section
and then returns to it throughout, allowing readers to understand the writer's purpose and stance. To use a
travel analogy, your thesis tells readers where you are going and why the journey matters.

As you are composing your essay, the thesis serves as a touchstone to help you determine what material is
pertinent. Keeping your thesis in mind as you draft is important to ensure that your reasoning and supporting
evidence are focused and relevant. A strong thesis also provides a way to measure how successful you have
been in achieving your purpose--in travel terms again, it lets you judge whether you have reached your
destination and explained the journey's meaning. See Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Rhetoric for
more information about thesis statements.

Review the Annotated Student Sample to follow the way Lily Tran presents her thesis: "The human race must
turn to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact, starting now."
What works? What doesn't? What can you learn from her for your own writing?

Remember that as your topic and ideas develop, you may need to revisit your thesis statement. One good
practice in writing is to revisit the thesis after completing your draft to ensure the thesis reflects the content
and focus of your paper. If it does not align with the content, readers may think that you set yourself one task
but completed another. If this disconnect occurs, it's time to revise the thesis or content accordingly.

To develop a working thesis for your argumentative research paper, try using one of these frames. You may
change the phrasing as needed to support your ideas.

  · Because ________, [someone] should ________.
  · ________ saves ________, reduces ________, and saves ________.
  · The lack of ________ shows ________.
  · ________ influences ________ and by extension ________.
  · ________ accurately (inaccurately) portrays ________ because ________.
  · ________ is a result of ________, ________, and ________.
  · Although some argue that ________, a close examination shows ________.
  · ________ and ________ prove that ________.

     Drafting: Working with Sources

When writing an argumentative research essay, you will need to draw on other people's research to support
your original thinking. Such a proposition may seem complicated and even contradictory.

      Your argumentative research essay writing                                       While also ...
           assignment may require that you ...
                                                         writing something new and original.
develop a topic based on what has already been said      engaging with the borrowed materials by improving upon
and written                                              or disagreeing with those same opinions.

rely on experts' and authorities' opinions and facts to
support your ideas

TABLE 12.1

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                     12.5 · Writing Process: Integrating Research 393

        Your argumentative research essay writing                                      While also ...
             assignment may require that you ...
                                                          finding a way to develop your own significant
 attribute credit meticulously to previous researchers    contribution.

 adapt your language to fit the discipline of your topic  finding a way to incorporate your own words and your
 by building upon what you hear and read                  own voice.
TABLE 12.1

You can meet these writing requirements through planning and organization. The following information is
designed to help you simplify the steps.

Don't Skip the Outline

Take the time to outline each body paragraph. Compose a working topic sentence, and choose a reasoning
strategy or strategies. Then, in a paragraph outline organizer like the one presented in Table 12.2, list the
researched evidence you will use in the paragraph to support your topic sentence and related thesis. Model
your entry on the first entry by Lily Tran. Be sure to include the in-text citation in the evidence column. Add
more rows as needed.

Working Thesis: The human race must turn to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal
environmental impact, starting now.

Topic Sentence                                            Reasoning  Supporting Researched Evidence
                                                           Strategy

Global food systems are threatened by climate change      Cause and  Yet food production is responsible for
because farmers depend on relatively stable climate       effect     up to 30 percent of greenhouse gas
systems to plan for production and harvest.                          emissions (Barnard).

TABLE 12.2 Paragraph outline organizer

Summary vs. Synthesis

In a research essay, you may incorporate borrowed material through synthesis, summary, quotation, or
paraphrase. Because research writing is more than cutting and pasting together other people's ideas, good
writers synthesize the material they use by looking for connections among sources to develop their own
arguments. Summary--or a brief review of main points--is a necessary foundation for synthesis, but it is
important to avoid constructing an essay simply on a series of summaries. Part of developing your own voice
and control over your essay stems from your decision about which supports you use and why. You do not want
sources to override your ideas. Remember, sources provide evidence for your thesis.

Table 12.3 shows some key differences between summary and synthesis:

Summary                                                              Synthesis

Demonstrates comprehension/understanding Demonstrates critical/creative thinking and insight

Collects information                                      Compares/contrasts information

TABLE 12.3 Summary vs. synthesis
394 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

Summary                                                                       Synthesis

Restates key points                           Interprets key points to make new meaning

                         Looks within a text  Looks for connections/relationships between texts
s

Treats sources as distinct entities           Combines bits and pieces of sources for specific purpose

Provides overview of content                  Interprets content

 Requires basic reading and thinking skills   Requires complex reading and thinking skills
TABLE 12.3 Summary vs. synthesis
                                                                                         end s

                                              end s

Notice how Lily Tran synthesizes information in her work, combining sources to respond to a claim and adding
her own views in the second paragraph:

            In response to claims that a vegetarian diet is a necessary component of sustainable food production
            and consumption, Lusk and Norwood determined the importance of meat in a consumer's diet. Their
            study indicated that meat is the most valuable food category to consumers, and "humans derive great
            pleasure from consuming beef, pork, and poultry" (120). Currently only 4 percent of Americans are
            vegetarians, and it would be difficult to convince consumers to change their eating habits. Purdy adds
            "there's the issue of philosophy. A lot of vegans aren't in the business of avoiding animal products for
            the sake of land sustainability. Many would prefer to just leave animal husbandry out of food
            altogether."

            At the same time, consumers expect ready availability of the foods they desire, regardless of health
            implications or sustainability of sources. Unhealthy and unsustainable foods are heavily marketed.
            Out-of-season produce is imported year-round, increasing carbon emissions from air transportation.
            Highly processed and packaged convenience foods are nutritionally inferior and waste both energy and
            packaging materials. Serving sizes are larger than necessary, contributing to overconsumption and
            obesity. Snack food vending machines are ubiquitous in schools and public buildings. What is needed
            is a widespread attitude shift toward reducing waste, choosing local fruits and vegetables that are in
            season, and paying attention to how foods are grown and transported.

Quoting vs. Paraphrasing

One of the most common ways to use sources is by incorporating other people's words into your work.
Students who are unsure about their writing sometimes overuse quotations, creating a patchwork essay of
other people's voices, because they may lack confidence about using their own words. However, one key point
to remember is not to allow your sources to drown out your own voice. As a writer, you can avoid overreliance
on others' words by being strategic about the quotations you include and by incorporating your own
explanations and analysis for the quotations that you do include. Always explain or analyze your quotations;
they do not speak for themselves.

For example, Lily Tran does this kind of analysis in the following paragraph. In the first three sentences, she
paraphrases and quotes from the source. In the final sentence, she looks at the implications and relates the
evidence to her thesis.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                               12.5 · Writing Process: Integrating Research 395

   Among their findings, they singled out, in particular, the practice of using human-edible crops to

   produce meat, dairy, and fish for the human table. Currently 34 percent of human-edible crops are fed

   to animals, a practice that reduces calorie and protein supplies. They state in their report, "If society

   continues on a `business-as-usual' dietary trajectory, a 119% increase in edible crops grown will be

s  required by 2050" (1). Future food production and distribution must be transformed into systems that

   are nutritionally adequate, environmentally sound, and economically affordable.

   A crucial skill you will develop as you practice writing is the ability to judge when to quote directly and when to
   paraphrase. You have no doubt used direct quotations in your writing, repeating someone else's words
   verbatim within your paper and placing them within quotation marks, "like this." Another way to incorporate
   borrowed ideas into your writing is to paraphrase them, or restaetnedths em in your own words. If the ideas you
   want to borrow are particularly long, complicated, or filled with jargon, consider paraphrasing for brevity or
   clarity. Paraphrasing also allows you to maintain your own voice, keeping the writing style and language as
   consistent as possible--a benefit especially when you draw on multiple sources at once.

   Table 12.4 reviews the differences between quoting and paraphrasing and when to use each.

   Quotation                                                   Paraphrase

   The borrowing must be identical to the original,            The idea or concept borrowed from a passage is
   comprising a narrow segment of the source. The quoted       rephrased in your own words. A paraphrase must be
   material must match the source document word for            attributed to the original source. Paraphrased material
   word and must be attributed to the original author.         may (or may not) be shorter than the original passage,
                                                               depending on the text. If any language used is the same
                                                               as the language of the original source, then you are
                                                               quoting, not paraphrasing. It is sometimes necessary in
                                                               a paraphrase to use words directly from the borrowed
                                                               material to account for technical or discipline-specific
                                                               language. In such instances, place the directly quoted
                                                               words within quotation marks.

   Use a quotation ...                                         Use a paraphrase ...

     · to support your definition of a new or unfamiliar         · if a quotation would break the flow of your paper
         term or phrase                                              (Too many quotations can make an essay sound
                                                                     choppy and difficult to follow.)
     · when you want to distance yourself from the
         original source by quoting it to make clear that the    · to communicate statistics and numerical data
         statement is not your own                               · when combining information from a source with

     · to show that an expert or authority supports your             your own analysis or other data (synthesizing)
         position                                                · when what you want from your source is the idea,

     · to provide factual evidence for a claim                       not the language that expresses it
     · to include historically significant language              · if you can state the point of the material more
     · when a source presents an idea in a particularly
                                                                     succinctly by eliminating irrelevant information and
         striking, moving, or unique way                             not alter the meaning of the passage
     · to serve as a passage for analysis, comment, or           · to explain or simplify a passage that may be
                                                                     difficult to understand
         critique; for example, to set out a position with
         which you intend to agree or disagree

   TABLE 12.4 When to quote and when to paraphrase

   Although quoting can be more straightforward, consider these suggestions when paraphrasing:
   396 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

   · Focus on ideas and on understanding the paper or passage as a whole rather than skimming for specific

   phrases.

   · Put the original text aside when you write so that it doesn't overly influence you.

   · Restructure the idea to reflect the way your brain works.

s  · Change the words so that the paraphrase reflects your language and tone. Think about how you would

   explain the idea to someone unfamiliar with your subject (your mother, your roommate, your sister).

   Here is an example of how Lily Tran combines paraphrase and quotation:

   Global food systems are threatened by climate change because farmers depend on relatively stable

   climate systems to plan for production and harvest. Yet food production is responsible for up to 30

   percent   of  greenhouse          gas  emissions  (Barnard). While  soil      can  be  a  highly  effective  means  of  carbon
                                                               end s

   sequestration, agricultural soils have lost much of their effectiveness from overgrazing, erosion,

   overuse of chemical fertilizer, and excess tilling. Hamilton reports that the world's cultivated and

   grazed soils have lost 50 to 70 percent of their ability to accumulate and store carbon. As a result,

   "billions of tons of carbon have been released into the atmosphere."

   For more information on quoting, summarizing, and paraphrasing, visit Purdue University's Online Writing
   Lab (OWL) (https://openstax.org/r/purdueOWL).

   Opening and Closing

   Lead your argumentative research essay with your best punch. Make your opening so strong your reader feels
   compelled to continue. Make your closing so memorable your reader can't forget it. Because readers pay
   special attention to openings and closings, make these sections work for you. Start with a title and lead
   paragraph that grab readers' attention and alert them to what is to come. End with closings that sum up and
   reinforce where readers have been. Choose from the menu of options presented in Table 12.5 as you draft your
   essay. You may want to write more than one opening and closing and then ask your peer conference partner to
   give feedback about their preference and why they have that preference.

                 Opening Strategies                                              Closing Strategies

             Describe a related conflict.

             Explain the evolution of your thesis. Provide the answer to your research question.

             Provide a related anecdote.             Return to the scene set by the opening.

             Start with a sensory detail.            Resolve the problem you have explored.

             Introduce a related quotation.          Make a recommendation or a call to action.

             Shock readers with a statistic.         Speculate about the future with regard to the issue.

             Ask a rhetorical question.              Revisit your thesis.

             Present the chronology of the issue. Leave readers with an insightful thought to ponder.

             End with your thesis.

   TABLE 12.5 Writing menu

   Look again at the way Lily Tran begins her essay by explaining the evolution of her thesis. Is it effective in
   grabbing your attention? Why or why not? What are some other strategies that she might have used?

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                12.5 · Writing Process: Integrating Research 397

   For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the way food is produced,

   processed, and distributed are necessary on a global scale. The required changes will affect nearly all

   aspects of life, including not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land use and habitats,

   water quality and availability, energy use and production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate

s  change, economics, and even cultural and social values. These changes may not be popular, but they

   are imperative. The human race must turn to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with

   minimal environmental impact, starting now.

   Now look again at the way Lily Tran ends her essay by revisiting her thesis. Is it effective in leaving you with

   something to think about? Why or why not? What are some other strategies that she might have used?
                                                     end s

               For the human race to ehnadvesa sustainable future, emnadsssive changes in the way food is produced,
               processed, and distributed are necessary on a global scale. The required changes will affect nearly all

               aspects of life, including not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land use and habitats,

               water quality and availability, energy use and production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate

               change, economics, and even cultural and social values. These changes may not be popular, but they

               are imperative. They are also achievable. The human race must turn to sustainable food systems that

               provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact, starting now.

   Responding to Counterarguments

   The final element of your argumentative research essay is a response to counterarguments, or others'
   objections. To establish your credibility on the subject, you need to acknowledge and address the most
   important arguments against your thesis. Look again at Lily Tran's response to a counterargument, which she
   acknowledges and then addresses. Does she address the counterargument fully? What could she add to the
   paragraph to address the counterargument more fully and forcefully?

               A second objection addresses the claim that land use for animal-based food production contributes to
               pollution and greenhouse gas emissions and is inefficient in terms of nutrient delivery. Berners-Lee et
               al. point out that animal nutrition from grass, pasture, and silage comes partially from land that cannot
               be used for other purposes, such as producing food directly edible by humans or for other ecosystem
               services such as biofuel production. Consequently, nutritional losses from such land use do not fully
               translate into losses of human-available nutrients.

   Use a graphic organizer like Table 12.6 to plan your response to important arguments against your thesis, and
   consult Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument.
   398 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

   Introduction                That ...                                              However, But, Despite ...
                    (What do critics claim?)                                     (What do you say in response?)

s  While some

   may claim ...

   Although                           end s
   critics argue
   ...

   Those
   opposed
   suggest ...

   Some
   opponents
   claim ...

   Those
   critical of the
   idea argue ...

   Some             that nutritional losses from     While this objection may be correct, it does not address the fact
   opponents        such land use do not fully       that natural carbon sinks are being destroyed to increase
   claim ...        translate into losses of human-  agricultural land and, therefore, increase greenhouse gas
                    available nutrients.             emissions into the atmosphere.

   TABLE 12.6 Counterclaim organizer

        Peer Review: Switch Sides

   One way to gain a new perspective for revision is to switch sides in arguing a position. Your peer conference
   partner can help you with this exercise. Rewrite a paragraph of your draft from an alternative viewpoint. Ask
   your partner to read both versions. Discuss the similarities and differences regarding the rhetorical situation.
   In what ways might you revise your original paragraph to better address the issues of the alternative
   paragraph?

   For example, Issa, a mountain bike enthusiast, wrote his draft in favor of opening up more wilderness trails for
   mountain bikers to use. However, before writing his final draft, he researched the arguments against his
   position and wrote from that viewpoint:

               Hikers and other passive trail users argue against allowing mountain bikes onto narrow trails
               traditionally traveled only by foot and horse. They point out that the wide, deeply treaded tires of
               mountain bikes cause erosion and that the high speeds of the bikers startle and upset both hikers and
               horses. According to hiker Donald Meserlain, the bikes "ruin the tranquility of the woodlands and drive
               out hikers, bird watchers, and strollers" (Hanley 4).

   For the writer, the main advantage of switching sides for a draft may be a better understanding of the
   opposition's viewpoint, making for a more effective argument against it in the final draft. In fact, for his final
   draft, Issa argues his original position in favor of mountain bikes, but he does so with more understanding,
   empathy, and effectiveness because he spent some time with the opposition. His final draft makes it clear
   where he stands on the issue. The tone of the mountain bike essay is now less strident and more thoughtful.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                     12.6 · Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations 399

   Educated mountain biking, like hiking and horseback riding, respects the environment and promotes

   peace and conservation, not noise and destruction. Making this case has begun to pay off, and the

   battle over who walks and who rides the trails should now shift in favor of peaceful coexistence.

   Buoyed by studies showing that bicycle tires cause no more erosion or trail damage than the boots of

s  hikers, and far less than horses' hooves, mountain bike advocates are starting to find receptive ears

   among environmental organizations (Schwartz 78).

   Another switch that pays good dividends for the writer is changing the audience. In college writing situations,
   the final audience always includes the instructor, so such a change may simply be a temporary but useful
   fiction. Had a draft of the mountain bike essay been aimed at the different constituencies mentioned in the
   essay--the Sierra Club, mountain biceyncdlesmanufacturers, property owners, or local newspapers--the writer
   might have gained a useful perspective in attempting to switch language and arguments to best address this
   more limited readership. Likewise, drafts of various papers written to young children, sympathetic classmates,
   skeptical professors, or sarcastic friends may also provide useful variations in the writing perspective.

   In addition to working with a partner on this activity, take some extra time to check the essential elements of
   the argumentative research essay. Note whether the paper you are reviewing has these elements:

   · a strong thesis
   · sufficient and accurate support for claims
   · a combination of summary, paraphrase, quotation, and synthesis
   · strong counterclaims
   · complete and correct citations
   · a strong closing

   Revising: Who's Game?

   As you know, revising means reseeing, rereading, and rethinking your thoughts on paper until they match
   your intention. Mentally, it is conceptual work in which you focus on larger units of meaning. Be prepared to
   do a lot of copying, cutting, pasting, crossing out, and rewriting until you are satisfied with the ideas and where
   they appear in your paper.

   12.6 Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations

   LEARNING OUTCOMES
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:

     · Apply citation conventions systematically in your work, understanding the concepts of intellectual property that
         motivate documentation conventions.

     · Compose texts that integrate the writer's ideas with those from appropriate sources.

   Direct quotations are most effective when you integrate them smoothly into the flow of your paper. You can do
   this by introducing the source and reason for the quotation in a phrase or sentence. Readers should be able to
   follow your meaning easily and to understand the relevance of the quotation immediately.

   Introduce Quotations

   Because readers need to know who is speaking, introduce quoted material with a signal phrase (sometimes
   called an attributory phrase). A signal phrase is a word or group of words that introduces borrowed or quoted
   material and informs readers of the source and purpose of the quotation. If the source is well-known, the name
   alone will be enough of a signal phrase. For example, a first-year student wrote, "Henry David Thoreau asserts
   in Walden, `The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation'" (5).

   If your paper focuses on the published work itself, introduce a quotation with the work's title rather than the
   author's name, as long as the reference is clear--for example, "Walden sets forth one individual's antidote
   against the `lives of quiet desperation' led by the working class in mid-nineteenth-century America" (Thoreau
400 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

5). If either the author or the source is not well-known, introduce the quotation with a brief explanation to give
readers enough context to understand the quotation--for example, "Mary Catherine Bateson, daughter of
renown anthropologist Margaret Mead, has become, in her own right, a student of modem civilization."

Select the Right Signal Phrase

Signal phrases (https://openstax.org/r/signalphrases) tell readers that the words or ideas that follow come from
another source. Signal phrases often contain a verb that indicates the tone or intention of the author. To avoid
monotony, vary the placement and words of the signal phrases you use. Note the differences, both slight and
significant, in the following signal words and phrases as you integrate some of them into your draft:

                                  acknowledges denies                         points out

                                  admits      emphasizes refutes

                                  agrees      endorses reports

                                  argues      follows up reveals

                                  asserts     grants                          says

                                  believes    illustrates shows

                                  claims      implies                         states

                                  comments    insists                         suggests

                                  concedes    maintains thinks

                                  concludes   notes                           writes

                                  declares    observes

                                  TABLE 12.7

Quote Smoothly and Correctly

A direct quotation repeats an author's or speaker's exact words. Slight changes in wording are permitted, but
these changes must be clearly marked. Although you cannot change what a source says, you do have control
over how much of it you use. Because using quotations that are too long can imply that you have little to say for
yourself, use only the part of the quotation needed to make your point. Quotations should support your points,
not say them for you.

To shorten a quotation to include only the most important information, integrate it smoothly and correctly into
the body of your paragraph to provide minimal disruption for readers. Unless the source quoted is itself the
topic of the paper (as in a literary interpretation), limit brief quotations to no more than two per page and long
quotations to no more than one every three pages. The following examples illustrate both correct and incorrect
use of quoted material.

Original Passage

According to one film critic, the plot is exciting, but most of the dialogue "has the energy and impact of day-old
gruel, without sugar, spice, or raisins." In fact, if I had to judge the film on dialogue alone, I'd say, "Save your
money." Most of the characters alternate between a low and intermittent mumble, like a distant helicopter with
engine trouble, and garbled whoops, as though speaking in tongues. Perhaps this is the director's way of trying
to mask a cornucopia of cliché-ridden, monosyllabic utterances, which, I agree, are not worth audience

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                         12.6 · Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations 401

   attention. Much of the acting is no better. However, some notable exceptions eclipse all the negatives of the
   script and the bit-part actors.

   Omit or Substitute Words Judiciously

s  Cutting words for the sake of brevity is often useful, but do not distort meaning. Indicate omitted words by

   using ellipsis points (three dots within a sentence, four to indicate a complete sentence is being omitted). Use

   brackets ([ ]) to indicate any changes or additions.

   Distorted Quotation

   "The plot is exciting . . . the dialogue has . . . energy and impact."
                                                     end s

   The critic's words are taken out of context. Negatives are removed, as are the critic's dismissive comments
   about the film and the exceptions to the opinion.

   Accurate Quotation

   "The plot is exciting, but most of the dialogue `has the energy and impact of day-old gruel. . . .' However, some
   notable exceptions eclipse all the negatives of the script."

   Quotation Marks for Short Quotations

   Embed brief quotations in the main body of your paper, and enclose them in quotation marks. The previous
   examples in this section are brief and would be embedded within paragraphs as normal sentences. According
   to MLA style guidelines, a brief prose quotation consists of four or fewer typed lines; a brief poetry quotation
   consists of three or fewer typed lines.

   Block Format for Long Quotations

   Set quotations of more than four lines in block format. Block quotations are indented but spaced the same as
   the normal text. Format block quotations as follows:

   · Introduce the quotation in the last line of normal text with a sentence that ends with a colon.
   · Indent one half inch, and then begin the quotation.
   · Do not use quotation marks, as the indentation signals direct quotation.
   · Include the page number, in parentheses, after the end punctuation.

   For example, this student writing on Thoreau used a block quotation from Walden to describe the scenery in
   the author's own words:

   The scenery of Walden is on a humble scale, and, though very beautiful, does not approach to
   grandeur, nor can it much concern one who has not long frequented it or lived by its shore; yet this
   pond is so remarkable for its depth and purity as to merit a particular description. It is a clear and deep
   green well, half a mile long and a mile and three quarters in circumference, and contains about sixty-
   one and a half acres; a perennial spring in the midst of pine and oak woods, without any visible inlet or
   outlet except by the clouds and evaporation (195).

   Explain and Clarify Quotations

   Sometimes you will need to explain a quotation's relevance or meaning in the context of your discussion. For
   example, one student wrote, "In A Sand County Almanac, author Aldo Leopold invites modern urban readers to
   confront what they lose by living in the city and mentions the resulting `spiritual dangers': `supposing that
   breakfast comes from the grocery and . . . heat comes from the furnace' (6). Leopold sees city-dwellers as self-
   centered children, blissfully but dangerously unaware of how their basic needs are met."

   If you need to clarify what a word or reference means, write your definition or explanation and enclose it
   within square brackets.
402 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

       Adjust for Clarity and Accuracy
       A passage containing a quotation must follow all the rules of grammatical sentence structure: tenses should be
       consistent, verbs and subjects should agree, and so on. If the form of the quotation doesn't quite fit the
       grammar of your own sentences, you can either quote less of the original source, change your sentences, or
       make a slight alteration in the quotation. For example, you might write, "Leopold writes that city dwellers
       assume `breakfast comes from the grocery'" or "Leopold writes that city dwellers `[suppose] that breakfast
       comes from the grocery.'" For more information on using quotations, see Editing Focus: Quotations and
       Quotations.

      When to Quote

       Reserve direct quotations for cases in which you cannot express ideas better yourself or when the exact words
       offer the strongest support for your ideas. Use quotations when the original words are especially precise, clear,
       powerful, or vivid, but ensure they do not substitute for your own thoughts.

         · Precise. Use quotations when the words are important in themselves or when the author makes fine but
             important distinctions.
             "Government, even in its best state, is but a necessary evil: in its worst state, an intolerable one."--Thomas
             Paine

         · Clear. Use quotations when the author's ideas are complex and difficult to paraphrase. "Paragraphs tell
             readers how writers want to be read."--William Blake

         · Powerful. Use quotations when the words are especially authoritative and memorable.
             "You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."--John 8:32, King James Version

         · Vivid. Use quotations when the language is lively and colorful, when it reveals something of the author's or
             speaker's character.
             "A person who won't read has no advantage over one who can't read."--Mark Twain

     12.7 Evaluation: Effectiveness of Research Paper

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify common formats and design features for different kinds of texts.
         · Implement style and language consistent with argumentative research writing while maintaining your own

             voice.
         · Determine how genre conventions for structure, paragraphing, tone, and mechanics vary.
       When drafting, you follow your strongest research interests and try to answer the question on which you have
       settled. However, sometimes what began as a paper about one thing becomes a paper about something else.
       Your peer review partner will have helped you identify any such issues and given you some insight regarding
       revision. Another strategy is to compare and contrast your draft with the grading rubric similar to one your
       instructor will use. It is a good idea to consult this rubric frequently throughout the drafting process.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                              12.7 · Evaluation: Effectiveness of Research Paper 403

Rubric

Score         Critical Language        Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

5             The text always          The writer's position or claim on   The writer maintains an objective
Skillful      adheres to the           a debatable issue is stated         voice in a paper that reflects an
              "Editing Focus" of this  clearly in the thesis and expertly  admirable balance of source
              chapter: integrating     supported with credible             information, analysis, synthesis,
              sources and              researched evidence. Ideas are      and original thought. Quotations
              quotations               clearly presented in well-          function appropriately as support
              appropriately as         developed paragraphs with clear     and are thoughtfully edited to
              discussed in Section     topic sentences and relate          reveal their main points. The writer
              12.6. The text also      directly to the thesis. Headings    fully addresses counterclaims and
              shows ample evidence     and subheadings clarify             is consistently aware of the
              of the writer's intent   organization, and appropriate       audience in terms of language use
              to consciously meet or   transitions link ideas.             and background information
              challenge                                                    presented.
              conventional
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

4             The text usually         The writer's position or claim on   The writer maintains an objective
Accomplished  adheres to the           a debatable issue is stated         voice in a paper that reflects a
              "Editing Focus" of this  clearly in the thesis and           balance of source information,
              chapter: integrating     supported with credible             analysis, synthesis, and original
              sources and              researched evidence. Ideas are      thought. Quotations usually
              quotations               clearly presented in well-          function as support, and most are
              appropriately as         developed paragraphs with topic     edited to reveal their main points.
              discussed in Section     sentences and usually relate        The writer usually addresses
              12.6. The text also      directly to the thesis. Some        counterclaims and is aware of the
              shows some evidence      headings and subheadings clarify    audience in terms of language use
              of the writer's intent   organization, and sufficient        and background information
              to consciously meet or   transitions link ideas.             presented.
              challenge
              conventional
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

TABLE 12.8
404 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

       Score  Critical Language        Clarity and Coherence                  Rhetorical Choices
 3                Awareness
 Capable
              The text generally       The writer's position or claim on      The writer generally maintains an
 2            adheres to the           a debatable issue is stated in the     objective voice in a paper that
 Developing   "Editing Focus" of this  thesis and generally supported         reflects some balance of source
              chapter: integrating     with some credible researched          information, analysis, synthesis,
TABLE 12.8    sources and              evidence. Ideas are presented in       and original thought, although
              quotations               moderately developed                   imbalance may well be present.
              appropriately as         paragraphs. Most, if not all, have     Quotations generally function as
              discussed in Section     topic sentences and relate to the      support, but some are not edited to
              12.6. The text also      thesis. Some headings and              reveal their main points. The writer
              shows limited            subheadings may clarify                may attempt to address
              evidence of the          organization, but their use may        counterclaims but may be
              writer's intent to       be inconsistent, inappropriate, or     inconsistent in awareness of the
              consciously meet or      insufficient. More transitions         audience in terms of language use
              challenge                would improve coherence.               and background information
              conventional                                                    presented.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

              The text occasionally    The writer's position or claim on      The writer sometimes maintains an
              adheres to the           a debatable issue is not clearly       objective voice in a paper that lacks
              "Editing Focus" of this  stated in the thesis, nor is it        a balance of source information,
              chapter: integrating     sufficiently supported with            analysis, synthesis, and original
              sources and              credible researched evidence.          thought. Quotations usually do not
              quotations               Some ideas are presented in            function as support, often replacing
              appropriately as         paragraphs, but they are               the writer's ideas or are not edited
              discussed in Section     unrelated to the thesis. Some          to reveal their main points.
              12.6. The text also      headings and subheadings may           Counterclaims are addressed
              shows emerging           clarify organization, while others     haphazardly or ignored. The writer
              evidence of the          may not; transitions are either        shows inconsistency in awareness
              writer's intent to       inappropriate or insufficient to       of the audience in terms of
              consciously meet or      link ideas.                            language use and background
              challenge                                                       information presented.
              conventional
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                       12.8 · Spotlight on ... Bias in Language and Research 405

       Score  Critical Language        Clarity and Coherence              Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness
 1
 Beginning    The text does not        The writer's position or claim on  The writer does not maintain an
              adhere to the "Editing   a debatable issue is neither       objective voice in a paper that
TABLE 12.8    Focus" of this chapter:  clearly stated in the thesis nor   reflects little to no balance of
              integrating sources      sufficiently supported with        source information, analysis,
              and quotations           credible researched evidence.      synthesis, and original thought.
              appropriately as         Some ideas are presented in        Quotations may function as
              discussed in Section     paragraphs. Few, if any, have      support, but most are not edited to
              12.6. The text also      topic sentences, and they barely   reveal their main points. The writer
              shows little to no       relate to the thesis. Headings     may attempt to address
              evidence of the          and subheadings are either         counterclaims and may be
              writer's intent to       missing or unhelpful as            inconsistent in awareness of the
              consciously meet or      organizational tools. Transitions  audience in terms of language use
              challenge                generally are missing or           and background information
              conventional             inappropriate.                     presented.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

12.8 Spotlight on ... Bias in Language and Research

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Avoid bias and stereotyping in your writing.
  · Evaluate sources for language bias and stereotyping.

When you begin any research project, it is important to have set checks and balances to ensure you are not
unknowingly imposing your own biases into your research. A bias is a personal and usually unreasoned
judgment, or a prejudice. Although it may be impossible to function without any bias (good or bad), you can
consider possible components of bias in your research. No document can be completely objective, for all
documents are created by people who have been socialized in some way; therefore, it is helpful to think about
the biases of authors of research documents. Many researchers are clear about their biases and state them in
introductions to their writings, whereas others may use--or omit--evidence in a way that implies bias for or
against the topic.

As a student researcher, seek to be as transparent and critically self-reflective as possible about your
preconceptions and language use. Although you will revisit the concept of bias in source selection in The
Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources, in this section you will look at bias in topic choice and
language use.

Language Bias

Language bias (https://openstax.org/r/languagebias) refers to words and expressions that are offensive,
demeaning, or prejudicial toward individuals or groups on the basis of gender, race, ethnicity, social class,
appearance, physical or mental abilities, or sexual orientation. One form of language bias
(https://openstax.org/r/languagebias1) is sexist language that includes only one gender. The most common
occurrence is use of the word man or men to stand for all people--including those who are not male. Language
has changed to be more inclusive, with terms such as firefighter replacing fireman and mail carrier replacing
406 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

       mailman.

       Another kind of language bias focuses on people's health or abilities, indicating a person as a "victim" of a
       certain disease or "suffering from it." Use unbiased language to identify the person as someone "with X
       disease." Similarly, refer to a "person who is blind" rather than a "blind person." This kind of language focuses
       on the person, not the disease or ability.

       To avoid language bias, follow these guidelines:

         · Use currently accepted terminology when referring to groups of people. If you are writing about a group of
             people and are unsure of the proper terminology, research the most recent usage patterns before you
             write. The same is true for pronoun references, about which you can find more information in Editing
             Focus: Pronouns and Pronouns.

         · Be sensitive when referring to people with disabilities by using a "people first" approach. For example, say
             "a person who uses a wheelchair" instead of "a wheelchair-bound person."

         · Avoid stereotyping--that is, attributing positive or negative characteristics to people on the basis of groups
             to which they belong. Although not strictly linguistic, stereotyping comes through in making assumptions
             about people. A stereotypical attitude would be to assume that all or most rich people act in certain ways
             and, conversely, that all or most poor people act in certain ways. Another stereotypical attitude would be to
             assume that a person who comes from a particular area of the country adheres to a certain political
             agenda.

      Assignment: Reviewing Your Research Essay for Language Bias

       First, review your essay, and speculate as to biases or blocks you may have incorporated while researching and
       writing. Freewrite, reflecting on these possibilities. Next, go through your essay one section at a time, and
       highlight any people references, pronouns, biased language, and instances of possible stereotyping. Using the
       information above and your reflective freewrite, complete a bias chart like the one shown in Table 12.9. Next,
       exchange your essay with two other classmates to see whether they detect bias of which you were unaware.
       After receiving feedback from two or three people, form a group and discuss what each of you found and how
       to use alternative language or references. Finally, revisit your freewriting after collaborating with your
       classmates to reconsider what you wrote before. Add a section to the freewrite in which you relate what your
       group discussed and what you may have learned from that discussion.

                                      Essay Section Essay Language Possible Bias Possible Revision

                                     TABLE 12.9 Bias chart

      Publish Your Work

       After completing your argumentative research paper, you should have a product to be proud of. Your instructor
       may have a plan to publish papers written by class members, or you may be interested in publishing on your
       own and joining a wider scholarly conversation. Consider submitting your work to one of these journals that
       publish undergraduate research:

         · Butler Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/butlerjournalUG)
         · Crossing Borders: A Multidisciplinary Journal of Undergraduate Scholarship (https://openstax.org/r/

             crossingborders)
         · Liberated Arts: A Journal for Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/liberatedarts)
         · Reinvention: An International Journal of Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/reinvention)

       In addition, if you have designed your research project as a solution to a local problem, consider finding
       venues to disseminate the information to those for whom it would be the most useful. This decision may mean

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     12.9 · Portfolio: Why Facts Matter in Research Argumentation 407

adjusting the format, tone, language, and/or conventions of your work to address the needs of a specific
audience.

12.9 Portfolio: Why Facts Matter in Research Argumentation

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between facts, inferences, and informed opinion and when to use each.
  · Analyze how facts have shaped your research and composing processes.

As this assignment draws to a close, you will note that facts, examples, inferences, informed opinions, and
personal experiences all provided believable evidence for your argument. However, be aware that the
difference between facts and other evidence is that facts are verifiable. That Alaska has the most territory of all
U.S. states is not up for question or interpretation; personal belief or opinion is irrelevant. Unless their
accuracy is challenged, facts are essential in any research paper. Yet they can be misleading when used in
certain ways or proved incorrect by later discovery. Hopefully, you have supported your research paper with
verifiable factual information.

Inferences are conclusions based on a combination of facts and personal knowledge. For example, if you
attend five different classes in five different academic departments and find no minority students in each
class, you may infer that very few minority students attend the school. However, although your inference may
seem reasonable, it is not a fact because you have not met all the students at the college, nor do you have
access to enrollment figures.

Facts are not necessarily better or more important than inferences; they serve different purposes. Facts
provide information, and inferences give that information meaning. Sometimes inferences are all you will
have available. For example, statistics reflecting what "Americans" believe or do are only inferences about
these groups based on information collected from a relatively small number of individuals. To be credible,
inferences must be reasonable and based on factual evidence.

Expert opinion makes strong evidence. A forest ranger's testimony about trail damage caused by mountain
bikes or lug-soled hiking boots reflects the training and experience of an expert. A casual hiker making the
same observation is less believable.

Personal testimony or informed opinion is based on direct personal experience. When someone has
experienced something firsthand, their knowledge cannot be discounted easily. If you have been present at the
mistreatment of someone, whether as the object or observer of the incident, your eyewitness testimony will
carry weight.

Reflective Task

After reflecting on your argumentative research essay by considering bias, facts, and inferences, you now have
the opportunity to reflect on what you learned through the research and writing process in general. Think
critically about your writing process, reflect on each stage, and consider how this writing experience was
similar to or different from others. Also, estimate roughly what percent of your sources are facts, examples,
inferences, or informed opinion. As you reflect, answer the following questions in your notebook or as part of a
cover letter for your research paper:

  · How did you decide on the topic for your paper?
  · How did you decide on the scope of your topic?
  · What did you know about your topic before you began your research?
  · What did you learn about your topic?
  · What primary and secondary sources did you collect, and why?
  · How did you arrive at a workable thesis?
  · How did you determine which sources best supported your thesis?
408 12 · Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence

         · Did you rely most on facts, examples, inferences, expert opinion, or personal experiences? Why?
         · What type of citation did you use for crediting material you did not write?
         · How did collaboration with others help you as you wrote and revised your paper?
         · How did the writing for this paper compare with other writing assignments? Was it easier or harder to

             write than others you have written?
         · How did you manage the timing of your essay, from topic selection, to gathering sources, to writing and

             revising?
         · What could you have done differently to make your writing process easier or more effective?
         · What insights do have about yourself as a writer?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      12 · Further Reading 409

Further Reading

These sources address argument and are based on researched evidence.
Lanier, Jaron. Ten Arguments for Deleting Your Social Media Accounts Right Now. Picador, 2019.
O'Neill, Cathy. Weapons of Math Destruction. Crown, 2017.
Zuboff, Shoshona. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of

   Power. PublicAffairs, 2020.

Works Cited

Burke, Kenneth. The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in Symbolic Action. 3rd ed., U of California P, 1973,
    pp. 110-11.

Giorgis, Hannah. "Samin Nosrat Wants Everybody to Cook." The Atlantic, 14 Oct. 2018, theatlantic.com/
    entertainment/archive/2018/10/samin-nosrat-salt-fat-acid-heat-netflix/572731/.

Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac. Oxford UP, 1949.
Morabito, Greg. "Samin Nosrat Turned Her TV Dream into a Reality with Netflix's `Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat.'" Eater,

    10 Oct. 2018, eater.com/2018/10/10/17949862/samin-nosrat-salt-fat-acid-heat-netflix.
Nosrat, Samin. Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat: Mastering the Elements of Good Cooking. Simon & Schuster, 2017.
Pinsker, Joe. "The Why of Cooking." The Atlantic, 25 Apr. 2017, theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2017/

    04/the-why-of-cooking-samin-nosrat/523923/.
The Purdue OWL Family of Sites. The Writing Lab and OWL at Purdue and Purdue U, 2008, owl.purdue.edu/

    owl/purdue_owl.html. Accessed 25 Jan. 2021.
Rosner, Helen. "`I Fail Almost Every Day': An Interview with Samin Nosrat." The New Yorker, 23 Feb. 2020,

    newyorker.com/culture/the-new-yorker-interview/i-fail-almost-every-day-an-interview-with-samin-nosrat.
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden; Or Life in the Woods. Ticknor and Fields, 1854. Project Gutenberg, 29 Jan.

    2021, gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm.
410 12 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Research Process: Accessing and                                                             13
Recording Information

FIGURE 13.1 In the research process, you may have to conduct fieldwork to collect primary data. In this

photograph, a military sergeant is interviewing an Iraqi police officer and entering the subject's answers into her
computer. (credit: "Petty Officer 1st Class" by Jeremy L. Wood/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

13.1  The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources
13.2  The Research Process: How to Create Sources
13.3  Glance at the Research Process: Key Skills
13.4  Annotated Student Sample: Research Log
13.5  Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log
13.6  Spotlight on ... Ethical Research

INTRODUCTION In every field, any claim you make about a debatable subject must be supported by evidence.
To identify an unknown rock, for example, you scrape it with a known rock in the geology laboratory. The
scratch marks of the harder rock on the softer rock will be part of your evidence to support your claims about
the unknown rock. If you conduct a survey of students to examine college study habits, counting and collating
your findings will provide evidence to support your conclusions. Although the nature of evidence varies from
one discipline to another, the need for evidence is constant. Collecting accurate and current evidence to
support your claim is a key part of research; without it, readers likely will judge you as uninformed and your
work as unconvincing. Equally constant is the need to have complete and accurate documentation for these
sources. While not all research is done for academic purposes--you may conduct research when choosing a
412 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

new piece of technology, deciding on a movie to watch, renting an apartment, or even choosing a career
path--the research discussed in this chapter is academic related. You will learn about generating research
support materials by doing library research, conducting fieldwork, taking notes, organizing sources, and
keeping a detailed and accurate research log.

13.1 The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Locate and evaluate primary and secondary research materials, including journal articles and essays, books,
      scholarly and professionally established and maintained databases or archives, and informal electronic
      networks and Internet sources.

  · Apply methods and technologies commonly used for research in various fields.

Once you have chosen your argumentative research topic, developed a workable research question, and
devised a plan for your research as described in Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with
Evidence, you are ready to begin the task usually associated with the term research--namely, the collection of
sources. One key point to remember at this stage is intentionality; that is, begin with a research plan rather
than a collection of everything you find related to your topic. Without a plan, you easily may end up
overwhelmed by too many unusable sources. A carefully considered research plan will save you time and
energy and help make your search for sources more productive. Access to information is generally not a
problem; the problem is knowing where to find the information you need and how to distinguish among types
and qualities of sources. In short, finding sources is all about sorting, selecting, and evaluating.

Your specific methods for collecting sources will depend on the details of your research project. However, a
good strategy to begin with is to think in terms of needs: What do you need, as the researcher and writer? What
do your readers need? This kind of needs assessment is similar to the considerations you make about the
rhetorical situation when writing an analysis or argument.

Review Table 13.1 as you conduct a source "needs assessment."

          Basic Facts/  These materials help inform you about your topic. They also may help shape the scope
          Data/         of your knowledge of your topic.
          Information

Your      Critical/     These materials provide explanations and context for your research project. They may
Needs     Conceptual/   range from basic historical or contextual information to explanations of special theories
          Contextual    or ideologies. These materials will help you with your analysis and will help you address
          Sources       the So what? questions that your research topic may pose.

          Reason to     This material engages readers both intellectually and emotionally.
          Invest

Readers'  Proof That    These are convincing arguments or illustrative examples that answer the So what?
Needs     It Matters    question, showing why anyone should care about the topic or your approach to it.

          Examples      These are illustrative examples and explanations of complex, esoteric, or idiosyncratic
          and           concepts, theories, technical processes, etc.
          Explanation

TABLE 13.1 Research needs assessment

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                 13.1 · The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources 413

Generating Key Words

Before you begin locating sources, consider the research terms you will use to find these sources. Most
research is categorized according to key terms that are important for understanding the topic and/or
methodologies. When beginning the research process, you may find that the ideas or words associated with
your topic are not yielding results when you search library or Internet databases (organized collections of
information).

If you are running into challenges locating information related to your topic, you may not have chosen the
specific key terms needed. Because libraries and online databases generate search results based on
algorithms that target keywords, the best way to find the appropriate terminology associated with your topic is
to practice generating key terms. You may need a range of keywords, some for library searches and others for
online searches. When considering the difference between keyword searches in academic libraries versus
online sources, note that most academic libraries use Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) for subject
searches of their online catalogs. Many databases use subject searches based on algorithms that may be
unique to that database. Don't become discouraged if you find that the terms for searching in your academic
library may be somewhat different from the terms for searching online. As you begin to find sources related to
your subject, take notes on the variety of terms that describe your research area. These notes will come in
handy as both keyword and subject searches throughout your research process.

The following steps and examples will help you get started:

  · Begin by limiting your topic to one or two sentences or questions. (What effects do a region's water and
     temperatures have on fall foliage?)

  · Highlight specific words that are key to understanding or finding answers to your question. (What effects
     do the amount of water a region gets and temperatures for that region have on colors of fall foliage?)

  · Consider words assumed but not mentioned in your question. For instance, the example question implies
     a search around trees and rainfall; however, trees and rainfall are not mentioned. Add these words to the
      words highlighted in your question.

  · Consider synonyms for the words you highlighted. A search for synonyms for fall yields harvest, autumn,
     and autumnal equinox. A search for synonyms for leaves yields foliage, fronds, and stalks. Be sure you
      understand the meaning of each synonym so that you can choose those that best capture the concepts you
      seek to research.

  · Try different combinations of the key terms and synonyms to help you find as many sources as you can.

You can find more information about key terms and searches by consulting Writing Process: Informing and
Analyzing.

Locating Sources

Once you have identified sources to fit both your and your readers' needs, you can begin to locate these
sources. Throughout the research process, look for sources that will provide enough information for you to
form your own opinions or answer your research question(s). Use source materials as support for your own
words and ideas. The following are possible locations for source materials:
414 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

       FIGURE 13.2 New York City Public Library, Rose Main Reading Room (credit: "Grand Study Hall, New York Public
       Library" by Alex Proimos/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
       Libraries
       While much of your writing and research work happens online, libraries remain indispensable to research.
       Your university's physical and/or online library is a valuable resource, providing access to databases, books
       and periodicals (both print and electronic), and other media that might not otherwise be accessible. In many
       cases, experienced people are available with discipline-specific research advice. To take full advantage of
       library resources, keep the following suggestions in mind:

         · Visit early and often. As soon as you receive a research assignment, visit the library (physically, virtually,
             or both) to discover resources available for your project. Even if your initial research indicates a wealth of
             material, you may be unable to find everything during your first search. You may find that a book has been
             checked out or that your library doesn't subscribe to a certain periodical. Furthermore, going to the library
             can be extremely helpful because you likely will see a range of additional sources simply by looking
             around the areas in which you locate initial sources.

         · Check general sources first. Look at dictionaries, encyclopedias, atlases, and yearbooks for background
             information about your topic. An hour spent with these sources will give you a quick overview of the scope
             of your topic and lead you to more specific information.

         · Talk to librarians. At first, you might show a librarian your assignment and explain your topic and
             research plans. Later, you might ask for help in finding a particular source or finding out whether the
             library has additional sources you have not checked yet. Librarians are professional information experts;
             don't hesitate to use their expertise.

       General Reference Works
       General reference works provide background information and basic facts about a topic. To locate these
       sources, you will need a variety of tools, including the online catalog and databases, as well as periodical
       indexes. To use these resources effectively, follow this four-step process:
        1. Consult general reference works to gain background information and basic facts.
        2. Consult specialized reference works to find relevant articles on all topics.
        3. Consult the library's online catalog to identify library books on your topic.
        4. Consult other sources as needed.
       The summaries, overviews, and definitions in general reference works can help you decide whether to pursue
       a topic further and where to turn next for information. Because the information in these sources is necessarily
       general, they will not be sufficient alone as the basis for most research projects and are not strong sources to

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                 13.1 · The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources 415

cite in research papers.
Following are some of the most useful general reference works to provide context and background information
for research projects:

  · Almanacs and yearbooks provide up-to-date information, including statistics on politics, agriculture,
     economics, and population. See especially the Facts on File World News Digest (1940-present), an index to
     current events reprinted in newspapers worldwide, and the World Almanac and Book of Facts
      (1868-present), which reviews important events of the past year as well as data on a wide variety of topics,
      including sports, government, science, business, and education. In addition to current publications,
      almanacs from recent years or from many years ago provide information about the times in which they
      were written.

FIGURE 13.3 This edition of the Horsford Almanac and Cook Book dates from 1887. Published as an "advertising
almanac" by a baking powder company, this short almanac featured recipes for a healthful diet as well as general
almanac data. (credit: "The Horsford 1887 almanac and cook book" by Science History Institute/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

  · Atlases such as the Hammond World Atlas, the National Geographic Atlas of the World, and the Times
     Atlas of the World can help you identify places anywhere in the world and provide information on
      population, climate, and industry.

  · Biographical dictionaries contain information about people who have made some mark on history in
     many different fields. Consult the following: Contemporary Authors (I962-present), containing short
     biographies of authors who have published during the year; Current Biography (1940-present), containing
     articles and photographs of people in the news; and Who's Who in America (1899-present), the standard
      biographical reference for living Americans.

  · Dictionaries contain definitions and histories of words, along with their syllabication, and correct spelling
      and usage.

  · Encyclopedias provide basic information, explanations, and definitions of virtually every topic, concept,
      country, institution, historical person or movement, and cultural artifact imaginable. One-volume works
416 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

             such as the Random House Encyclopedia and the Columbia Encyclopedia give brief overviews. Larger
             works, such as the New Encyclopædia Britannica (32 volumes, also online), contain more detailed
             information.

       FIGURE 13.4 Both print and electronic texts provide excellent general resources for people of all ages. (credit: "The
       future of books" by Johan Larsson/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Databases
       Databases, usually accessed directly through your library website, are indispensable tools for finding both
       journal and general-audience articles. Some databases contain general-interest information, indexing articles
       from newspapers, magazines, and sometimes scholarly journals as well. While these databases can be useful
       when you begin your research, once you have focused your research topic, you likely will need to use subject
       databases, which index articles primarily from specialized scholarly and technical journals.
       The difference between scholarly journal and other articles is important. Although at times these lines are
       blurred, think of articles found in popular journals or magazines as published widely and usually addressing a
       general audience. Such materials are useful for obtaining introductory or background information on a topic
       as well as a sense of the range of factors to consider. Indeed, these sources may help you narrow your topic by
       giving you a basic understanding of the range and scope of the "conversation" you are entering in your
       research process. Scholarly journal articles, on the other hand, typically are written and published by
       academic researchers. These publications often have more specialized information and vocabulary and are
       most useful after you have narrowed your topic and developed specific research questions. Within the range of
       scholarly articles are those that are peer reviewed or found in peer-reviewed journals. These journal articles
       are generally more specific and contain more reliable information because they are written by experts and
       reviewed by other experts in the field before the article is published. See Compiling Sources for an Annotated
       Bibliography for more information about peer-reviewed publications.
       A good starting point for research is a general-interest database, which covers a wide range of topics from
       many sources. Several major general-interest databases are listed below; however, many others may be
       available at your library. A librarian likely can help you find those that may be specific to your university.

         · Academic OneFile from Gale. Based on the access capabilities of your institution, you may be able to use
             this database, which indexes citations, abstracts, and some full texts in such subjects as the physical
             sciences, technology, medicine, social sciences, the arts, theology, literature, and more. By using this
             database, you may be able to retrieve the full text of articles provided in PDF and HTML formats and audio
             versions of texts in MP3 format.

         · Academic Search Complete from EBSCOhost. Your library also may provide you with access to this

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                 13.1 · The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources 417

      database, which indexes citations, abstracts, and full text from journal articles, books, reports, and
      conference proceedings in all disciplines. An advantage of this database is that you can retrieve full-text
      articles provided in PDF and HTML forms. Academic Search Complete also provides searchable cited
      references for nearly 1,000 journals.
  · CQ Researcher. This general database is unique because it publishes well-researched, single-themed
      12,000-word reports by respected journalists who have established ethos because of their history of in-
      depth, unbiased coverage of health, social trends, criminal justice, international affairs, education, the
      environment, technology, and the economy. These reports can be beneficial at any research stage because
      they provide an overview, background, chronology, assessment of the current situation, tables and maps,
      pro/con statements from opposing positions, and bibliographies. Files from before 1996 are in HTML
      format; newer ones, beginning January 1996, are PDFs.
  · Factiva. Many students find Factiva a useful general tool because it provides full-text news articles and
      business/industry information from newswires, newspapers, business and industry magazines, television
      and radio transcripts, financial reports, and news service photos. Within the Factiva database, most
      content is HTML, though other formats are available for export. The database contains news sources from
      1979 to the present and financial data from the 1960s to the present.
  · Google. One of the most frequently used databases for any research is Google. Students often use Google
      to begin their searches because they can find material from many different sources, both formal and
      informal, including blogs, journals, websites, and popular magazines. For academic research, you may
      find it useful to begin with a general Google search and then move to Google Scholar. Google Scholar
      provides a simple way to do a broad search for scholarly literature across a variety of disciplines and
      sources--articles, theses, books, et cetera. Within the Google database, you will also find more information
      or effective uses of Google for your research purposes. See Compiling Sources for an Annotated
      Bibliography for more information about Google Scholar.
  · Opposing Viewpoints in Context from Gale. As you familiarize yourself with your topic, you may find this
      database helpful for understanding the parameters of the discussion on your topic. Opposing Viewpoints
      offers over 20,000 pro/con viewpoint essays on controversial issues and current events, plus thousands of
      topic overviews, primary source documents, social activist biographies, court case overviews, related full-
      text periodical articles, statistical tables, and multimedia content.
  · Gale in Context. This database provides curated topic pages that combine academic journal articles,
      primary sources, reference works, essays, news sources, multimedia, and biographies about people,
      events, places, and time periods.
  · Web of Science from Clarivate Analytics. The three Web of Science databases index citations from
      journal articles and conference proceedings in the sciences, social sciences, arts, and humanities. You can
      access cited reference searches, analyze trends and patterns, and create visual representations of citation
      relationships. Its contents date from 1900 to the present.

Government Documents

The U.S. government publishes numerous reports, pamphlets, catalogs, and newsletters on most issues of
national concern. To access documents from published in 1976 and onward, consult the Catalog of U.S.
Government Publications. To find documents published prior to 1976, consult the Monthly Catalog of United
States. Both resources should be available electronically and contain listings for materials in formats such as
nonprint media, records, CDs, audiocassettes, videotapes, slides, photographs, and other media. Many of these
publications may be located through your university's library catalog as well. Consult a librarian to find out
what government documents are available to you and in what forms.

Archives/Special Collections

Many libraries have donated records, papers, or writings that make up archives or special collections
containing manuscripts, rare books, architectural drawings, historical photographs and maps, and so on.
These, as well as items of local interest such as community and family histories, artifacts, and other
418 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

       memorabilia, are usually found in a special room or section of the library. By consulting these collections or
       archives, you also may find local or regional atlases, maps, and geographic information systems (GIS). Maps
       and atlases depict more than roads and boundaries. They include information on population density, language
       patterns, soil types, and much more. And, as discussed later in this chapter, these materials can figure into
       research projects as primary data.

       University libraries' special collections often house items donated by alumni, families, and other community
       groups. For example, one state university library's special collections, housing a collection of Black Panther
       and American Communist Party newspapers and pamphlets, celebrated Black History Month with an exhibit
       featuring the Black Panther Party and the Black Power movement. Included in the exhibit were Black Panther
       newspapers and pamphlets published in the 1960s and 1970s, as well as earlier civil rights literature from the
       American Communist Party. This exhibit not only helped students become aware of information about the
       time and movement but also demonstrated the range and depth of the university's archive collection.

       Interlibrary Loans

       Even though libraries house many materials, you may need a source unavailable at your library. If so, you
       usually can get the source through a networked system called interlibrary loans. Your library will borrow the
       source for you and provide some guidance as to the form of the materials and how long you will have access to
       them.

       Whichever search tool you use, nothing is magic about information gathered. You will need to use critical skills
       to evaluate materials gathered from sources, and you will still need to ask these basic questions: Is the author
       identified? ls that person a professional in the field or an interested amateur? What are their biases likely to
       be? Does the document represent an individual's opinion or peer-reviewed research?

      Evaluating Sources

       One key to judging the validity of sources is analysis. You already may be familiar with analysis, which involves
       looking at texts, media, or other artifacts to examine their individual parts and make interpretive claims about
       them. In the research process, analysis involves collecting data, deciding how you want to use that data (what
       are you looking for?), and applying those criteria to your data. For example, if you were looking at how the
       presence of social media has changed in television programs in the last five to seven years, you would
       determine what shows you want to view and what patterns you want to study.

       As you analyze sources, you evaluate them in terms of your research needs. On the basis of your needs
       assessment, you will determine whether a source is acceptable or unacceptable, good or bad, trustworthy or
       biased. Although firm categories can be useful, you may find a more nuanced evaluation helpful as well. When
       you look for sources and evaluate them, begin with general questions such as these:

         · How do I want to use this source?
         · Am I able to use it in that way?
         · Might this source be more valuable if used in another way?

       When you ask whether a source is acceptable, the answer usually depends on what you want to do with it. Even
       biased, false, or misleading material can be useful, depending on how a researcher puts it to use. For instance,
       you may be writing about a particular historical event and come across a magazine article featuring a biased
       account of that event. If your purpose is to write a brief but accurate description of the event, then this account
       is of little use. But what if your purpose is to write a critical analysis of the ways in which misleading media
       coverage of an event has influenced public perception of it? Suddenly, the biased account becomes useful as a
       specific example of the media coverage you wish to analyze.

       A source's value, therefore, is a function of your purpose for it. Labeling a source as good or bad, truthful or
       misleading, doesn't really evaluate its use to you as a researcher and writer; truthful sources can be used
       poorly, and misleading sources can be used effectively. What matters is whether the source fits your purpose.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                 13.1 · The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources 419

Finally, when evaluating a source, consider time (when was it judged true?) and perspective (who said it was
true, and for what reason?).

Locate the Date

Most documents, especially those created since the advent of copyright laws at the end of the 19th century,
include their date of publication. Pay attention to the date a source was created, and reflect on what might have
happened since then. Information may be outdated and useless. On the other hand, it may still be highly
useful--and continuing usefulness is the reason many old texts remain in circulation. Once you locate the
source's date, you can decide whether it will be relevant for your purpose. If you are studying change over time,
for example, old statistical information would be useful baseline data to demonstrate what has changed. But if
you are studying current culture, dated information may be misleading. In other words, when evaluating
whether a dated source serves your purpose, know what that purpose is.

Identify Perspective

To identify and evaluate perspective, ask what viewpoint, or perspective, it represents. Who created the
source, and for what purpose? This question can be difficult to answer immediately because an author's
viewpoint is not always identified or summarized in the source itself--and when it is, the information provided,
being a creation of the author, cannot always be believed. To trust a source, you need to analyze its
assumptions, evidence, biases, and reasoning, which together constitute the author's perspective. ln essence,
you need to ask these questions: What is this writer's purpose? Is it scholarly analysis, political advocacy,
entertainment, or something else? Consider the following:

  · Will a quick perusal of the introduction or first chapter reveal the writer's assumptions about the subject
      or audience?

  · Can you tell which statements are facts, which are inferences drawn from facts, and which are strictly
      opinions?

  · Does a first reading of the evidence persuade you? Is the logic of the position apparent and/or credible?
  · Does the writer omit relevant points?
  · Do the answers to these questions make you more or less willing to accept the author's conclusions?

Although trying to answer these questions about every source may seem daunting or even futile at first, have
patience and give the research process the time it needs. At the beginning of a research project, when you are
still trying to gain context and overview and have looked at only one source, you likely will have difficulty
recognizing an author's purpose and viewpoint. However, as you read further and begin to compare and
contrast one source with another, differences will emerge, especially if you read extensively and take notes.
The more differences you note, the more critically aware you become and the more you understand how and
where a source might help you.

Review Critically

To review a source with a critical eye, ask both first and second questions of the text. The answers to first
questions are generally factual, the result of probing the text (identifying the title, table of contents, chapter
headings, index, and so on). The answers to second questions are more inferential, the result of analyzing
assertions, evidence, and language in the text (identifying the perspective of the author and their sources).

Review Internally

Does information in one source support or contradict information in other sources? Do a subject search of the
author across platforms to find out how other experts view the author and how your source fits in with the
author's other works.
420 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

     13.2 The Research Process: How to Create Sources

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Locate and create primary research materials.
         · Apply methods and technologies used for research and communication in various fields.

       Introducing Research as Evidence and Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography explain the
       difference between primary and secondary sources in the research process. Almost all of the source-gathering
       information in this chapter thus far has focused on gathering secondary sources. However, your research
       assignment may require that you use primary sources--not only those you find in the library but also those you
       create yourself, outside the library, by doing field research, also called fieldwork.

      Conducting Field Research

       If not applicable for this class, you may be asked at some point in your college career to conduct fieldwork,
       which is considered primary research (the collection or development of primary sources). You may already
       have engaged in primary research by performing experiments in a laboratory for a science course or by
       documenting your observation of a musical or artistic performance.

       Fieldwork is the kind of research done when a person goes out into the "field" to collect data. This term is often
       used by both biologists, who may observe nature to understand plant growth, and anthropologists, who
       observe people to understand human cultural habits. Social scientists interested in language use and
       development, for example, have borrowed the term fieldwork to describe the ways they collect data about how
       people learn or use language. In fact, fieldwork is common to subjects such as education, medicine,
       engineering, sociology, journalism, criminology, and advertising.

       Different disciplines--and different rhetorical situations--require different kinds of fieldwork. If your task, for
       instance, is to find out what consumers think of a new product, you may need to create and distribute a survey
       or questionnaire. If you want to find out how many people stop at a certain fast-food restaurant along the
       highway just to use the restroom, as compared with the number of customers who purchase food, you will have
       to spend some time observing the location.

       No matter what kind of data you collect, the way you represent your research in your written work requires
       careful attention to fairness and accuracy. These ideas are particularly important when you write about the
       people you interview or observe. The way you represent them, as well as their words and actions, may present
       challenges. Be aware of those challenges by considering personal biases as you write about your research
       participants. Finally, be considerate of interviewees' time, and acknowledge their help by sending a follow-up
       email thanking them.

       Planning Field Research

       Unlike a library, which bundles millions of bits of every kind of information in a single location, "fields" are
       everywhere, including the campus of your university (academic departments, administrative offices, labs,
       libraries, dining and sports facilities, and dormitories) as well as the neighborhood beyond the campus
       (theaters, restaurants, malls, parks, playgrounds, farms, factories, schools, and so on). Field information is not
       cataloged, organized, indexed, or shelved for your convenience. Obtaining it requires diligence, energy, and
       careful planning. Some considerations are listed below:

         · Think about your research question. What field sources might strengthen your argument or add to your
             report?

         · Select your contacts and sites. Find the person, place, thing, or event that you would see as most helpful
             to you. Will you set up observations, conduct interviews, distribute surveys, or use a combination of
             methods?

         · Schedule research in advance. Interviews, trips, and events don't always work out according to plans.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  13.2 · The Research Process: How to Create Sources 421

      Allow time for glitches, such as having to reschedule an interview or return for more information.
  · Do your homework. Visit the library or do a Google search before conducting extensive field research. No

      matter from whom or from where you intend to collect information, having background knowledge can
      help you make more insightful observations and formulate better interview questions.
  · Log what you find. Record visits, questions, phone calls, and conversations in a research log
      (https://openstax.org/r/reasearchlog). From the very beginning of your research, enter information
      about topics, questions, methods, and answers into a journal, or use another record-keeping method.
      Record even dead-end searches to remind yourself that you tried them. This method of organizing
      information is the writing task for this chapter and will be discussed at length in Glance at the Research
      Process: Key Skills and Annotated Student Sample.

FIGURE 13.5 Biologists work in the field to gather samples for further study. (credit: "Biologists track frogs in
Eastern Oregon desert" by U.S. Bureau of Land Management/Maria Thi Mai/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
Observation
In general, fieldwork that relies on observation as a method of data collection involves taking notes while
observing events, activities, people, places, animals, and so on. Observations can range from a single visit to
one event or location to several visits over an extended period. Consider your research question and topic to
determine whether you need to observe over time or just once to get the information you need. You can
prepare for your observation by doing some of the preliminary work in your research log. At this time,
consider the limitations of only one observation session, which may yield only partial information.
As you plan for your observation, and before you arrive, decide whether you will be a participant observer,
which involves taking part in what you are observing. For example, if you observed a volleyball club meeting
that you attend regularly, and thus know most of its members or join in activities, you would be a participant
observer. You will need to consider, though, how well you will be able to focus on the observation tasks. How
actively will you participate in the group/event? While participating, how frequently will you be able to jot
down notes or otherwise document your experience? Might you become distracted and forget your
observation tasks, and if so, how will you handle that possibility?
Another option is to be a nonparticipant observer. In this capacity, you try to let your presence go unnoticed.
Although you are there and observing, you do not influence the situation in any way. If you sat in a corner of an
art class at your university to observe what materials students use, for example, you would be an unobtrusive
and nonparticipant observer.
When you observe, take detailed notes; without them, you may forget much of what you observed after you
leave a site. After recording your notes in your research log, review and rewrite your observation notes as soon
422 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

after your site visit as possible. Take precise notes, indicating the color, shape, size, texture, and arrangement
of everything relevant as applicable. Pay special attention to any anomalies you notice in a situation. Visual
images provide excellent memory aids, so consider sketching, photographing, or videotaping the site you visit.
If you speak your notes into a recording device, you will also pick up the characteristic sounds of the site.

Your observation notes will become very important as you begin to analyze your data. When you have finished
observing, review your notes to consider them for analysis. Ask yourself what kinds of questions or
conclusions your observations raise. Record your questions and conclusions in the speculations section of
your research log; this material serves as your tentative interpretation of observation notes. These questions
and conclusions can help direct further analysis of what you have observed and what you write based on those
observations.

For example, consider that you want to determine whether seating is an issue for students eating in on-
campus restaurants. You might organize your observations, questions, and speculations as shown in Table
13.2.

Observations                                                    Questions and Speculation

Student enters campus restaurant with friends. Friends          How many seats are available in the campus
look around for seating before rejoining student at the         restaurant? Are students at the tables eating, studying,
counter. Friends take over five minutes to find an empty        or both? The students appear concerned about time
table that will seat them. Both the students searching          and the opportunity to eat as a group.
for tables and the student at the counter keep checking
their watches. The time is between classes but later in
the afternoon than normal lunch time: 2:30.

TABLE 13.2 Observations, questions, and speculations

In the "Observations" column, the writer describes, whereas in the "Questions and Speculation" column, the
writer evaluates the situation. The "Questions and Speculation" section is particularly important, as different
observers usually will have different interpretations. Moreover, both columns might be different at different
times of the day or on different days of the week. To increase the validity of your findings, you might get a
second opinion on your interpretation by sharing your observations with a peer.

Surveys

Researchers in the social sciences often use surveys to collect data from a large number of individuals or from
groups of people. A survey is a structured interview in which respondents are all asked the same questions
and their answers are tabulated and interpreted. A survey would be a good source of data if, for example, you
were comparing the eating habits of students who eat off campus with those of students who eat in college
dining facilities. Or you may want to conduct research that compares the overall eating habits of students in
one on-campus dining facility with those of students in another. You might ask questions such as these:

  · How often do you eat at a campus facility? This question could provide several options to assist survey
      takers with some ranges.

  · When you eat on campus, which of these dining facilities do you choose? A list of the dining facilities you
      are comparing would follow this question to refamiliarize survey takers with the names of the venues.

For research purposes, respondents to surveys can be treated as experts because they are being asked for
opinions or information about their own behavior. Design your survey questions to be answered quickly and to
generate useful information about your topic. To get this kind of information, ask questions skillfully. What and
who questions are easy for respondents to answer easily and accurately. Less valuable for a survey is a why
question, which requires a more thorough and planned answer. Respondents are less likely to give the proper

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                  13.2 · The Research Process: How to Create Sources 423

attention to a why question for this reason. Furthermore, wording that suggests a right or wrong answer
reveals the researcher's biases more than the subject's candid responses.

The format of the questioning and the way the research is conducted also influence responses. For example, to
get complete and honest answers about a sensitive or highly personal issue, the researcher would probably use
anonymous written surveys to ensure confidentiality. Other survey techniques include oral interviews in
which the researcher records each subject's responses on a written form. Surveys are usually brief in order to
gain the cooperation of a sufficiently large number of respondents. To enable the researcher to compare
answers, the questions are usually closed, although researchers may sometimes ask open-ended questions to
gain additional information or insights. Treated briefly here, surveys involve complex procedures for the
designing of questions, distribution of the survey, and assessment of the results.

A complication arises when a survey requests sensitive information, such as personal experience with drugs,
alcohol, or sex, from identifiable subjects. Colleges and universities have "human subject" boards or
committees that need to approve any research that could compromise the privacy of students, staff, or faculty.
Consequently, consult your instructor before launching any survey on or off campus. However, the simple,
informal polling of people to request opinions takes place quite often in daily college life, such as every time a
class takes a vote or an instructor asks the class for opinions or interpretations of texts.

In one case, a student who was writing a self-profile wanted to find out how others perceived her. First, she
listed 10 people who knew her in different ways--her mother, father, older sister, roommate, best friend,
favorite teacher, and so on. Next, she invited each to list five words that best characterized her. Finally, she
asked each to call her answering machine on a day when she knew she would not be home and name those five
words. ln this way, she was able to collect original outside opinion (fieldwork research) in a nonthreatening
manner. She then wove those opinions into her profile paper, combining them with her own self-assessment.
The external points of view added an interesting (and sometimes surprising) view of herself as well as other
voices to her paper.

Interviews

Conducting interviews is another method of gathering information. Consulting, interviewing, and using
information gathered from professionals in specific fields can offer authoritative perspectives. Other
possibilities include interviewing people who have direct experience with your research topic.

If you are comfortable talking to people you don't know, then you have a head start as a successful interviewer.
In many respects, a good interview is simply a good conversation. If you consider yourself shy, don't worry; you
can still learn how to ask insightful interview questions that will elicit useful answers. Before conducting an
interview, determine whether it is more appropriate to use a formal question-and-answer session, an informal
exchange of ideas, or something in between.

Your chances of gathering helpful interview material increase dramatically when you prepare ahead of time
and formulate the questions you want to ask. Consider the following guidelines:

  · Select the right person. People differ in both the amount and the kind of knowledge they have. Not
      everyone who knows something about your research topic will be able to provide the information you
      need. Ask yourself

  what information you need;
  why you need it;
  who is likely to have it; and
  how you might gain it.

      Most research projects benefit from more than one perspective, so plan on more than one interview. For
      example, to research Lake Erie pollution, you could interview someone who lives on the shore, a chemist
      who knows about pesticide decomposition, a vice president of a nearby paper company, and people who
424 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

             frequent the waterfront.

         · Know your subject. Before you talk to an expert about your topic, make sure you know something about it
             yourself. Be prepared to explain your interest in it, know the general issues, and learn what your interview
             subject has already said about it in books, articles, or interviews. ln this way, you will ask sharper
             questions, get to the point faster, and be more interesting for your subject to talk with.

         · Create a working script. A good interview doesn't follow a script, but it usually starts with one. Before you
             begin an interview, write the questions you plan to ask, and arrange them so that they build on each
             other--general questions first, specific ones later. Your written questions can remind you to get back on
             track, should you or your subject digress.

         · Ask both open and closed questions. Different kinds of questions elicit different kinds of information.
             Open questions place few limits on the answers given: Why did you decide to major in business? What are
             your plans for the future? Closed questions specify the information you want and usually elicit brief
             responses: When did you receive your degree? From what college? Open questions usually provide general
             information; closed questions supply details.

         · Ask follow-up questions. Listen closely to the answers you receive. When the information is incomplete or
             confusing, ask follow-up questions to request clarification. Such questions are seldom scripted, so plan on
             using your wits to direct your subject toward the information you consider most important.

         · Use silence. If you don't get an immediate response to a question, wait a bit before asking another one. ln
             some cases, your question may not have been clear, and you will need to rephrase it. But in many cases,
             your interview subject is simply collecting their thoughts, not ignoring you. After a slight pause, you may
             hear answers worth waiting for.

         · Read body language. Be aware of what your subject is doing while answering questions. Does the subject
             look you in the eye? Fidget and squirm? Look distracted or bored? Smile? From these visual cues, you may
             be able to infer when your subject is speaking most frankly, doesn't want to give more information, or is
             tired of answering questions.

         · Take content notes. Many interviewers take notes on a pad that is spiral bound on top and thus allows for
             quick page flipping. Don't try to write down everything, just major ideas and telling statements in the
             subject's own words that you might want to use as quotations in your paper. Omitting small words,
             focusing on the most distinctive and precise language, and using common abbreviations are all techniques
             to make taking notes more efficient.

         · Take context notes. Note your subject's physical appearance, facial expressions, and clothing as well as
             the interview setting itself. These details will be useful later when you reconstruct the interview, helping
             you represent it more vividly in your paper.

         · Record audio with permission only. If you plan to record the interview, ask for permission in advance.
             The advantage of recording is that you have a complete record of the conversation. Sometimes, when
             hearing the interview subject a second time, you notice important things you missed earlier. However,
             recording devices may make subjects nervous. Be aware, too, that transcribing a recording is time
             consuming. It's a good idea to have a pen in hand to catch highlights or jot down additional questions.

         · Confirm important assertions. When your subject says something especially important or controversial,
             read back your notes aloud to check for accuracy and to allow your subject to elaborate. Some interviewers
             do this during the interview, while others do it at the end.

         · Review your notes. Notes taken during an interview are brief reminders of what your subject has said, not
             complete quotations. Write out the complete information as soon after the interview as you can, certainly
             within 24 hours. Supplement the notes with other remembered details while they are still fresh, recording
             them in your research log or directly into a computer file that you can refer to as you write your paper.

         · Interview electronically. It is possible, and useful, to contact individuals electronically. Phone interviews
             are quick and obvious ways of finding out information on short notice. Even better is asking questions via
             email, which is less intrusive than telephoning, as your subject can answer quickly, specifically, and in
             writing at a convenient time. Other electronic media for interviews include Skype, Zoom, Google Meet, and

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                       13.3 · Glance at the Research Process: Key Skills 425

      Microsoft Teams. All of these tools allow you to see the interviewee physically without having to travel for
      an in-person interview.

13.3 Glance at the Research Process: Key Skills

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Locate and evaluate primary and secondary research materials, including journal articles and essays, books,
      scholarly and professionally established and maintained databases or archives, and informal electronic
      networks and Internet sources.

  · Practice and apply strategies such as interpretation, synthesis, response, and critique to compose texts that
      integrate the writer's ideas with those from appropriate sources.

  · Apply methods and technologies commonly used for research and communication in various fields.
Your task in writing an argumentative research paper as outlined in Writing Process: Integrating Research is to
present original thinking that is supported by researched evidence. You may wonder how a college student will
think of anything new to say about a topic that already has been researched by many others. First, keep in
mind that your original thinking does not necessarily have to be groundbreaking--something never considered
by others in the field--though it might be. Your original thinking may be something smaller but equally
important, such as offering an alternative viewpoint on some evidence, interpreting existing evidence in a new
way that sheds light on current questions in the field, or pointing out a flaw in the current thinking regarding a
topic.

Synthesis

One skill that will help you develop this original thinking is synthesis. As explained in Writing Process:
Integrating Research, synthesis involves combining information gathered from various sources and making
connections among those sources to create a new, deeper, or changed understanding of a topic. In other words,
you examine how information or opinions you have read in one place relate to what you have read in another
place or to your own thoughts. To practice the skill of synthesis, use Figure 13.6, which illustrates how thinking
can change like ripples of water.

   FIGURE 13.6 Synthesizing research (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Keeping Track of Sources
Because unorganized or incorrectly documented research may be less than useless, many researchers make
the effort to keep their notes and comments on their sources in a research log. An organized record of all
sources consulted, a research log includes publication information, notes taken from the sources, and
commentary about their relation to other sources or to the thesis of your paper. Having a dynamic tool such as
this makes it easier to document sources in your works cited or references list and place in-text citations in
426 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

       your paper. It also helps with the research itself, showing at a glance what information you already have and
       where it comes from so that you can avoid repetition. Equally important, commentary on notes helps you
       synthesize information efficiently.

      Key Research Skills

       In addition to synthesis and research log maintenance, a good researcher needs the following skills to perform
       required tasks:

         · Critical analysis: Ability to think about what text or data means and how the parts relate to the whole.
         · Critical thinking: Ability to analyze, make inferences, evaluate, synthesize, and draw conclusions on the

             basis of researched information.
         · Data collection: Ability to gather facts and research on a topic through various kinds of sources, field

             research, observation, interviews, surveys or questionnaires, experimentation, and/or focus groups.
         · Field research: Ability to collect raw data outside a laboratory, library, or workplace setting; observation

             and data collection in the subject's natural environment.
         · Interviewing: Ability to engage in questions and answers with experts or those who have knowledge to

             share regarding a research topic.
         · Note-taking: Ability to identify and record information that will later be used to support a thesis.
         · Organization: Ability to plan, document, and track research to incorporate into a unified composition.
         · Paraphrasing: Ability to restate an idea in your own words.
         · Summarizing: Ability to restate in your own words the main ideas and key details of a text.
         · Synthesis: Ability to combine information from different sources and make connections among them to

             form a new conclusion or deeper understanding of a topic.
         · Technology: Ability to use computers, databases, and other forms of technology to conduct research.
         · Time management: Ability to plan research tasks over several weeks or months.

     13.4 Annotated Student Sample: Research Log

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Demonstrate the ability to inquire, learn, think critically, and communicate when reading in varying rhetorical
             and cultural contexts.

         · Identify and analyze relationships between ideas, patterns of organization, and interplay between verbal and
             nonverbal elements in written texts.

         · Practice and apply strategies such as interpretation, synthesis, response, and critique to compose texts that
             integrate the writer's ideas with those from appropriate sources.

      Introduction

       Lily Tran created this log entry during the research process for an argumentative research paper assigned in
       her first-year composition class, as shown in this Annotated Student Sample.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS                                                 13.4 · Annotated Student Sample: Research Log 427
              Planning to Write
                                                                                      end public domain t end public domain t
public domain t                                                                                    end public domain t

                                                                 end public domain t

FIGURE 13.7 National Guard soldiers at the Glendale, Arizona, food bank, 2021 (credit: "U.S. Air National Guard" by
Tech. Sgt. Michael Matkin/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

      Freewrite: I found this photograph in an article I was reading about food insecurity during the COVID-19
      pandemic. I copied and pasted it here as inspiration for my argumentative research paper.

LainlynoTtratn includes a visual in the freewrite section of her research log. The visual may or may not appear in the final
paper, but here, it serves to stimulate her writing and thinking about her topic and possibly connect to other
information she finds.end annotat

      For a sustainable future, food production and processing have to change. So does global distribution.

Tarnannobtaetgins to establish problem-and-solution reasoning, recognizing that there are different stages to food
production and that all will be affected by any proposed solution.end annotat

      The necessary changes will affect nearly all aspects of life, including world hunger, health and welfare, use of
      land resources, habitats, water, energy use and production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, and
      economics, as well as cultural and social values.

Tarnannoatalsto employs cause-and-effect reasoning in beginning to think about the effects of any proposed change.end annotat

      These needed changes may not be popular, but people will have to accept them.

Sanhneorteactognizes potential counterarguments to address if the paper is to be persuasive.end annotat
428 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

                        Information               Connection to   Notes/Cross-References/Synthesis
                                                   Thesis/Main
Date: 12/07/2020
Their report states, "If society continues on a        Points
`business-as-usual' dietary trajectory, a 119%
increase in edible crops grown will be required   Shows why a     Create a concrete example to support this
by 2050" (Berners-Lee).                           solution to     statistic. For example, if Farmer Joe grows . . .
                                                  food
                                                  sustainability  Tie to the explanation of the problem for
                                                  is needed       which I'm proposing a solution.

annotat                                           annotat         Sanhneoatnaticipates that not all readers will

         end annotat                                              respond to the statistic alone. To counteract

Tran cites and quotes an alarming statistic from               end antnhoistaptossibility, she may decide to create an
a secondary source.                               She makes a
                                                  connection to original anecdotal example.end annotat

                                                  her thesis.

                                                                  Tarnannothaten connects the information to the text
                                                                  structure: problem/solution.end annotat

Source/Citation: Berners-Lee, M., et al. "Current Global Food Production Is Sufficient to Meet Human Nutritional
Needs in 2050 Provided There Is Radical Societal Adaptation." Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene, vol. 6,
2018, online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article/doi/10.1525/elementa.310/112838/Current-global-food-production-
is-sufficient-to (https://openstax.org/r/onlineucpress). Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Tarnannoutastes MLA 8th edition style guidelines to create this citation for her log entry. She includes all information
needed for citing the entry in the works cited list for her paper.end annotat

TABLE 13.3 Research log entry

Discussion Questions

1. If Lily Tran were to use the photo, what information or questions might she enter in the right-hand column
    of her research log?

2. Why do you think Tran has chosen a direct quotation instead of a summary or paraphrase?

3. Why is the information in the center column important to include in a research log?

13.5 Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping
a Research Log

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Employ the methods and technologies commonly used for research and communication within various fields.
  · Practice and apply strategies such as interpretation, synthesis, response, and critique to compose texts that

      integrate the writer's ideas with those from appropriate sources.
  · Analyze and make informed decisions about intellectual property based on the concepts that motivate them.
  · Apply citation conventions systematically.

As you conduct research, you will work with a range of "texts" in various forms, including sources and
documents from online databases as well as images, audio, and video files from the Internet. You may also

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                      13.5 · Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log 429

work with archival materials and with transcribed and analyzed primary data. Additionally, you will be taking
notes and recording quotations from secondary sources as you find materials that shape your understanding
of your topic and, at the same time, provide you with facts and perspectives. You also may download articles as
PDFs that you then annotate. Like many other students, you may find it challenging to keep so much material
organized, accessible, and easy to work with while you write a major research paper. As it does for many of
those students, a research log for your ideas and sources will help you keep track of the scope, purpose, and
possibilities of any research project.

A research log is essentially a journal in which you collect information, ask questions, and monitor the results.
Even if you are completing the annotated bibliography for Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing, keeping a
research log is an effective organizational tool. Like Lily Tran's research log entry, most entries have three
parts: a part for notes on secondary sources, a part for connections to the thesis or main points, and a part for
your own notes or questions. Record source notes by date, and allow room to add cross-references to other
entries.

Summary of Assignment: Research Log

Your assignment is to create a research log similar to the student model. You will use it for the argumentative
research project assigned in Writing Process: Integrating Research to record all secondary source information:
your notes, complete publication data, relation to thesis, and other information as indicated in the right-hand
column of the sample entry.

Another Lens. A somewhat different approach to maintaining a research log is to customize it to your needs or
preferences. You can apply shading or color coding (https://openstax.org/r/shadingorcolorcoding) to headers,
rows, and/or columns in the three-column format (for colors and shading). Or you can add columns to
accommodate more information, analysis, synthesis, or commentary, formatting them as you wish. Consider
adding a column for questions only or one for connections to other sources. Finally, consider a different visual
format (https://openstax.org/r/visualformat), such as one without columns. Another possibility is to record
some of your comments and questions so that you have an aural rather than a written record of these.

Writing Center

At this point, or at any other point during the research and writing process, you may find that your school's
writing center can provide extensive assistance. If you are unfamiliar with the writing center, now is a good
time to pay your first visit. Writing centers provide free peer tutoring for all types and phases of writing.
Discussing your research with a trained writing center tutor can help you clarify, analyze, and connect ideas as
well as provide feedback on works in progress.

      Quick Launch: Beginning Questions

You may begin your research log with some open pages in which you freewrite, exploring answers to the
following questions. Although you generally would do this at the beginning, it is a process to which you likely
will return as you find more information about your topic and as your focus changes, as it may during the
course of your research.

  · What information have I found so far?
  · What do I still need to find?
  · Where am I most likely to find it?

These are beginning questions. Like Lily Tran, however, you will come across general questions or issues that a
quick note or freewrite may help you resolve. The key to this section is to revisit it regularly. Written answers to
these and other self-generated questions in your log clarify your tasks as you go along, helping you articulate
ideas and examine supporting evidence critically. As you move further into the process, consider answering
the following questions in your freewrite:
430 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

  · What evidence looks as though it best supports my thesis?
  · What evidence challenges my working thesis?
  · How is my thesis changing from where it started?

Creating the Research Log

As you gather source material for your argumentative research paper, keep in mind that the research is
intended to support original thinking. That is, you are not writing an informational report in which you simply
supply facts to readers. Instead, you are writing to support a thesis that shows original thinking, and you are
collecting and incorporating research into your paper to support that thinking. Therefore, a research log,
whether digital or handwritten, is a great way to keep track of your thinking as well as your notes and
bibliographic information.

In the model below, Lily Tran records the correct MLA bibliographic citation for the source. Then, she records a
note and includes the in-text citation here to avoid having to retrieve this information later. Perhaps most
important, Tran records why she noted this information--how it supports her thesis: The human race must
turn to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact, starting now.
Finally, she makes a note to herself about an additional visual to include in the final paper to reinforce the
point regarding the current pressure on food systems. And she connects the information to other information
she finds, thus cross-referencing and establishing a possible synthesis. Use a format similar to that in Table
13.4 to begin your own research log.

Information                                  Connection to Thesis/Main Points   Notes/Cross-References/
                                                                                           Synthesis

Date: 6/06/2021                              Shows the pressure being put on    Maybe include a graph
                                             food systems that will cause the   showing the rising pressure
It has been estimated, for example, that by  need for more sustainable systems  on food systems.
2050, milk production will increase 58
percent and meat production 73 percent                                          Connects to similar
(Chai).                                                                         predictions about produce
                                                                                and vegan diets. See Lynch
                                                                                et al.

 Source/Citation: Chai, Bingil Clark, et al. "Which Diet Has the Least Environmental Impact on Our Planet? A
 Systematic Review of Vegan, Vegetarian and Omnivorous Diets." Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 15, 2019,
 www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/15/4110 (https://openstax.org/r/mdpi4110). Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.
 Date:
 Source/Citation:
 Date:
 Source/Citation:

TABLE 13.4 Model research log

Types of Research Notes

Taking good notes will make the research process easier by enabling you to locate and remember sources and
use them effectively. While some research projects requiring only a few sources may seem easily tracked,
research projects requiring more than a few sources are more effectively managed when you take good
bibliographic and informational notes. As you gather evidence for your argumentative research paper, follow

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                       13.5 · Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log 431

 the descriptions and the electronic model to record your notes. You can combine these with your research log,
 or you can use the research log for secondary sources and your own note-taking system for primary sources if
 a division of this kind is helpful. Either way, be sure to include all necessary information.

 Bibliographic Notes

 These identify the source you are using. When you locate a useful source, record the information necessary to
 find that source again. It is important to do this as you find each source, even before taking notes from it. If you
 create bibliographic notes as you go along, then you can easily arrange them in alphabetical order later to
 prepare the reference list required at the end of formal academic papers. If your instructor requires you to use
 MLA formatting for your essay, be sure to record the following information:

 1. Author
 2. Title of source
 3. Title of container (larger work in which source is included)
 4. Other contributors
 5. Version
 6. Number
 7. Publisher
 8. Publication date
 9. Location

 When using MLA style with online sources, also record the following information:

10. Date of original publication
11. Date of access
12. URL
13. DOI (A DOI, or digital object identifier, is a series of digits and letters that leads to the location of an online

       source. Articles in journals are often assigned DOIs to ensure that the source can be located, even if the
       URL changes. If your source is listed with a DOI, use that instead of a URL.)

 It is important to understand which documentation style your instructor will require you to use. Check the
 Handbook for MLA Documentation and Format and APA Documentation and Format styles. In addition, you
 can check the style guide information provided by the Purdue Online Writing Lab (https://openstax.org/r/
 purdueonlineWL).

 Informational Notes

 These notes record the relevant information found in your sources. When writing your essay, you will work
 from these notes, so be sure they contain all the information you need from every source you intend to use.
 Also try to focus your notes on your research question so that their relevance is clear when you read them later.
 To avoid confusion, work with separate entries for each piece of information recorded. At the top of each entry,
 identify the source through brief bibliographic identification (author and title), and note the page numbers on
 which the information appears. Also helpful is to add personal notes, including ideas for possible use of the
 information or cross-references to other information. As noted in Writing Process: Integrating Research, you
 will be using a variety of formats when borrowing from sources. Below is a quick review of these formats in
 terms of note-taking processes. By clarifying whether you are quoting directly, paraphrasing, or summarizing
 during these stages, you can record information accurately and thus take steps to avoid plagiarism.

 Direct Quotations, Paraphrases, and Summaries

 A direct quotation is an exact duplication of the author's words as they appear in the original source. In your
 notes, put quotation marks around direct quotations so that you remember these words are the author's, not
 yours. One advantage of copying exact quotations is that it allows you to decide later whether to include a
 quotation, paraphrase, or summary. ln general, though, use direct quotations only when the author's words are
432 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

       particularly lively or persuasive.
       A paraphrase is a restatement of the author's words in your own words. Paraphrase to simplify or clarify the
       original author's point. In your notes, use paraphrases when you need to record details but not exact words.
       A summary is a brief condensation or distillation of the main point and most important details of the original
       source. Write a summary in your own words, with facts and ideas accurately represented. A summary is useful
       when specific details in the source are unimportant or irrelevant to your research question. You may find you
       can summarize several paragraphs or even an entire article or chapter in just a few sentences without losing
       useful information. It is a good idea to note when your entry contains a summary to remind you later that it
       omits detailed information. See Writing Process Integrating Research for more detailed information and
       examples of quotations, paraphrases, and summaries and when to use them.

      Other Systems for Organizing Research Logs and Digital Note-Taking

       Students often become frustrated and at times overwhelmed by the quantity of materials to be managed in the
       research process. If this is your first time working with both primary and secondary sources, finding ways to
       keep all of the information in one place and well organized is essential.
       Because gathering primary evidence may be a relatively new practice, this section is designed to help you
       navigate the process. As mentioned earlier, information gathered in fieldwork is not cataloged, organized,
       indexed, or shelved for your convenience. Obtaining it requires diligence, energy, and planning. Online
       resources can assist you with keeping a research log. Your college library may have subscriptions to tools such
       as Todoist or EndNote. Consult with a librarian to find out whether you have access to any of these. If not, use
       something like the template shown in Figure 13.8, or another like it, as a template for creating your own
       research notes and organizational tool. You will need to have a record of all field research data as well as the
       research log for all secondary sources.

            FIGURE 13.8 Electronic note card (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      13.6 · Spotlight on ... Ethical Research 433

13.6 Spotlight on ... Ethical Research

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Participate effectively in collaborative processes involving field research in a variety of disciplines.
  · Develop projects using the characteristic processes of various disciplines.
  · Analyze and make informed decisions about intellectual property based on the concepts that motivate them.
  · Apply citation conventions systematically.

Whenever you do research, especially field research involving human participants, fair and ethical treatment
of your subjects is expected. Included in this treatment are respect for privacy and, when required, anonymity.
Related to fair and ethical treatment is your respect for the work of others, as demonstrated by attributing
credit to sources from which you borrow information. Not doing so is one aspect of plagiarism.

Working with Human Participants and Institutional Review Boards

To comply with federal regulations and ethical principles, universities maintain institutional review boards
(IRBs) that monitor how researchers treat their research participants. A range of research involvement exists
when working with human subjects; whether your research involves taking blood samples, conducting
psychological experiments, or simply distributing surveys, you must be aware of and consult your university's
IRB for policies and guidelines. In most cases, as undergraduates, you will not be working on research that is
potentially risky or harmful to human participants. For example, it is unlikely you will be involved in
conducting medical or psychological research. However, you may work on a project that requires field research
such as interviews or observations. Although participants in a fieldwork project will probably not incur the
same amount of risk as participants in clinical experiments, the IRB may have some questions nonetheless:

  · Will participation be voluntary?
  · Will the selection of research subjects be fair?
  · Will confidentiality be preserved?
  · Will there be any risks to participants?
  · Will the study yield important results for society?

Whenever you conduct fieldwork, whether it is via interviews, observations, or surveys, keep in mind ethical
considerations for your participants and the ways you represent them in your work. See Tracing a Broad Issue
in the Individual for more information.

Plagiarism

Plagiarism is putting one's name on a paper written by a friend and submitting it as one's own. Plagiarism is
buying or downloading a paper from an Internet site and pretending to have written it. And plagiarism is
pasting in a phrase, sentence, paragraph, passage, or portion of anybody else's work in a paper and not giving
that author credit. ln these examples, the intent to plagiarize is deliberate and obvious, something that serious
and honorable students would never do.

However, plagiarism also occurs when well-meaning students get careless when taking notes or copying notes
into actual drafts. Following are three examples of unintentional plagiarism:

  · A student copies a passage word for word from an Internet site and pastes it into a paper but forgets to
      include quotation marks or author attribution.

  · A student summarizes a published author's idea but omits both author name and source title.
  · A student credits an author's idea in a signal phrase (According to John Smith . . .) but omits quotation

      marks around the author's exact phrases.

All of these may be unintentional, but each is an act of plagiarism, easily avoidable by more careful research
and writing practice.
434 13 · Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

       What Plagiarism Is Not
       While you cannot publish the work of others, you may publish material that is common knowledge--that is,
       historical, cultural, or geographical information that an educated adult would be expected to know. Nor do you
       need to attribute material that appears in multiple sources, such as dates of historical events, names and
       locations of states and cities, general laws of science, and statements of well-known theories.
       You do not need to document phrases in widespread use in your culture or well-known information found in
       textbooks or lectures in the field in which you are writing. For example, in a paper written about Austrian
       psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) for a psychology class, you would not document the term
       superego, a word Freud frequently used. For more about what plagiarism is and is not, see Spotlight on ...
       Citation.
       Avoiding Plagiarism
       Ensuring that your voice, ideas, critical thinking, connections, and analysis are the focus of your essay and not
       allowing borrowed materials to "take over" are critical to avoiding plagiarism. Additionally, keeping an
       accurate research log will assist you in recording, attributing, and clearly citing borrowed materials. When you
       think about plagiarism, consider what seems fair and how you might feel if someone were to use your work
       without giving you credit. Here are a few tips for avoiding plagiarism:

         · In your research log, and subsequently in your essay, put quotation marks around language that comes
             directly from your sources. Use internal citations and appropriate reference pages for academic papers.

         · Use internal citations for paraphrases and summaries, and do your best to capture the sentiment of the
             author you cite, even when using your own words.

         · Keep accurate, thorough research notes so that you have the source information you need to work
             efficiently and cite accurately. For all copied sources, write who said what, where, and when. When quoting
             directly, do not distort or intentionally modify an author's meaning.

         · Plan your work schedule to allow time for careful reading of your sources and effective use of them.
       Another way to avoid plagiarism is to make sure that you have enough time to write and revise your project
       multiple times. Many students often find that postponing or avoiding the research process forces them to
       become rushed and to present a product that reflects insufficient attention to attribution.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      13 · Further Reading 435

Further Reading

Here are a few resources that you may find helpful throughout your research processes.
"Your Research Toolbox," University of Massachusetts Amherst: https://people.umass.edu/curtis/academics/

    researchtoolbox/researchlog.html
"Observing," Purdue Online Writing Lab (notes on conducting fieldwork): https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/

    research_and_citation/conducting_research/conducting_primary_research/observing.html
"Using Citation Generators Responsibly," Purdue Online Writing Lab: https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/

    research_and_citation/using_citation_machines_responsibly.html

Works Cited

OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab. Purdue U, 2021, owl.purdue.edu/owl/purdue_owl.html. Accessed 25 Jan.
    2021.
436 13 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Annotated Bibliography: Gathering,  14
Evaluating, and Documenting
Sources

FIGURE 14.1 Academic writers often create annotated bibliographies to inform readers about sources and to
analyze the information sources provide. Annotated bibliographies are especially useful in argumentative and
scientific research. (credit: "Wikimedia Design edit-a-thon 16" by Sebastian ter Burg/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

14.1 Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography
14.2 Glance at Form: Citation Style, Purpose, and Formatting
14.3 Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran
14.4 Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing

INTRODUCTION As an author, you will spend a great deal of time crafting your compositions to ensure that
your ideas, thesis statements, and arguments come across to readers clearly and with authority. The way to
present a strong, persuasive argument is through thorough analysis and solid evidence obtained from credible
sources. Because sources are so important, creating an annotated bibliography can be a cornerstone of the
argumentative research writing process.
This chapter shows how to develop an annotated bibliography for the argumentative research project
presented in Writing Process: Integrating Research. An annotated bibliography shows the authority present in
each of the sources and explains why each was chosen. The information in the annotated bibliography helps
readers understand the role a bibliography plays in gathering and using sources to support an argument. Later
in the chapter, you will apply the principles presented to create your own annotated bibliography for one of the
438 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

       assignments in this course--perhaps your own argumentative research paper, as outlined in Writing Process:
       Integrating Research.

       If you are creating an annotated bibliography, you may not have created a research log, as addressed in
       Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log. However, as you work
       through this chapter, consult Research Process: Making Notes, Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a
       Research Log for additional information about locating, analyzing, and incorporating sources.

       By creating an annotated bibliography, you move beyond simply collecting sources to interacting with them.
       When writing annotations, you read each source more closely than you would otherwise, think about it more
       critically, and strengthen your own claims on the topic. An annotated bibliography thus provides you with
       perspectives beyond your own ideas and helps you understand where your claims fit into the broader body of
       knowledge on the topic, or "the conversation." Annotated bibliographies help other scholars by providing an
       overview of the sources and breadth of knowledge about the research surrounding a given topic.

       Writing an annotated bibliography is an opportunity to practice expectations of convention; there are many
       rules to follow depending on the format and style you write in. But it can also be an opportunity to challenge
       convention in both the content and the style of your writing. A growing movement in academics fosters anti-
       racist practice, which embraces stylistic choices based on culture. That is to say, so-called standard language
       ideologies are no longer seen as "better" or even "correct." Rather, an ever-evolving idea of language
       awareness increasingly allows students and their instructors to explore cultural expression of ideas.

     14.1 Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Integrate your ideas with ideas from related sources.
         · Locate, compile, and evaluate primary, secondary, and tertiary research materials related to your topic.

       A bibliography is a list of the sources you use when doing research for a project or composition. Named for the
       Greek terms biblion, meaning "book," and graphos, meaning "something written," bibliographies today
       compile more than just books. Often they include academic journal articles, periodicals, websites, and
       multimedia texts such as videos. A bibliography alone, at the end of a research work, also may be labeled
       "References" or "Works Cited," depending on the citation style you are using. The bibliography lists
       information about each source, including author, title, publisher, and publication date. Each set of source
       information, or each individual entry, listed in the bibliography or noted within the body of the composition is
       called a citation.

       Bibliographies include formal documentation entries that serve several purposes:

         · They help you organize your own research on a topic and narrow your topic, thesis, or argument.
         · They help you build knowledge.
         · They strengthen your arguments by offering proof that your research comes from trustworthy sources.
         · They enable readers to do more research on the topic.
         · They create a community of researchers, thus adding to the ongoing conversation on the research topic.
         · They give credit to authors and sources from which you draw and support your ideas.

       Annotated bibliography expand on typical bibliographies by including information beyond the basic citation
       information and commentary on the source. Although they present each formal documentation entry as it
       would appear in a source list such as a works cited page, an annotated bibliography includes two types of
       additional information. First, following the documentation entry is a short description of the work, including
       information about its authors and how it was or can be used in a research project. Second is an evaluation of
       the work's validity, reliability, and/or bias. The purpose of the annotation is to summarize, assess, and reflect
       on the source. Annotations can be both explanatory and analytical, helping readers understand the research

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              14.1 · Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 439

you used to formulate your argument. An annotated bibliography can also help you demonstrate that you have
read the sources you will potentially cite in your work. It is a tool to assist in the gathering of these sources and
serves as a repository. You won't necessarily use all the sources cited in your annotated bibliography in your
final work, but gathering, evaluating, and documenting these sources is an integral part of the research
process.

Compiling Sources

Research projects and compositions, particularly argumentative or position texts, require you to collect
sources, devise a thesis, and then support that thesis through analysis of the evidence, including sources, you
have compiled. With access to the Internet and an academic library, you will rarely encounter a shortage of
sources for any given topic or argument. The real challenge may be sorting through all the available sources
and determining which will be useful.

The first step in completing an annotated bibliography is to locate and compile sources to use in your research
project. At the beginning, you do not need to be highly selective in this process, as you may not ultimately use
every source. Therefore, gather any materials--including books, websites, professional journals, periodicals,
and documents--that you think may contain valuable ideas about your topic. But where do you find sources
that relate to your argument? And how do you choose which sources to use? This section will help you answer
those questions and choose sources that will both enhance and challenge your claim, allowing you to confront
contradictory evidence and synthesize ideas, or combine ideas from various sources, to produce a well-
constructed original argument. See Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information for more
information about sources and synthesizing information.

Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Sources

In your research, you likely will use three types of sources: primary, secondary, and tertiary. During any
research project, your use of these sources will depend on your topic, your thesis, and, ultimately, how you
intend to use them. In all likelihood, you will need to seek out all three.

Primary Sources

Primary sources allow you to create your own analysis with the appropriate rhetorical approach. In the
humanities disciplines, primary sources include original documents, data, images, and other compositions
that provide a firsthand account of an event or a time in history. Typically, primary sources are created close in
time to the event or period they represent and may include journal or diary entries, newspaper articles,
government records, photographs, artworks, maps, speeches, films, and interviews. In scientific disciplines,
primary sources provide information such as scientific discoveries, raw data, experimental and research
results, and clinical trial findings. They may include published studies, scientific journal articles, and
proceedings of meeting or conferences.

Primary sources also can include student-conducted interviews and surveys. Other primary sources may be
found on websites such as the Library of Congress (https://openstax.org/r/Library_of), the Historical Text
Archive (https://openstax.org/r/Historical_Text), government websites, and article databases. In all academic
areas, primary sources are fact based, not interpretive. That is, they may be commenting on or interpreting
something else, but they themselves are the source. For example, an article written during the 1840s
condemning the practice of enslavement may interpret events occurring then, but it is a primary source
document of its time.
440 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

       FIGURE 14.2 This letter of resignation by President Richard Nixon (1913-1994), written in 1974, is an example of a
       primary source. (credit: "Letter of Resignation of Richard M. Nixon, 1974" by Former U.S. President Richard M.
       Nixon, officially a work of the U.S. government/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

       FIGURE 14.3 Original poetry, such as this mirror-writing poem by Caroline Fitzgerald, is an example of a primary
       source. Manuscripts, journals, and diaries are primary sources. (credit: "Caroline Fitzgerald poem in mirror writing
       flipped" by Caroline Fitzgerald (1865-1911)/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              14.1 · Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 441

FIGURE 14.4 This map of Scandinavia from 1730 is an example of a primary source. (credit: "1730 Homann Map of
Scandinavia, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland and the Baltics - Geographicus - Scandinavia" by Johann Homann
(1664-1724)/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

FIGURE 14.5 Government documents, such as the United States Constitution, are primary sources. (credit:
"Constitution of the United States, page 1" by U.S. National Archives and Records Administration/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)
Secondary Sources
Secondary sources, unlike primary sources, are interpretive. They often provide a secondhand account of an
442 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

       event or research results, analyze or clarify primary sources and scientific discoveries, or interpret a creative
       work. These sources are important for supporting or challenging your argument, addressing
       counterarguments, and synthesizing ideas. Secondary sources in the humanities disciplines include
       biographies, literary criticism, and reviews of the fine arts, among other sources. In the scientific disciplines,
       secondary sources encompass analyses of scientific studies or clinical trials, reviews of experimental results,
       and publications about the significance of studies or experiments. In some instances, the same item can serve
       as both a primary and a secondary source, depending on how it is used. For example, a journal article in which
       the author analyzes the impact of a clinical trial would serve as a secondary source. But if you instead count
       the number of journal articles that feature reports on a particular clinical trial, you might use them as primary
       sources because they would then serve as data points.

FIGURE 14.6 Infographics are secondary sources that combine text and graphics to summarize information about a
topic. (credit: "Youth Vaping Risks" by nhs.gov/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Table 14.1 provides examples of how primary and secondary sources often relate to one another.

   Discipline                     Primary Source Example       Secondary Source Example
Literature
               Wilfred Owen's poem "Dulce et Decorum est" Essay analyzing World War I poetry
Psychology
               Raw data from a study testing the effects of a  Book evaluating different approaches to treating
Politics and   medication on bipolar disorder                  bipolar disorder in patients
Government
History        Transcript of John F. Kennedy's inauguration    Website analyzing the themes present in John F.
               speech                                          Kennedy's inauguration speech

               Diary of a soldier who fought in the Civil War Textbook entry about the battles of the Civil War

TABLE 14.1 Primary and secondary sources

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                          14.1 · Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 443

Discipline  Primary Source Example                     Secondary Source Example

Fine Art    Native American pottery       Newspaper article about the importance of
                                          honoring Native American art
Performing  Recording of a live concert
Arts                                      Critical review of a concert published in a
                                          magazine

TABLE 14.1 Primary and secondary sources

Tertiary Sources

In addition to primary and secondary sources, you can use a tertiary source to summarize or digest
information from primary and/or secondary sources. Because tertiary sources often condense information,
they usually do not provide enough information on their own to support claims. However, they often contain a
variety of citations that can help you identify and locate valuable primary and secondary sources. Researchers
often use tertiary sources to find general, historical, or background information as well as a broad overview of
a topic. Tertiary sources frequently placed in the secondary-source category include reference materials such
as encyclopedias, textbooks, manuals, digests, and bibliographies. For more discussion on sources, see The
Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources.

FIGURE 14.7 Textbooks are examples of tertiary sources. (credit: "Programming language textbooks" by
User:K.lee/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Authoritative Sources

Not all sources are created equally. You likely know already that you must vet sources--especially those you
find on the Internet--for legitimacy, validity, and the presence of bias. For example, you probably know that the
website Wikipedia is not considered a trustworthy source because it is open to user editing. This accessibility
means the site's authority cannot be established and, therefore, the source cannot effectively support or refute
a claim you are attempting to make, though you can use it at times to point you to reliable sources. While so-
called bad sources may be easy to spot, researchers may have more difficulty discriminating between sources
that are authoritative and those that pose concerns. In fact, you may encounter a general hierarchy of sources
in your compilation. Understanding this hierarchy can help you identify which sources to use and how to use
them in your research.
444 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

       Peer-Reviewed Academic Publications
       This first tier of sources--the gold standard of research--includes academic literature, which consists of
       textbooks, essays, journals, articles, reports, and scholarly books. As scholarly works, these sources usually
       provide strong evidence for an author's claims by reflecting rigorous research and scrutiny by experts in the
       field. These types of sources are most often published, sponsored, or supported by academic institutions, often
       a university or an academic association such as the Modern Language Association (MLA). Such associations
       exist to encourage research and collaboration within their discipline, mostly through publications and
       conferences. To be published, academic works must pass through a rigorous process called peer review, in
       which scholars in the field evaluate it anonymously. You can find peer-reviewed academic sources in library
       catalogs, in article databases, and through Google Scholar online. Sometimes these sources require a
       subscription to access, but students often receive access through their school.
       Academic articles, particularly in the social and other sciences, generally have most or all of the following
       sections, a structure you might recognize if you have written lab reports in science classes:

         · Abstract. This short summary covers the purpose, methods, and findings of the paper. It may discuss
             briefly the implications or significance of the research.

         · Introduction. The main part of the paper begins with an introduction that presents the issue or main idea
             addressed by the research, establishes its importance, and poses the author's thesis.

         · Review. Next comes an overview of previous academic research related to the topic, including a synthesis
             that makes a case for why the research is important and necessary.

         · Data and Methods. The main part of the original research begins with a description of the data and
             methods used, including what data or information the author collected and how the author used it.

         · Results. Data and methods are followed by results, detailing the significant findings from the experiment
             or research.

         · Conclusion. In the conclusion, the author discusses the results in the context of the bigger picture,
             explaining the author's position on how these results relate to the earlier review of literature and their
             significance in the broad scope of the topic. The author also may propose future research needs or point
             out unanswered questions.

         · Works Cited or References. The paper ends with a list of all sources the author used in the research,
             including the review of literature. This often-overlooked portion of the composition is critical in evaluating
             the credibility of any paper that involves research.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              14.1 · Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 445

FIGURE 14.8 Articles from peer-reviewed academic journals such as this one are among the most credible sources
you can use. (credit: "The perception of odor objects in everyday life a review on the processing of odor mixtures" by
Thierry Thomas-Danguin, Charlotte Sinding, et al./Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)
Credible Nonacademic Sources
These sources, including articles, books, and reports, are second in authority only to peer-reviewed academic
publications. Credible nonacademic sources are often about current events or discoveries not yet reviewed in
academic circles and often provide a wider-ranging outlook on your topic. Peer-reviewed texts tend to be
narrow and specific, whereas nonacademic texts from well-researched sources are often more accessible and
can offer a broader perspective. These three major categories generally provide quality sources:

  · Information, white papers, and reports from government and international agencies such as the United
      Nations, the World Health Organization, and the United States government

  · Longer articles and reports from major newspapers, broadcast media, and magazines that are well
     regarded in academic circles, including the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, the BBC, and the
     Economist

  · Nonacademic books written by authors with expertise and credentials, who support their ideas with well-
      sourced information

To find nonacademic sources, search for .gov or .org sites related to your topic. A word of caution, however:
know that sources ending in .org are often advocacy sites and, consequently, inherently biased toward
whatever cause they are advocating. You also can look at academic article databases and search articles from
major newspapers and magazines, both of which can be found online.
446 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

FIGURE 14.9 Information from credible sources, such as the World Health Organization, provides value to your
research. (credit: "WHO World Health Organization on Coronavirus pandemic COVID-19" by
https://www.nursetogether.com/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0)

Short Informational Texts from Credible Websites and Periodicals

The next most authoritative sources are shorter newspaper articles or other pieces on credible websites. These
articles tend to be limited in scope, as their authors report on a single issue or event. Although they do not
often provide in-depth analysis, they can be a source of credible facts to support your argument. Alternatively,
they can point you in the direction of more detailed or rigorous sources that will enhance your research by
tracing the original texts or sources on which the articles are based. Usually, you can find these sources
through Internet searches, but sometimes you may have difficulty determining their credibility.

Judging Credibility

To judge credibility, begin by looking for the author or organization publishing the information. Most
periodical compositions contain a short "About the Author" blurb at the beginning or end of the article and
often include a link to the author's credentials or to more information about them. Using this information, you
can begin to determine their expertise and, potentially, any agenda the author or organization may have. For
example, expect a piece discussing side effects of medical marijuana written by a doctor to present more
expertise than the same piece written by a political lobbyist. You also can determine whether bias is present;
for example, the organization may promote a particular way of thinking or have an agenda that will influence
the content and language of the composition. In general, look for articles written with neutral expertise.

The CRAAP Test

You may find the CRAAP test a helpful and easy-to-remember tool for testing credibility. This checklist
provides you with a method for evaluating any source for both reliability and credibility. CRAAP stands for
Currency, Relevance, Authority, Accuracy, and Purpose. The CRAAP test, as shown in Table 14.2, includes
questions that can be asked of any source.

Currency                          When was the information published, revised, or updated?
                                  Does your topic require current information?
                                  Are links within the source current?

TABLE 14.2 CRAAP test questions

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                 14.1 · Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 447

           Does the information relate to your topic or support your thesis?

Relevance  Who is the intended audience of the source?
           What is the purpose of the source?

Authority  Who is the publisher, sponsor, or source?
           What are the author's credentials and/or qualifications?
           Does the URL reveal anything about the source?

Accuracy   Where does the information come from?
           What evidence is used to support the information, and can it be verified?
           Are there elements of bias?
           Has the information been reviewed?

Purpose    What is the author's purpose for creating the source?
           Is the information based on facts, opinion, or propaganda?
           What biases are present? Are biases recognized?

TABLE 14.2 CRAAP test questions

Sources with Clear Bias or Unclear Authority

The final type of source encompasses nearly everything else. Although they cannot be considered credible or
valid to support your argument or claims, these sources are not necessarily useless. Especially when you are
compiling sources at the beginning of a project, those with clear bias or unclear authority can be useful as you
explore all facets of a topic, including positions within an argument. These sources also can help you identify
topics on which to base your search terms and can even point you toward more credible sources.

FIGURE 14.10 Websites and periodicals with clear bias or without clear authority may be useful in pointing you in
the direction of more credible sources. (credit: skylarvision/Pixabay, CC0 1.0)

Locating Sources

Academic article databases are the best starting places for finding sources. There are too many databases to
cover them all in this chapter, but you would be wise to familiarize yourself with those to which you have access
through your school or program. For further information on databases, see The Research Process: Where to
Look for Existing Sources. In the long run, this knowledge will save you a good deal of time and a possible
headache.
448 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

       You will want to start with your college library website, which includes access to sources paid for by your
       institution. As a student, you should be able to access these quickly and easily. Another popular and wide-
       ranging database is Google Scholar (https://openstax.org/r/Google_Scholar). Google Scholar is helpful for
       finding sources across a wide range of topics. One drawback, however, is that it catalogues nearly all
       disciplines, so the results can be vast and unfocused. Therefore, when using Google Scholar, be as specific as
       possible, and add your academic discipline as a keyword. For example, when searching for information on
       climate change, add the keyword "environment" or "politics" depending on your research angle; otherwise, the
       results will include all disciplines and potentially bury the articles you seek. Google Scholar also has a feature
       labeled "Cited by," which shows you other papers that cite the article in their review of literature relate to the
       topic. Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing contains more information about focusing your searches. Like
       clues to a mystery, one search can lead you to a wealth of related articles.

       When you are able to identify potential sources by reading their abstracts or using Google Scholar, you may at
       times land on a publisher's website that requires you to pay to read the full article. When you find yourself in a
       situation such as this, record information about the article--author(s), article title, journal title, publication
       date. It is likely that you will be able to use your school's database to access the article. For information about
       other databases, consult The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources.

       Just as writing is recursive, requiring you to go back and forth between different stages of the process, you will
       likely return to your annotated bibliography at different points. You may begin by looking for sources related to
       your topic, or you may choose or narrow your topic after an initial database search for sources. If your project
       has a variety of possible topics, you may even start with a current issue of a leading journal in the field, find an
       article that interests you, and use that article to shape your topic selection. As a bonus, you will have your first
       reputable source. Later, as you refine your thesis, reasoning, and evidence, you may find yourself returning to
       your search for sources. Consider this hypothetical situation: You are developing an argument that examines
       the risk factors of childhood trauma that surface in later life. As you analyze the data from your sources, it
       occurs to you to find out whether any documented correlation exists between early trauma and resilience. So
       you return to Google Scholar and your university's academic database to find more research based on this idea
       in order to revise your analysis by adding the new viewpoint.

       One difficulty may be homing in on the keywords that will lead you to the sources you need. At this point,
       sources from the last two categories discussed may come into play: short pieces from credible websites and
       newspapers and other texts with clear bias or unclear authority. Less credible sources may lead you to better
       ones, particularly if you can identify the keywords used in them and then apply those keywords within
       academic databases. For more on developing useful keywords, consult The Research Process: Where to Look
       for Existing Sources.

       Boolean Operators

       Keyword searches can become frustrating, either yielding so much information that it seems impossible to
       sort through or narrowing the search so much that you miss important potential sources. One way to remedy
       this situation is to become familiar with Boolean operators, the basis of mathematical sets and database logic.
       Rather than searching with natural language only, you can use these operators to focus your search. The three
       basic Boolean operators are AND, OR, and NOT. Using these operators helps you search by linking necessary
       information, excluding irrelevant information, and focusing information. For example, if you have some pieces
       of information from tertiary sources, you may be able to use Boolean operators to find additional useful
       sources. A search string such as artificial intelligence (title) AND Buiten (author) AND 2019 (year) can yield the
       exact journal source you need. Here is a brief review of how to use the three operators:

         · Use AND to narrow search results and tell the database to include all search terms in finding sources. If
             you want to find sources that include all of the search terms entered, use the AND operator. In Figure
             14.11, the darkest blue triangular section in the center of the Venn diagram represents the result set for
             this search, including all three terms. In many databases, including Google, AND is implied between each

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                              14.1 · Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography 449

     word. To exclude AND, use quotation marks. For example, Google would translate the search term ethics
     artificial intelligence as ethics AND artificial AND intelligence. To make your phrases more specific, use
     the AND operator combined with quotation marks: "ethics" AND "artificial intelligence".

  FIGURE 14.11 Search results for AND (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
  · Use OR to connect two or more similar concepts and broaden your results, telling the search engine that

      any of your search terms can appear in the results it gives you. The Boolean operator OR is represented by
      Figure 14.12. Using the OR operator gives you a very large set of results.

   FIGURE 14.12 Search results for OR (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
  · Use NOT to exclude results from a search. This operator can help you narrow your search, telling the

      search engine to ignore names or words you do not want included in your results. For example, if you
     know you don't want self-driving cars in your search results, you might search for "artificial intelligence"
     NOT "self-driving cars".

Choosing Sources

Choosing sources to include in your annotated bibliography may seem overwhelming. However, if you can find
a few good academic articles as a starting point, use them to guide your research. Academic articles are
efficient, scrutinized by experts in their fields, and organized in ways that aid readers in identifying key
findings that relate to their argument. The following tips will help you choose solid sources to guide your
research:

  · Look for relevant scholarly articles. Even the briefest Google search can yield an overwhelming amount
      of content. Sift through it by looking first through academic databases to find high-quality sources relevant
      to your research.

  · Read abstracts. As you sift through scholarly articles, you can get a good idea of what each one is about by
      reading the abstract. It includes the findings and will show you in about 100 words whether the paper
      holds relevance to your research.

  · Skim. Once you have determined that an article may be useful, skim each section to glean the information
450 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

             you need. Closer and more extensive reading can come later as you develop and support your argument.
         · Avoid getting bogged down in technical information or industry-specific jargon. The benefit of reading

             peer-reviewed research is that you know the reviewers have determined it to be solidly constructed.
             Therefore, even if you don't understand some portions completely, you can still feel confident about using
             relevant information from the article.
         · Work smarter by using the research provided. Once you have identified an article that is helpful to your
             research, use it to find more like it. Search for other publications by the authors; researchers often spend
             much of their careers researching one overarching topic or theme. Use the review of literature to identify
             related articles that may add to your research. You can also use the article's bibliography to find additional
             sources. Or reverse engineer the process: use article databases to find other articles that cite the article in
             their literature reviews.

     14.2 Glance at Form: Citation Style, Purpose, and Formatting

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Successfully apply citation conventions to your writing, understanding the ideas of intellectual property that
             motivate their use.

         · Compose texts that integrate the writer's ideas with ideas from related sources.

      Citation Styles

       Academic writing encompasses a variety of citation styles. Depending on the type of source, most of these
       styles include varieties of similar information: author's name, title of work, publisher, location of publishing
       company, journal, website link, and sometimes the DOI (digital object identifier). The citation style you choose
       often will coincide with the academic discipline involved. Major citation styles include the following:

         · American Psychological Association (APA): Often used in education, psychology, and science fields
         · Modern Language Association (MLA): Often used in humanities fields
         · Chicago or Turabian Style: Often used in business, history, and fine arts fields

       Your instructor most often will assign a particular style for students to use. In this book, for example, the
       primary focus is on MLA Documentation and Format, although APA Documentation and Style is covered as
       well.

       You can also visit the official MLA Style Center (https://openstax.org/r/MLA_Style). Another excellent and
       comprehensive source on citation format is Purdue University's Online Writing Lab (https://openstax.org/r/
       Purdue_University) (OWL). A citation in MLA format of a website with no listed author name would look like the
       following example:

       "Food Preparation Workers." Occupational Outlook Handbook, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1 Sept. 2020,
           www.bls.gov/ooh/food-preparation-and-serving/food-preparation-workers.htm.

      Annotated Citations

       An annotated bibliography goes further than the citation entry. Beginning with the formal citation as shown
       above, it continues with information about the text, discussing the work's author(s), authority, and impact on
       or usefulness to the research project. Most annotated bibliographies also present a short critical analysis of the
       source. Annotations are written in paragraph form. Depending on the purpose of your project and the
       instructions given, your annotations may range from relatively simple summaries to thorough analyses of
       your sources and how you will use them. Typically, you will provide this information in one or two paragraphs
       of around 100 to 200 words total.

       Look at the following sample annotation, which is two paragraphs long and consists of just over 150 words. It
       not only establishes the credibility of the publisher of the website, in this case a United States government
       organization, but also summarizes the conclusions of the source, including an analysis of future projections

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                            14.2 · Glance at Form: Citation Style, Purpose, and Formatting 451

                   for this and similar occupations. It also reflects on how the source contributes to the research and how it helps
                   shape the argument proposed in the research project.

                   "Food Preparation Workers." Occupational Outlook Handbook, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1 Sept. 2020,
                       www.bls.gov/ooh/food-preparation-and-serving/food-preparation-workers.htm.

student sample t
                          Authority: This web page is produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, part of the United States Department of
                            Labor. This agency collects and disseminates the latest economic and employment data, including figures on
                            employment and wages. The report provides information suecnhdass education needed, median pay, most recent
                            data regarding number of jobs, and employment outlook for the next 10 years.

                          The web page concludes that the occupational outlook of this profession is declining slightly, with an
                          enadntsicipated 1 percent decline in employment over the 10 years following the publication date, largely as a

                            result of folding food preparation into the duties of counter workers. However, it also projects that
                            employment in the combined occupations of cooks and food preparation workers will increase 7 percent over
                            the same period of time. This source supports the project's claim that technical education in food services
                            provides beneficial training that leads to employment and helps shape the argument for better funding for
                            technical schools.

                   Annotated bibliographies are usually ordered alphabetically by the first word in the citation, often the author's
                   last name. In very long lists of citations, you may choose to organize entries by topic, arranging sources into
                   groups that address the topic from similar perspectives or focuses. The entirety of the annotation should be
                   indented. Only the beginning of the source citation, typically the author's last name, is left-aligned. Your
                   paragraphs should be objective, offering comment and criticism based on the reliability, validity, and bias
                   present rather than on your agreement or disagreement with the ideas. Although you can state opinions, do so
                   in the context of the larger project, and provide explanations.

                   Functions of an Annotated Bibliography

                   The function of an annotated bibliography can vary according to the purpose of the writing and the stage at
                   which it is completed. These functions often include

                      · providing a review of literature for research related to a argument;
                      · formulating a thesis, particularly if you compile the annotated bibliography at the beginning of the writing

                         process;
                      · demonstrating the amount and quality of your research on a subject or topic;
                      · providing examples of sources of information available on a topic; and
                      · supplying items and publications of interest to readers or other researchers.

                   Parts of an Annotated Bibliography

                   An annotated bibliography allows readers to determine the scope and credibility of the sources you have used
                   in your research. Each annotation goes beyond a summary of the source, providing information that helps
                   readers determine whether to read the entire work. In other words, if someone else were researching the same
                   or a similar topic, your annotations would help them decide whether the sources would be useful and why.
                   Occasionally, confusion may arise about the function and purpose of abstracts versus annotations. As defined,
                   an abstract is a purely descriptive summary, typically found at the very beginning of a journal article or in a
                   periodical index. Abstracts are usually short, intended to provide readers with a concise understanding of a
                   paper's basic content, research, and findings. Although annotations also can be descriptive, informative, and
                   similarly brief, they are usually evaluative and critical.

                   A useful and thorough annotation contains three basic parts:

                      · A summary of the source, detailing the topic(s), major arguments and claims, and main ideas discussed.
                      · An evaluation of the source's usefulness to your argument, its validity, its reliability, and any bias present.

                         When you evaluate sources, you discuss the authors and their credentials, any agendas present, and the
452 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

             sources' goals.
         · A reflection on how the source fits into the puzzle of your research project. You will examine how it shapes

             your argument and influences your thinking about the topic.

       Create an Annotation

       With these guidelines and information in mind, you can create an annotation. First, write a summary of
       typically no more than one or two sentences. Include the name of the author of the work, when and where it
       was written, and a general description of the content. Here you will need to paraphrase, or explain the
       essential information of the text in your own words. The rest of the annotation is an analysis of the source and
       a reflection on how you will use it. The evaluation assesses the source's quality and relevance to your topic.
       Although you often complete an annotated bibliography at the culmination of a work, the analytic nature of the
       annotated bibliography means that working on it as part of the prewriting process can help you shape your
       ideas, learn more about your topic, write a thesis, and determine which sources to use while formulating your
       argument.

      Using Sources in Academic Conversation

       Academic writing, particularly an assignment in which you create an argument--a persuasive text using one
       or more appeals--to support a claim to support a claim through reasoning and evidence, is somewhat like
       joining a conversation, as mentioned in the introduction to this chapter. You contribute your own ideas to an
       issue, support your claim by citing other sources on the topic, refute counterclaims, and create meaningful
       rhetorical appeals. With these contributions, you add your writing to the database of knowledge and opinion
       regarding that topic. See Glance at Genre: Introducing Research as Evidence for a more detailed discussion of
       authors in conversation. As you think about creating your annotated bibliography, keep this conversation in
       mind.

       One way to use sources is to find those that agree with your position and perhaps even those that argue the
       point in a similar way. While using sources like these isn't necessarily a problem, creating a rhetorical
       argument is more than simply repeating existing research, no matter how solid or well-regarded it may be.
       Therefore, try to expand your compilation to include sources that not only provide strong evidence for your
       claim but also challenge, extend, or focus on a narrow part of your argument. Joining the conversation may
       mean explaining how your ideas differ from those presented by another author, or it may involve synthesizing
       the ideas of multiple sources.

       You can join the conversation in several ways without simply restating the words of a source. One option is to
       combine arguments or research findings from associated source ideas in order to create a summary claim or
       statement. It may be that none of your sources individually point to a result, but connecting some of them may
       lead you to a broad conclusion. A second option builds on the first, but rather than summarize to draw a
       conclusion, you would synthesize to make a claim about the consequences or implications of the sources. A
       third option is to identify and develop areas of agreement or disagreement between sources and between your
       own claims and the sources you examine. Finally, you may find areas for further study, including unanswered
       questions raised by the research you analyze.

      Key Terms

       These are key terms and characteristics of annotated bibliographies.

         · Agenda: Underlying intentions or motivations of a person or group.
         · Analysis: Detailed examination of a complex topic, often looking at individual parts, to interpret

             meanings, themes, and author choices.
         · Annotations: A note of explanation or comment. Annotations are both descriptive and critical, adding

             clarity and insight beyond a straightforward summary.
         · bias: Predisposition, inclination, or prejudice toward or against something.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                   14.3 · Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran 453

  · Bibliography. A list of sources and basic information about them, including author, title, publisher, and
      publication date.

  · Boolean operators: The words AND, OR, and NOT used as conjunctions between search terms to combine
      or exclude keywords in an online database search. Boolean operators help narrow searches.

  · Citation: A set of information referencing a single source of information used in a writer's research.
  · Format: The way in which a composition is arranged or organized. In a bibliography, format is the way in

      which the bibliographical information is presented.
  · Paraphrase: A restatement, usually for clarity, of a written or spoken text.
  · Peer-reviewed source: An article or other informational work written by an expert and reviewed

      anonymously by other experts in the field to ensure the work's overall quality, including its validity.
  · primary sources: An immediate, firsthand account of a topic or an event from someone connected to it.

      Original research, including interviews, experiments, surveys, and field observations, is considered a
      primary source.
  · rigorous: Exhaustive, thorough, accurate.
  · secondary sources. A secondhand account of an event or topic, often providing analysis or interpretation.
  · Style: A set of rules for citing sources in academic writing.
  · Summary: A brief statement covering the main ideas of an event or written composition.
  · Synthesis: The combination of ideas to form new conclusions.
  · tertiary sources: A summary or digest of primary or secondary sources.
  · Thesis: A statement that identifies a topic and the author's claim, or angle, about that topic.

14.3 Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can
Save the Earth" by Lily Tran

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the purpose, language, culture, and expectations of different genres of composition.
  · Analyze relationships between ideas and organizational patterns.
  · Evaluate research materials for credibility, sufficiency, accuracy, timeliness, and bias.

Introduction

In this section, you will read a sample annotated bibliography based on the Annotated Student Sample to help
you create your own annotated bibliography. As you read, remember that annotations summarize, assess, and
evaluate a source, specifically regarding its function in the project for which it is used. Note the purpose of the
annotations in this bibliography and how much information the author includes for readers.

        LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS                                                                                              end annotat

Annotated Bibliography

Berners-Lee, M., et al. "Current Global Food Production Is Sufficient to Meet Human Nutritional Needs in 2050
   Provided There Is Radical Societal Adaptation." Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene, vol. 6, 2018,
    online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article/doi/10.1525/elementa.310/112838/Current-global-food-production-is-
    sufficient-to. Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Fanonrmotaatt. Notice that only the author's name is left-aligned. All other text, including the annotation, is indented. The
citation includes all relevant information in MLA format. Et al. means "and others." M. Berners-Lee is the principal
author.
454 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

pupbulbiclicdodmomaianint t  M. Berners-Lee and the other authors of this article--C. Kennelly, R. Watson, and C. N. Hewitt--all are
                             associated with Lancaster [UK] University. In this article, they present a quantitative analysis of global and
                             regional food supply, following the flow of calories, protein, and selected micronutrients from production to
                             human consumption. Clear tables and figures accompany the text. A reference list of 55 books, scholarly
                             articles, and official reports provides sources for additional information.

                             Of particular value is that the paper first analyzes current policies and practices in foeondd ppruobdliuccdtioomn,atihnetn offers
                             projections for two scenarios. One scenario assumes that current policies and practices continue unchanged.
                             The other explains what policies and pracetincdespnuebelidc dtoombeaiinmtplemented to supply a healthyednidetpgulbolbicaldlyominain t
                             2050. This information makes it possible to describe wehnadtpsuubclcicesdsolmooakins tlike and also what failure looks like.

Aanunthotoartity. This annotation includes two paragraphs. In the first, Lily Tran discusses the credibility of the authors,
noting their research and association with a British university. Tran also emphasizes the data provided and
commeenntdspounbtlhicedbormeaadinthtof references listed.end annotat

Eanvnaolutation. The second paragraph is an evaluation of the source's applicability to the topic of the research paper.
Notice that Tran specifically explains its potential use: the scenarios given allow readers to understand success and
failure as related to healthy diets from sustainable resources.end annotat

Chai, Bingli Clark, et al. "Which Diet Has the Least Environmental Impact on Our Planet? A Systematic Review of
   Vegan, Vegetarian and Omnivorous Diets." Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 15, 2019, www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/
    15/4110. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

                             Bingli Clark Chai and secondary authors Johannes Reidar van der Voort, Kristina Grofelnik, Helga Gudny
                             Eliasdottir, Ines Klöss, and Federico J. A. Perez-Cueto are associated with the Design and Consumer Behaviour
                             Section, Department of Food Science, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. They present a
                             systematic review of the environmental impacts of human diets, based on 16 published studies and 18
                             published reviews. Most of the studies were done in the United States or Europe, and they ranged in duration
                             from seven days to 27 years. Separate tables compare the design, intervention, duration, diets, quality
                             assessment, and main outcomes of the studies, as well as the diets, quality assessment, and main outcomes of
                             the reviews. In addition to the studies and reviews analyzed, the reference cites additional journal articles for
                             further information.

                             This is a secondary source in that it evaluates published work rather than presenting original research. Its value
                             lies in the compilation, comparison, and summation of information from a variety of credible sources.

Eanvnaolutation. Tran summarizes the credibility of the source by noting the authors' academic association and
explaining that the source is actually a compilation of study research.end annotat

Ranenfloetcattion. Tran notes the source's usefulness as a secondary source whose authors compile, compare, and
summarize research valuable to the paper's argument. Notice, however, that she does not analyze the impact of the
source on her argument.end annotat

                             Lusk, Jayson L., and F. Bailey Norwood. "Some Economic Benefits and Costs of Vegetarianism." Agricultural and
                              Resource Economics Review, vol. 38, no. 2, 2009, pp. 109-124, www.cambridge.org/core/journals/
                               agricultural-and-resource-economics-review/article/abs/some-economic-benefits-and-costs-of-
                               vegetarianism/1C2CB85022A54F27504A7DA65576C5C4.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                             14.3 · Annotated Student Sample: "Healthy Diets from Sustainable Sources Can Save the Earth" by Lily Tran 455

                             Jayson L. Lusk is a distinguished professor and department head of the Department of Agricultural Economics

                             at Purdue University, and F. Bailey Norwood is an associate professor in the Department of Agricultural

                             Economics at Oklahoma State University. They report the findings of a detailed cost-benefit analysis examining

                             production costs and nutrient content of corn, soybeans, wheat, peanuts, hogs, cattle, chickens, and milk to

pupbulbiclicdodmomaianint t  determine cost per nutrient produced at the farm level and the retail level. The discussion includes the

                             monetary value consumers place on these fooednsd, pbuasbelidc odnompraicinetand demand. The text is supepnldempuebnltiecddboymain t

                             tables of data plus details of calcuelantdiopnus.blic domain t              end public domain t

Sanunmomtaat ry. This annotation provides a robust summary of the aretnicdlep'subcloicntdeonmt.eanindtannotat

                             This approach is valuable because of its transparency as to methods and the detailed calculations shown.

                             Unfortunately,  the  numbeenrds  are dated; the  at rticle  was  published  in  2009.  However,  because  of  the  specificity  of
                                                              public domain

                             the presentation, it is  possible  to  extrapolate  trends  that  would  be     applicable  today.
                               end public domain t

Eanvnaolutation. Tran points out a flaw in the data--namely, that it is old. However, she explains how she might use it
anyway through analysis. Other than this short explanation of the potential to extrapolate trends, Tran does not
reflect on how she could use the source in other ways.end annotat

                             Schulz, Lee. "Would a Sudden Loss of the Meat and Dairy Industry, and All the Ripple Effects, Destroy the
                              Economy?" Department of Economics, Iowa State U, www.econ.iastate.edu/node/691. Accessed 6 Dec.
                               2020.

                             Schulz is an associate professor in the Department of Economics at Iowa State University. In response to a
                             question about the effects of removing livestock-related industries from the United States, he cites statistics on
                             the contributions these industries make to the economy, both domestically and globally. No references are
                             provided, but the author's contact information is given for further questions.

                             Although this article is less scholarly than other sources cited here, it is included to show a viewpoint that
                             differs from the general pro-vegetarian stance of most sources.

Eanvnaolutation and Reflection. Noting that this source is less scholarly and provides fewer citations than others, Tran
nevertheless considers it important for presenting a different viewpoint from the other sources collected. Although
she does not explicitly explain the impact of the viewpoint on the argument, readers can assume she will address
this influence in her argument paper.end annotat

                             Willett, Walter, et al. "Food in the Anthropocene: The EAT-Lancet Commission on Healthy Diets from
                              Sustainable Food Systems." Lancet, vol. 393, no. 10170, 2019, pp. 447-492, www.thelancet.com/journals/
                               lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)31788-4/fulltext.

                             The EAT-Lancet Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable Food Systems is composed of physicians and
                             researchers from Germany, Sweden, Norway, England, Switzerland, Lebanon, Mexico, Netherlands, Zimbabwe,
                             Australia, Indonesia, Italy, India, Pakistan, and the United States. Lead author Walter Willett, MD, is affiliated
                             with Harvard University's T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School, and the Brigham and
                             Women's Hospital, Boston, MA. The commission report quantitatively describes a universal healthy reference
                             diet with the goals of alleviating hunger and increasing nutrition, saving water, minimizing agricultural land use,
                             and reducing the effects of climate change. This in-depth study cites 357 professional references available for
                             further information.

Sanunmomtaat ry. In this annotation, Tran provides a summary listing the key ideas.end annotat

Aanunthotoartity and Evaluation. Tran lists the lead author's credentials and establishes the authority of the commission
sponsoring the report, showing the breadth of research involved.end annotat
            456 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

                        Directly related to the topic at hand, this is a major source because of its global scope, thorough treatment, and
                        realistic assessment of the current situation and future challenges. This will be the most important source for
                        this paper.

                 Ranenfloetcattion. Tran reflects on the quality of the source and explains its impact on the research, revealing it to be the
public domainmtost important source for the paper.end annotat

              end public domain t

              Discussion Questions

                 1. Why does Lily Tran evaluate the credibility of the authors in the annotations? How does this practice help
                      the research?

                 2. Which of Tran's sources will likely increase knowledge of the subject matter she is researching? Why is this
                      increased knowledge an important step in forming an argumentative research project?

                 3. How can Tran use these sources to refine her own opinion?

                 4. How might Tran use the source from Agricultural and Resource Economics Review to find more recent
                      data?

            14.4 Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing

                 LEARNING OUTCOMES
                 By the end of this section, you will be able to:

                    · Successfully apply citation conventions to your writing, understanding the ideas of intellectual property that
                       motivate their use.

                    · Evaluate research materials for credibility, sufficiency, accuracy, timeliness, and bias.
                    · Compose to discover and reconsider ideas.
                    · Compose an annotated bibliography that uses correct style conventions and integrates the writer's ideas with

                       ideas from related sources.

                  Now it is time to try your hand at creating your own annotated bibliography. As you work through identifying
                  and writing about your sources, you may want to seek out additional ones to help support your argument or
                  thesis. This recursive process is similar to the fine-tuning that occurs during the writing process, in which a
                  writer moves fluidly among drafting, editing, and revising. You can return to your annotated bibliography
                  during the course of research and writing to modify, further develop, analyze, and add to your sources.
                  Remember, using a variety of sources can broaden your perspective about your topic by showing how different
                  scholars and popular publications approach it.

              Summary of Assignment: Annotated Bibliography

                 For this assignment, you will create an annotated bibliography based on your research for one of the writing
                 assignments in this course, preferably Writing Process: Integrating Research. After collecting and choosing
                 sources, you will write citations using MLA Documentation and Format and compose a one- or two-paragraph
                 annotation for each source. Remember, the purpose of the annotation is to provide

                   · a brief summary that allows readers to understand the background of the source and its basic claims; and
                   · an evaluation and reflection on the source's reliability, its usefulness, and the author's or organization's

                       credibility.

                  While the format for your MLA citation should follow the prescriptive pattern from the Handbook, you will
                  decide on the language and structure of the annotations you include. While your topic, personal style, and
                  ideas may lend themselves to a more standardized format, it is possible that they may instead challenge
                  codified conventions in favor of a style more authentic to you.

                 Another Lens 1. Consider alternatives to a formal annotated bibliography that complements differing learning

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                        14.4 · Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing 457

styles or abilities. If your instructor is amenable, you may informally annotate sources in their margins or use
an online annotation program such as Kami (https://openstax.org/r/Kami).

Another Lens 2. Another alternative is to discuss, with a partner or in a small group, each source's credentials,
key ideas, and usefulness to your project. In either case, using a graphic organizer similar to the one in the
next section should help you organize your ideas.

      Quick Launch: Organizing Information

Begin by collecting sources. A good way to start is to make a list of keywords, known authors, organizations,
and previously identified sources related to your topic. For example, imagine you have been assigned an
argument project and chosen artificial intelligence as the topic. Begin, then, with the keywords artificial
intelligence. A Google search will reveal a wealth of information on the topic, likely too much to help you craft a
meaningful argument. However, a basic search will allow you to

  · effectively define artificial intelligence as "the simulation of human intelligence by machines programmed
      to mimic human thought and actions";

  · name four types of artificial intelligence: reactive machines, limited memory, theory of mind, and self-
      aware;

  · identify leading industries in which artificial intelligence is already present, such as self-driving cars and
      virtual butlers; and

  · recognize the existence of a spectrum of thought surrounding the ethics and governance of artificial
      intelligence.

You also may discover some alternative search terms to use, such as machine learning, data mining, robotics,
and neuroscience. Although you may not ultimately use them in your argument, the sources that you find may
point you toward a focused thesis.

When you finish your keyword search, the next step is to search academic databases. Use your library's
resources to find scholarly sources such as journal articles, books, textbooks, expert interviews, and reputable
periodical pieces. Aim for five to seven sources to begin with, though you likely will add more as you work on
your project. You may already have an idea of what claims you want to make in your argument, but the sources
may shape them as well. As you review the sources you collect, choose those that give you a varied range of
perspectives on the topic. Remember that you can return to this procedure at various points in your research,
adding sources as your needs change and as you refine your claims. While you search for sources, keep in
mind the specifics of your research project, and limit your search to sources that specifically support your
argument, inform a counterargument, or otherwise add information that enhances your research.

Thesis

Before you choose sources, you must have an idea of what you want to say. If you're creating an annotated
bibliography for the argument described Writing Process: Integrating Research, you likely have already
drafted a thesis statement. If you are creating an annotated bibliography for another topic, you will need to
draft a working thesis. Your thesis will state your position on the topic. It is often a single clear, concise
sentence that reveals your side in the argument. You will use your sources to support the thesis you draft.

These frames may be useful when you draft your working thesis:

  · Because ________, [someone] should ________.
  · ________ saves ________, reduces ________, and helps ________.
  · The lack of ________ shows ________.
  · ________ influences ________ and, by extension, ________.
  · ________ accurately (inaccurately) portrays ________ because ________.
  · ________ is a result of ________, ________, and ________.
              458 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

                      · Although some argue that ________, a close examination shows that ________.
                      · ________ and ________ prove that ________.

                Citations and Annotations

student sampleFtor each source you choose, first write the source citation in MLA format. An example of a citation for the
                    research project on artificial intelligence might be:

                         Buiten, Miriam C. "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial Intelligence." European Journal of Risk
                           Regulation, vol. 10, no. 1, 2019, pp. 41-59, www.ecanmd bsridge.org/core/journals/european-journal-of-risk-
                            regulation/article/towards-intelligent-regulation-of-artificial-intelligence/
                            AF1AD1940B70DB88D2B24202EE933F1B. Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.

                   After preparing citations for each of your sources, write the annotations. To do this, consider the following:

                      · The purpose of the work
                      · For whom the work is written
                      · How to summarize the content
                      · The author/organization producing the work
                      · Distinctive or interesting features of the content (particularly in comparison with other sources)
                      · The relevance of the work to your topic
                      · Strengths, weaknesses, and bias present
                      · Conclusions and implications

                   To annotate, you will typically begin with a summary of one to three sentences. For longer or more complex
                   sources, the summary may be longer. Then discuss unique features of the content, an evaluation of the source,
                   and a reflection on how the source is useful to your research. For each source, use a graphic organizer such as
                   Table 14.3. It will help you collect the needed information, organize your thoughts, and get started
                   summarizing and analyzing your sources.

                                                                 Source
                                                                 Citation

                                                                 Intended
                                                                 Audience

                                                                 Main Ideas,
                                                                 Arguments,
                                                                 and Themes
                                                                 Present

                                                                 Author's
                                                                 Point of
                                                                 View, Bias,
                                                                 and
                                                                 Expertise

                                                                 Comparison
                                                                 with Other
                                                                 Sources on
                                                                 the Topic

                                                               TABLE 14.3 Source evaluation organizer

                       Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                 14.4 · Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing 459

                          Evaluation
                          of Source's
                          Relevance
                          to Topic

                          Evaluation
                          of Strengths
                          and
                          Weaknesses

                          Conclusions
                          Drawn by
                          Author

                         TABLE 14.3 Source evaluation organizer

     Drafting:

Creating an annotated bibliography requires you to read your sources critically. As you first collect your
sources, briefly review and examine the information they contain, specifically through the lens of how each
can add to your research. As you read more critically, choose those that represent different perspectives on
your topic as well as those that have similar viewpoints but arrive at them in different ways or from various
angles.

If you have been using a graphic organizer for each source, as suggested, the information you need and your
ideas about the source will be right there for you. If you haven't organized your research in this way, now is a
good time to do it, when you do not yet need to structure good paragraphs. When it is time for you to write your
annotations, having your thoughts already mapped out will make your work easier. For the hypothetical
artificial intelligence project, you might organize information for the article cited earlier as shown in Table
14.4.

Source Citation          Buiten, Miriam C. "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial Intelligence." European
                         Journal of Risk Regulation, vol. 10, no. 1, 2019, pp. 41-59, www.cambridge.org/
Intended Audience        core/journals/european-journal-of-risk-regulation/article/towards-intelligent-
Main Ideas, Arguments,   regulation-of-artificial-intelligence/AF1AD1940B70DB88D2B24202EE933F1B.
and Themes Present       Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.
Author's Point of View,
Bias, and Expertise      The journal is published by Cambridge University Press. Therefore, it is peer
                         reviewed and intended for an academic audience.

                         Discusses the unpredictability and difficulty of controlling artificial intelligence and
                         examines what, if anything, can be done to increase transparency, specifically as it
                         relates to biases of algorithms

                         Buiten is a law and economics professor at the University of Mannheim. She is the
                         author or coauthor of nine publications, and contributed to others, about law and
                         technology and digitalization, competition law, and European law.

TABLE 14.4 Completed source evaluation organizer
460 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

Comparison with Other             Other sources call for total transparency in legal matters regarding artificial
Sources on the Topic              intelligence. This article questions whether such transparency is useful and/or
                                  feasible on the basis of current laws
Evaluation of Source's
Relevance to Topic                Focuses on legal transparency for artificial intelligence, related to the question of
                                  whether artificial intelligence is harmful or helpful to society
Evaluation of Strengths
and Weaknesses                    Well-researched; uses dozens of peer-reviewed sources

Conclusions Drawn by              Transparency for artificial intelligence will be difficult and expensive to comply with
Author                            and should be better defined in legal contexts before it is required.

TABLE 14.4 Completed source evaluation organizer

For some sources, you may be unable to find information for each category. In particular, for sources that are
very short or from which you use only one or two bits of information, your annotations will not be long or
complex, and your graphic organizer may seem sparse. That is to be expected. What is important at this stage
is to identify how you will use your resources as they relate to your argument or thesis.

After you have outlined your sources by using the graphic organizer or a similar method, it is time to start
writing the actual annotations. Remember the three tasks in writing an annotation:

1. Summary the central idea or scope of the source, particularly as it relates to your research project.
2. Evaluation the source for authority, author's perspective, reliability, validity, and bias.
3. Reflect on how the source affects your research and your thinking.

Your annotated bibliography should include at least some of these functions and, depending on the source,
may contain all of them. Below is an example of an annotated bibliography entry for the article on artificial
intelligence. The entry begins with the correctly formatted citation, followed by two paragraphs summarizing,
evaluating, and reflecting. Because you already have completed the graphic organizer, much of the analysis is
already done there. Simply take that thinking and shape it into useful paragraphs, like those the writer created
here.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                        14.4 · Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing 461

FIGURE 14.13 Sample annotated bibliography entry (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
4.0 license)
You can break down this sample annotation, analyzing each part separately as shown in Figure 14.13.
Buiten, Miriam C. "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial Intelligence." European Journal of Risk

   Regulation, vol. 10, no. 1, 2019, pp. 41-59, www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-journal-of-risk-
    regulation/article/towards-intelligent-regulation-of-artificial-intelligence/
    AF1AD1940B70DB88D2B24202EE933F1B. Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.
Fanonrmotaatt. Notice the MLA format, including information listing the author, title, publishing journal, and DOI or link to
the article. The reader will be able to find and read the article easily.end annotat
   462 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

   Authority: Miriam Buiten is a law and economics professor. She has authored or coauthored eight journal

   articles and one book, covering topics such as law, technology, and digitalization; competition law; and

   European law. This article appears in a journal published by Cambridge University Press. It is peer reviewed and

   intended for an academic audience. The author discusses the unpredictability and difficulty of controlling

s  artificial intelligence and examines what, if anything, can be done to increase transparency, specifically as it

   relates to the biases present in artificial intelligence algorithms.

   Aanunthotoartity. The author is named and introduced with background informateionndesstablishing her authority in the field.
   The publishing organization is also named, establishing credibility as a peer-reviewed journal.end annotat

   Sanunmomtaat ry. The contents of the text are summarizeednbedrnisedfsly, allowing readers to quickly understand the topic and
   scope of the article and to begin to piece together its relevance to the overall research project.end annotat

   This source focuses on legal transparency for artificial intelligence, which is related to the question of whether
   artificial intelligence is harmful or helpful to society. The author argues that transparency for artificial
   intelligence will be difficult and expensive to comply with and should be better defined in legal contexts before
   it is required. Many other sources call for total transparency in legal matters regarding artificial intelligence.
   However, this article questions whether such transparency is useful and/or feasible based on current laws. The
   article is well researched, using dozens of peer-reviewed sources.

   Eanvnaolutation. This paragraph includes an evaluative statement that shows the article's validity.end annotat

   This article aids the researcher in shaping her argument that oversight of artificial intelligence is a highly
   complex endeavor that, although important, will be difficult to achieve. It is useful to the argument that laws
   need to develop at a much quicker pace to keep up with rapidly developing technology.

   Ranenfloetcattion. This part of the paragraph reveals how the source fits into the research puzzle, noting that it indirectly
   supports the claim that developing oversight for artificial intelligence is not a simple task and would require the law
   to evolve quickly.end annotat

   Santynloet.aTthe annotation is written in third person, referring to "the researcher" and "her," as opposed to using first-
   person pronouns such as me and I.end annotat

   Formatting

   The format of an annotated bibliography can vary depending on the discipline and purpose. Therefore, be
   clear at the outset which style you need to use. In academic writing, that information often will come from your
   instructor. Generally, annotated bibliographies will be written in MLA Documentation and Format, APA
   Documentation and Format, or Chicago style.

   This text uses MLA style. MLA source citations follow several principles in place of specific rules. The style has
   been adapted in recent years to respond to the evolving nature of text in an increasingly digital world. Thus,
   the MLA Handbook is organized by the process of citation, rather than listing rules for every type of source.
   However, certain overall guidelines apply. When you cite a source, first identify core elements that are present.
   Remember from earlier in this chapter that these are author(s), title of source, title of container, version,
   number, publisher, publication date, and location.

   Aanunthotoart. The entry with gold highlighting begins with the author's last name, followed by a comma and the remainder
   of the name. The author's name is followed by a period.end annotat
   TanitnleotoaftSource. The title of the source follows the author's name in purple highlighting. The title is either italicized

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                             14.4 · Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing 463

or placed within quotation marks, depending on the type of source, and followed by a period. Book titles are
italicized, while print or online articles are placed in quotation marks, as shown.end annotat

TanitnleotoaftContainer. The container, highlighted in teal, is the larger work to which a source belongs. An article may
belong to a website or journal, a song to an album, or a video to a video-sharing site. This container comes next in
the citation. It is generally italicized and followed by a comma. However, some sources do not have containers; for
example, a book (versus a chapter in a book) or an entire website (versus a single page on a website) is self-
contained and thus has no container to cite.end annotat

Vanenrsoitoant. Next, the version is listed, if there is one. For example, a textbook edition or version of a text would appear
here, followed by a comma. This citation example doesn't have a version, so that information is skipped.end annotat

Nanunmobtaetr. Some sources, especially academic journals, are part of a numbered sequence as shown in green                     end annotat
highlighting. Journals usually have both volume and issue numbers; include both in your citation, separated by
commas.

Panunbolitsahter. The next element in the citation is the publisher, followed by a comma. The publisher does not have to be
listed for some sources, including periodicals, works published by the author or editor, websites with the same
name as the publisher, or websites that host works but do not actually publish them. Because this sample source is
a periodical, no publisher is listed in the citation.end annotat

Panunbolitcaattion Date. List the most recent date of publication available for the version of the source you used. The date
is followed by a comma as shown in red highlighting.end annotat

Laoncnaotiaotn. Location, shown in dark and light gray highlighting, refers to where in the source you found the
information, including page numbers and URLs. Be as specific as possible, as this information allows readers to
return to your source to read it for themselves. When listing a URL, remove the beginning tag of http:// or https://.end annotat

Optional elements

You may want to add optional elements to help readers identify the source more easily. These can include the
following:

· City of publication, generally only for books that were published before 1900 or whose publishers either
   have offices in more than one country or are unknown in North America (MLA 8)

· Access date, which is present in the sample annotation
· DOI (digital object identifier), which may be used in place of a URL if available
· Original publication date, if it differs from the publication date used for the citation

Alphabetizing and Indenting

Other rules also apply to MLA citations in a research project. Most of these are formatting and style rules that
add to a polished final product. Remember to list sources in alphabetical order according to the author's last
name. If the source has more than one author, list it according to the last name of the first author mentioned. If
the source has no author named, insert it into your alphabetical list according to the first word in the title. For
example, if Miriam C. Buiten's name were not mentioned, you would enter the item under T, the first letter of
the first word in the title, Towards. In your bibliography, double-space the citation, and do not leave a space
between entries.

In an annotated bibliography, indent the entire annotation in the same manner as the source citation after the
first line. In most word processing programs, you can create this formatting by highlighting the citation and
annotation paragraphs and then creating a hanging indent. In Microsoft Word, open the Paragraph Settings
icon on the Home tab. Under the tab that reads Indents and Spacing, find the section labeled Indentation. On
the right side of that section is the label Special. Click the drop-down menu, and choose Hanging. Different
word processing programs may require you to create hanging indentations in another way. Consult an MLA
guide often to ensure that your citations are correct.
464 14 · Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

       Annotations
       Annotations are the most important part of an annotated bibliography. Although there is no set format for
       writing annotations, remember to write them in paragraph form and to summarize, evaluate, and/or reflect.
       Annotation lengths will vary depending on the length of the source, how it is used in your project, and how
       much analysis you do within the annotation. However, a general length of one to two paragraphs consisting of
       100 to 200 words is roughly the standard.

      Descriptive/Informative and Analytical/Critical Annotations

       There are two major types of annotated bibliographies. The first is descriptive annotations, or informative,
       summarizing the material and explaining why the source is useful for your topic. This type of annotated
       bibliography also points out special features of the text, including any data, graphics, or other characteristics.
       Although you discuss the author's main arguments and conclusions, you do not analyze or evaluate them.
       Descriptive annotations are useful for helping readers understand an author's main ideas but less helpful for
       showing how the source has influenced the research project as a whole.
       The other type of annotated bibliography is analytical bibliography, or critical. This type includes all the
       features of a descriptive annotated bibliography, including a summary of the material. In addition, it includes
       your analysis of the information in each source and explanation of how the source has influenced the
       development of your research. With analytical or critical annotations, you examine the strengths, weaknesses,
       and biases present in the author's information and explain how the author's work and conclusions apply to
       your research.
       In projects for this course, especially those using arguments, you will almost always create analytical or critical
       annotated bibliographies, though the detail in which you analyze may vary from source to source. The detail in
       these bibliographies will contribute to your knowledge base and provide information for others.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      14 · Further Reading 465

Further Reading

To learn more about creating an annotated bibliography, consider the following sources:
"Annotated Bibliographies." OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab, Purdue U, owl.purdue.edu/owl/

    general_writing/common_writing_assignments/annotated_bibliographies/index.html.
Beatty, Luke, and Cynthia A. Cochran. Writing the Annotated Bibliography: A Guide for Students and

   Researchers. Routledge, 2020.
"How to Prepare an Annotated Bibliography: The Annotated Bibliography." Cornell University Library, Cornell

    U, 5 May 2021, guides.library.cornell.edu/annotatedbibliography.

Works Cited

Krause, Steven D. The Process of Research Writing. 2007, www.stevendkrause.com/tprw/.
"MLA Citation Guide (8th Edition): Annotated Bibliography." LibGuides at Columbia College (BC), LibGuides, 16

    June 2021, columbiacollege-ca.libguides.com/mla/annot_bib.
"MLA Formatting and Style Guide." OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab, Purdue U, 2021, owl.purdue.edu/owl/

    research_and_citation/mla_style/mla_formatting_and_style_guide/mla_general_format.html.
466 14 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Person Says About All Case Study Profile: What One 15

FIGURE 15.1 Throughout history, language differences have affected aspects of human life such as trade,
diplomacy, and culture. Found in 1799 and at first indecipherable, the Rosetta Stone, pictured here, marks an
important milestone in helping language researchers understand Egyptian hieroglyphics. In addition to language-
related artifacts, case studies are another, far more frequently used tool that researchers rely on to understand how
people learn and use languages. (credit: "Rosetta Stone" by Ryan Somma/ideonexus/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

15.1  Tracing a Broad Issue in the Individual
15.2  Case Study Trailblazer: Vilayanur S. Ramachandran
15.3  Glance at Genre: Observation, Description, and Analysis
15.4  Annotated Sample Reading: Case Study on Louis Victor "Tan" Leborgne
15.5  Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact
15.6  Editing Focus: Words Often Confused
15.7  Evaluation: Presentation and Analysis of Case Study
15.8  Spotlight on ... Applied Linguistics
15.9  Portfolio: Your Own Uses of Language

INTRODUCTION Academic research is often about finding answers to human questions. How do people live,
and how do they learn? In what ways is language an expression of thought? Why do people act as they do? How
do people's feelings affect their behavior? Answers to these questions are not easy to find because many are
hidden in the human brain. Indeed, researchers may spend years of study looking for such answers and, in
468 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

       doing so, may discover only more questions.

       How do you begin to find answers to such behavioral research questions? One research tool, the case study,
       gives researchers the opportunity to observe people and draw conclusions about their behavior. Education,
       psychology, sociology, and linguistics are just some of the research fields that rely on these studies as a way of
       drawing conclusions through observation.

       A case study is a genre of academic writing in which researchers use firsthand evidence to share findings,
       draw hypotheses, and identify opportunities for further investigation. In this chapter, you will learn what a
       case study is, how it contributes to research, and how to conduct an informal one of your own.

     15.1 Tracing a Broad Issue in the Individual

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Define the term case studies.
         · Explain the purpose of case studies in academic research.
         · Identify ethical considerations of research on human subjects.

       To gain more knowledge of or insights into human behavior, thoughts, or emotions, researchers conduct
       observations of participants. Case studies are the written results of these observations. Because authors of
       case studies interpret results within the context of a limited setting and sample size, these authors often
       theorize about their findings and aim to discover opportunities for further research rather than draw hard,
       universal conclusions.

       Case studies depend on qualitative research and analysis. Qualitative research involves subjective evidence
       that is difficult to control and difficult to replicate. For example, if a researcher observes a classroom, business,
       or hospital setting, their observations are limited to what they observe at that particular location on that
       particular day at that particular time.

       Case studies also depend on quantitative research. Quantitative research involves hard, specific data that can
       be replicated in a controlled environment. You may have read about health studies that suggest a moderate
       amount of red wine or chocolate is good for your health or that eating red meat is bad for your health. Authors
       of case studies use quantitative research by looking at data drawn from a group and using it as a basis for their
       findings. In other words, the data, not the researchers' observations, form the primary evidence.

       Another thing to know about case studies is that their authors attempt to observe participants in their natural
       environments. For example, to learn something about customer-service skills for a case study, an author would
       observe employees at a call center or in a retail store as they do their jobs. Similarly, to learn about how people
       use language, an author might observe people communicating naturally with their friends, family, or
       colleagues. Because case studies take place in the participants' natural environments, analyzing case studies
       can help readers imagine themselves in that environment. For example, as part of their training, a nurse or
       doctor might read a case study about a patient to think about what they would do in the same situation.
       Examining case studies helps readers imagine a wide range of outcomes, while conducting case studies helps
       researchers discover opportunities for further research.

      Case Study Ethics

       Professional researchers must abide by a complex ethical and legal framework when conducting case studies.
       More importantly, participants must give their permission to be part of the study and to have their information
       shared. Researchers are obligated to act ethically when conducting case studies, but what does "act ethically"
       mean, exactly? Most people would agree that it is unethical to inflict harm on a case study participant, yet
       there are instances of researchers injuring their participants either physically or psychologically. One of the
       best-known examples of a case study conducted unethically (https://openstax.org/r/conductedunethically) is
       the Milgram Experiment (https://openstax.org/r/milgramexperiment), in which Yale University psychologist

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    15.2 · Trailblazer 469

Stanley Milgram (https://openstax.org/r/stanleymilgram) (1933-1984) attempted to study the extent of
people's willingness to submit to authority when ordered to do something they know is wrong. Participants
were instructed to deliver a range of electric shocks to other participants, who in fact were not actual
participants but other researchers. Unbeknownst to the participants, the shocks were not real, and no electric
current was delivered when participants pressed the button to deliver the shocks. Responses to
shocks--screams and other indications of pain--were prerecorded. Yet some participants reported suffering
psychological trauma from what they believed were their actions.

Most people also would consider it unethical to be dishonest about a case study. Researchers are expected to
conduct their studies and analyze their data objectively, without bias. Over the years, laws and ethical codes
have been implemented to protect case study participants. If you pursue an academic or career field that uses
case studies, you will learn more about ethical and legal considerations specific to that field. For example, most
academic case studies must be approved by an institutional review board (IRB) before the research can be
conducted. Most universities have specific guidance on how faculty and students should go about research
involving human subjects and most likely will have strict guidelines for conducting case studies. The
assignment in this chapter, however, asks only that you conduct an informal case study. Your instructor will be
your best resource to get answers to questions you have about your college's policies on conducting research
and whether and how they apply to the research you intend to do.

15.2 Trailblazer

Case Study Trailblazer: Vilayanur S. Ramachandran

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply critical thinking and communication in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Identify and describe the genre conventions and rhetorical situation of case studies.
470 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

                                            "My . . . work . . . has
                                           been to unravel . . . the

                                                  mysterious
                                           connections between
                                           brain, mind, and body."

           FIGURE 15.2 "Vilayanur S. Ramachandran (credit:
           Vilayanur S Ramachandran 2011" by David
           Shankbone/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

      Ramachandran's Case Study on Phantom Limbs

       Neuropsychologist Vilayanur Subramanian Ramachandran (https://openstax.org/r/vsramachandran) (b. 1951)
       was born in Tamil Nadu, India. He was educated in India and Thailand before earning a PhD from the
       University of Cambridge in England. Both a physician and a medical researcher, Dr. Ramachandran is a
       distinguished professor of psychology at the University of California, San Diego. He is best known for his work
       in behavioral neurology, particularly his research on the phenomenon of phantom limbs.
       Behavioral neurology is a specialty that focuses on the ways in which neurological damage and disease affect
       behavior, memory, and cognition and how these problems can be treated. Ramachandran is the author of the
       books Phantoms in the Brain (1998) and The Tell-Tale Brain (2011), among others.
       Ramachandran's most significant contribution to the field of behavioral neurology is the mirror box
       (https://openstax.org/r/mirrorbox), a device used to treat patients with amputated limbs. Phantom limb, a
       condition that afflicts people who have had an arm or leg amputated, is characterized by a feeling or sensation
       in the area of the amputated limb. In some cases, patients report pain in a phantom limb. Connecting brain,
       mind, and body, Ramachandran theorized that in cases of phantom limb pain, the brain could be tricked into
       thinking the limb was still there. Thus, the brain would reorient itself (scientifically referred to as neural
       plasticity) and, consequently, reduce pain. He then conducted case studies to test this theory.
       Ramachandran's first task was to identify a research question, which he formulated from a theory based on
       existing literature on neural plasticity. At the time, little scientific research existed on phantom limbs, thus

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    15.2 · Trailblazer 471

providing Ramachandran with an opportunity to gain new insights into the phenomenon. Aware that existing
research suggested the brain could reorient, or rewire, itself, he posited that neural plasticity could be used to
help people with phantom limb syndrome.
Ramachandran's methods included recruiting case study participants whom he could observe. He placed ads
in newspapers seeking volunteers who had undergone amputations. He then conducted case studies on the
volunteers to observe how phantom limbs affected them.
These observations, along with previous research, convinced Ramachandran that neural plasticity could be
used to treat patients with phantom limb syndrome. Based on his observations of a limited number of people,
Ramachandran analyzed the results of his studies and developed the mirror box, a treatment that is used
today to help ease chronic pain when it exists on one side of the body. Focusing on the connections of brain,
mind, and body, Ramachandran created a box containing a mirror that reflects the existing limb. The
reflection of the limb, which the participant moves, creates an illusion in the brain, tricking it into thinking it
has control of the missing limb.

FIGURE 15.3 Dr. Ramachandran's research and case study established the link between visual perception and
nerve transmission. Mirror therapy, resulting from this discovery, has helped bring some relief from phantom limb
pain. (credit: "Mirror-box-comic" by Edward M. Hubbard/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
To learn more about Dr. Ramachandran's research, see his TED Talks 3 Clues to Understanding Your Brain
(https://openstax.org/r/3clues) and The Neurons That Shaped Civilization (https://openstax.org/r/
thatshapedcivilization).

Discussion Questions

1. What advantages and disadvantages would a case study offer a researcher such as Ramachandran for
    finding information?

2. What do you think Ramachandran's research question was?
3. What would have constituted quantitative and qualitative research in Ramachandran's case study?
472 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

       4. What do you think Ramachandran might have told participants regarding the ethics of the study?

     15.3 Glance at Genre: Observation, Description, and Analysis

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify the structural components of case studies.
         · Determine the objectivity of case studies.
         · Apply the genre conventions of case studies in your own research.

       The goal of case study authors is to expand knowledge in a field of study. In many case studies, researchers
       look for "blind spots": areas of investigation that the current research is not addressing or not addressing
       sufficiently. Sometimes the authors of a study will explicitly state what they believe are the gaps in their
       research and call on other researchers to fill in those gaps.

      Components of Case Studies

       Case studies generally have five main parts. They begin by presenting an overview of previous case studies on
       the topic. Sometimes called a literature review, this part of the case study provides background and helps
       readers understand where the current study fits within previous research. The second component of a case
       study is a detailed description of the participants and the observation environment. These descriptions of
       the individuals being studied and the conditions under which they are being studied provide additional
       background and context. The third component is the methods section, in which the author explains the ways
       in which data will be collected, such as interviews, surveys, observations, document analysis, and so on. The
       fourth component, following the methods section, is an organized presentation of the data collected, or the
       findings of the study. Finally, an analysis of the results concludes the case study. In this section, the author
       provides an interpretation of the collected data. This section usually includes an explanation of the limitations
       of and gaps in the case study's data, methods, or anything else the author believes is important.

       Similar to academic essays, case studies adhere to a formal structure and voice. They are organized clearly,
       edited carefully, and reflect objectivity. As with all academic work, sources are documented and cited, usually
       using APA Documentation and Format.

      Key Terms

       A case study, at its most basic level, is about close observation as a basis for analysis. By observing individuals
       or groups in a particular setting, researchers attempt to learn something about the participants' thoughts,
       actions, behavior, or feelings. To conduct a case study, you should be familiar with the following terms.

         · Analysis: Interpretation of data gathered in a case study.
         · Data: Information gathered from observation, interviews, research, or any other part of a case study.
         · field observations: Observations made while participants are engaged in "real" activities at "real" places.

             Usually these are the workplace, school, or home. Other locations might be athletic or social venues or any
             other setting in which participants can be observed acting as they would if they were not being observed.
         · Results: What collected data reveals about the research question.
         · Participants: The human or, in some cases, nonhuman subjects observed in specific settings for the
             purpose of collecting data and evidence.
         · Observation environment: The location and conditions under which participants are observed.
         · qualitative research: Subjective information based on observations or elements that are difficult to
             replicate.
         · quantitative research: Specific data that can be replicated in a controlled environment.
         · Research question: Focused question about the topic being researched. A research question is the basis
             of a case study.
         · Survey or Interview: Questions that the author of a case study asks participants in order to elicit relevant

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                               15.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: Case Study on Louis Victor "Tan" Leborgne 473

      information.

15.4 Annotated Sample Reading: Case Study on Louis Victor "Tan" Leborgne

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply critical thinking and communication in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Identify and describe the genre conventions and rhetorical situation of case studies.
  · Analyze relationships between ideas and patterns of organization.

Introduction

      FIGURE 15.4 Pierre Paul Broca (credit: "Paul Broca" by Anonymous/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
French physician Pierre Paul Broca (1824-1880), an early researcher of brain science, is credited with
developing theories about how the brain controls motor functions such as language. One of his patients, Louis
Victor Leborgne, suffered from a continuing loss of speech that resulted in an inability to form any syllables
other than tan. Following Leborgne's death, Broca examined Leborgne's brain and observed some
abnormalities in the left frontal lobe. These observations would eventually lead to the larger discovery that
different areas of the brain control different motor functions.
This sample case study imagines what Broca might have written about Leborgne. The contemporary
references at the end of the study are those used by the actual writer of the case study, not Pierre Paul Broca.
            474 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

              Patient Admission

public domain t This 50-year-old Caucasian male was transferred from the psychiatry division to the surgical ward of Bicêtre
                        Hospital in Paris on 11 April 1861. I performed a thorough physical examination upon his admission. The
                        preensdenptuiebnnglidcdpdiauogbmnloiacsindisotims dainffutse gangrenous inflammation and infiltration of connective tissue of the entire lower
                        right extremity, extending from the instep upward to the buttock. The patient shows complete peanrdalpysuibsliocfdhoismain t
                        right-side limbs. The left limbs are mobile with adequate control and power. Both bowel and bladder control are
                        intact. The eyes are equally focused and reactive to light, although the vision in the left eye has deteriorated
                        more than in the right eye. Theepnadtipeunbtleicxhdiobmitsaidniftficulty in swallowing food, but the tongue is not paralyzed,
                        anednvdopicuebilsicndoormalin. t

                 Ianntnrootdaut ction. Broca first orients readers to the details of the case study: the participant, Leborgne, and how
                 Leborgne came to be under his care.end annotat

                 Banancoktgartound and Context. Broca gives a detailed description of the case study participant. He notes physical details
                 of Leborgne's paralysis so that readers understand that Leborgne retains control over his voice and tongue. This
                 knowledge allows Broca to eliminate paralysis as a cause of the subject's inability to use language.end annotat

                       The patient is completely unable to form words other than the single syllable tan, which he most often repeats
                        twice in rapid succession: "tan-tan." This is said in varying tones and inflections. Paralysis of the patient's
                        dominant arm prevents writing. Nevertheless, the patient can communicate to a surprising extent through facial
                        expressions and gestures with his left hand. His intellect appears normal, and he shows no signs of head
                        trauma.

                 Ranensoetaartch Question. In this paragraph, Broca further describes his participant and begins to bring the case study
                 into focus. The details he provides about Leborgne's ability to communicate and use language will be the focus of
                 the study. Broca observes that Leborgne can communicate nonverbally, and no physical signs indicate that his brain
                 may be affected. Broca wants to understand why Leborgne communicates as he does.end annotat

              Patient History

                       Personal History. My personal interviews with family members revealed that Louis Victor Leborgne was born
                        21 July 1809, in Moret-sur-Loing. The town has many tanneries, a fact that may account for his use of the
                       syllable tan. His father is an elementary school teacher. The patient is one of six siblings. His previous
                       occupation was formier [artisan who made forms for shoemakers]. He is unmarried and has no children.
                        Members of his immediate family visit but have been unable to provide care for him at home, resulting in an
                        extended hospital stay of 21 years. Interviews with other patients in the ward have indicated that the patient is
                        unfavorably viewed as egotistical and vindictive.

                 Danensoctraipt tion of Research Methods. In this section, Broca notes that he interviewed Leborgne's family and other
                 patients in the hospital and provides a hypothesis as to why Leborgne uses the syllable tan to communicate.end annotat

                 Oanrngaontaizt ation. The author uses headings to organize the different sections of the case study. Main headings are
                 centered; subheadings are left-justified.end annotat

                       Medical History. My interviews with family members and hospital staff responsible for his care yielded only a
                        cursory medical history. They did, however, reveal that the patient developed epilepsy in his childhood or youth;
                        the exact age is unknown.

                        At age 30, the patient lost the ability to speak but did not immediately seek medical attention. When the
                        condition persisted, he came to Bicêtre Hospital and was admitted to the psychiatry division in 1840 (exact
                        date not recorded).

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                 15.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: Case Study on Louis Victor "Tan" Leborgne 475

Lainmnoittaattions of Research. Broca again notes the use of personal interview data as a research method / primary
source. He acknowledges the limitations of this method ("only a cursory medical history") but was able to gather
relevant details, such as when Leborgne developed epilepsy, when he lost the ability to speak, and when he was first
admitted to the hospital.end annotat

public domain t  Approximately 10 years after the onset of his first symptoms, Leborgne experienced greadnduapluwbeliackdnoemssaoinf this

                 right arm, which developed into complete paralysis in that limb. This condition was followed by weakness in his
                 right leg and foot. Appaernedntplyu,bitlictodookmfoauinr ytears from the start of the paralysis of his right arm until the patient
                 coenmdppleutbelliycldoostmtaheiendatbpiulibtylictodsotmanadin. Itn these years, his vision and menedntpaulbfaliccudltoimesaeainnlsdtopduebtelirciodroamteadin. t

                     end public domain t
                 The patient remains in bed, having refused to leave it for the past seven years. During this time, his clothing was

                 changed once a week. The infrequent change of clothes caused a delay in discovering the extent of his

                 gangrenous inflammation and infection. At this point, the patient could hardly move and was transferred to the

                 surgical unit, where I first met him.

Banancoktgartound and Context. More details of Leborgne's medical history are given. Broca concludes the patient history
by relating the circumstances leading to his treatment of Leborgne. This section provides a detailed account of
everything known about the participant and his condition. Broca doesn't rely only on records to gather this history,
though. He interviews hospital staff to try to gather additional information not recorded.end annotat

Treatment

      The gangrene being too extensive for surgery, I confined myself to testing his mental faculties and language
      comprehension. By using his fingers, the patient was able to respond accurately to mathematical questions. He
      understood and responded to verbal questions as well. At times, his answers were incorrect, such as claiming
      to have children; I attribute these lapses to sepsis, which by now was far advanced.

Ranensoetaartch Methods. In this section, Broca begins to relate how he observed Leborgne's ability to communicate.end annotat

Aannnaolytastis of Results. Broca tries to explain the reason for Leborgne's incorrect responses.end annotat

                 Lacking any physical irregularities that would cause his loss of speech, I conclude the condition must be related
                 to brain function. This condition is so singular that it seems useful to assign it a special name. I will designate it,
                 therefore, as aphemia, or loss of speech.

                 The patient expired on 17 April 1861 at 11:00 a.m. Cause of death was gangrenous infection and sepsis.

BanronaodtaTt heory. Broca poses a theory about Leborgne's limited ability to communicate: "the condition must be
related to brain function." This theory will be tested later in the case study and, if correct, might be applicable to
how the brain works for everyone.end annotat

Autopsy Findings

      I performed an autopsy 24 hours postmortem and found a number of irregularities in the patient's brain. A
      softened area over the perisylvian region contained a cavity the size of a chicken's egg, filled with serous fluid.
      Volume loss affected the gyri, subcortical perisylvian area, insula, and part of the striate nucleus. I weighed the
      brain and discovered it to be lighter than normal. I attribute the low weight to the loss of volume in the left
      cerebral hemisphere.

                 I observed a significant malformation on the left frontal lobe, which I believe to be the source of the patient's
                 aphemia and, therefore, the brain location controlling speech production. Wishing to preserve the brain, I
                 performed a surface examination only, without a full dissection. I have placed the preserved brain at the Musée
                 Dupuytren in Paris.

Ranensoetaartch Methods. Broca provides details of the autopsy and describes the abnormalities he found in Leborgne's
brain. These details are crucial to the study because of Broca's earlier comment about Leborgne's inability to
communicate resulting from brain function.end annotat
            476 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

                 Aannnaolytastis of Results. Broca further hones his theories based on his observations of Leborgne's brain. Broca
                 hypothesizes that this malformation is the cause of Leborgne's condition and, therefore, is located in the part of the
                 brain that is related to speech.end annotat

              Discussion

public domain t I presented Leborgne's case at the meeting of the Société d'Anthropologie de Paris on 18 April 1861, where it
                        generated considerable controversy. My former teacher Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud had previously advanced the
                        idea that the language function is localized in the frontal lobes, with which, based on my autopsy of Leborgne's
                        brain, I concur. Anatomist LouisePndieprruebGlircadtioomleationptposed the idea that there could exist a specific area
                        responsible for speech, arguing that the brain functions as a whole. Esteemed physician Ernest Auburtin
                        asserted that specific areas of the brain have specific functions and further stated that motor articulation is not
                        directly relevant to the ability to conceiveewndorpdusbalincddiodmeaasin. t

                 Aandnvoatnacting Knowledge. Broca uses his case study to contribute to the research on brain functions.end annotat
                 Lainmnoittaattions of the Research. Broca notes that not all attending the meeting are in agreement, suggesting that
                 further research is needed to learn more about the brain and whether specific parts control specific functions.end annotat

              Conclusion

                        Given my patient Leborgne's success at responding to verbal and mathematical questions despite his loss of
                        speech, I am convinced that brain function is localized. Auburtin's theory of more compartmentalized
                        specificity is intriguing, and I intend to pursue this idea. Leborgne's preserved brain remains at the Musée
                        Dupuytren, where it is available for further study.
                 Wanhnaot'astNext. Inviting additional research, Broca calls on his audience to research localized brain function. He notes
                 that Leborgne's brain is available for researchers to observe.end annotat

                                                                        References

                 Domanski, C. W. (2013). Mysterious "Monsieur Leborgne": The mystery of the famous patient in the history of
                     neuropsychology is explained. Journal of the History of the Neurosciences, 22(1), 47-52.
                     https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0964704X.2012.667528

                 Konnikova, M. (2013, February 8). The man who couldn't speak and how he revolutionized psychology. Scientific
                     American. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/literally-psyched/the-man-who-couldnt-speakand-how-he-
                     revolutionized-psychology/

                 Mohammed, N., Narayan, V., Patra, D. P., & Nanda, A. (2018). Louis Victor Leborgne ("Tan"). World Neurosurgery,
                     114, 121-125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2018.02.021

                 Ruane, M. (2013, July). Discovering the identity of a 150-year-old patient. Smithsonian.
                     https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/discovering-the-identity-of-a-150-year-old-patient-4563869/

              Discussion Questions

                 1. What methods does Broca use in his case study?
                 2. What are Broca's field observations?
                 3. What types of evidence does Broca gather for his case study?
                 4. How does Broca analyze his data? What conclusion does he reach?
                 5. If Leborgne had lived longer, what are some ways Broca could have expanded his study on his patient's use

                      of language?

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                      15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 477

Language and Expression

One significant finding of Broca's case study was that Leborgne grew up in the town of Moret-sur-Loing. The
town had many tanneries, leading Broca to theorize that Leborgne's use of the syllable tan was related to his
home. Why is this theory important? It illustrates how personal history affects people. It is possible that
Leborgne used language in this way because of his history and cultural association with his hometown. Culture
and identity have a big impact on how people use language, even among people who speak the same language.

FIGURE 15.5 The Broca area--named for French anthropologist and pathologist Pierre Paul Broca (1824-1880),
who discovered its function--is the part of the brain that controls articulate speech. The Wernicke area--named for
German neurologist Carl Wernicke (1848-1905), who first described the area--is the part of the brain that controls
the comprehension of speech. (credit: "BrocasAreaSmall" by NIH publication 97-4257/Wikimedia Commons, Public
Domain)

15.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language
Interact

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify and implement genre conventions of case studies for structure, paragraphing, voice, and mechanics.
  · Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
  · Participate successfully in the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
  · Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.
Having learned about case studies and how they help advance research and knowledge, you are ready to do an
informal one of your own. You will conduct an informal case study profile by selecting a topic to research,
observing a setting and a participant (or participants), and using specified research methods. If applicable, see
The Research Process: How to Create Sources for more information about selecting a research topic. You will
then analyze the results of your study to determine its significance.
As indicated in Tracing a Broad Issue in the Individual, many universities and professional organizations will
provide guidance on how to adhere to ethical standards when conducting a case study. Your instructor will be
your best resource for answers to questions you have about your college's policies on conducting research and
whether and how they apply to the research you intend to do. Remember, however, that for any research you do
involving human subjects, you must obtain participants' written permission to be included in your study.

Summary of Assignment

Conduct an informal case study of a classmate, friend, or family member to gain insight into the participant's
478 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

       use of language, specifically the ways in which their culture(s) and language(s) interact. Try to find a willing
       participant who is either bilingual or fluent in, familiar with, or an occasional user of a language other than
       English. You can focus your case study on the ways in which your participant changes their language
       according to context, how their use of language is different when they interact with family and friends as
       opposed to in academic or professional contexts, or how using one language affects the other. Be sure to
       consult your instructor about the school's policy on student participation in studies, and obtain written
       permission from the participant before you begin. If you do not know anyone who speaks another language,
       consider these topics:

         · Body language that accompanies linguistic communication
         · Language shifts according to medium (text, phone call, email, in person)
         · In-person vs. written communication
         · Comparison of language use between two participants from different cultures or age groups

       After you decide on your topic, formulate a research question that asks precisely what you want to learn from
       your study. Next, you will need to plan your case study by drafting questions for interviews and conducting
       observations at determined times and places. Then, using the information you collect from your interviews
       and observations, you will offer an interpretation about the participant's use of language that might be helpful
       to your college's instructors and administrators. Present your findings in a report of around 1,000 to 1,200
       words.

       Another Lens. Complete the same case study, and share your findings in a presentation that is 7 to 10 minutes
       in length. See Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak for more information about scripting for a
       public forum. For this version of the assignment, record your interviews on video or use a voice recorder. Play
       clips of your interviews in your presentation to illustrate the participant's use of language. Organize the
       presentation into clear, distinct sections with subtitles. Instead of long, dense paragraphs, use short bullet
       points to state your main points. Use visuals to communicate abstract ideas or data. Make sure your
       presentation flows logically and that you use appropriate transitions to maintain coherence. To indicate clear
       demarcations between sections, use headings and subheadings, as in the Annotated Sample Reading. In your
       presentation, include all of the typical sections of a written case study:

         · Background/Context. Give an overview of previous research on the topic.
         · Methods. Provide a detailed description of the methods you used to collect the data. Include a description

             of the participant and the observation environment.
         · Results. Provide the data collected: answers to interview or survey questions, your observations, and any

             other pertinent information.
         · Analysis. Interpret the data, and discuss any limitations of the case study.

       See the resources below for some helpful presenting tips.

         · 6 Tips to Calm Your Nerves before Speaking (https://openstax.org/r/6tips)
         · Like, Eliminate Ums and Ahs, Right? (https://openstax.org/r/eliminateums)
         · Do You Write the Way You Speak? (You Should!) (https://openstax.org/r/doyouwritetheway)
         · Do You Write the Way You Speak? (You Should!) Part 2 (https://openstax.org/r/doyouwritetheway2)

             Quick Launch: Research Question and Data Collection

       Within your selected topic, begin to brainstorm possible research questions, keeping in mind the following
       characteristics:

         · Open Ended. A good research question has multiple possible answers, all equally plausible. Avoid a yes-
             or-no question or one with an obvious answer.

         · Debatable. The research question should spark reasonable debate around the best answer or solution. If
             you think you know the answer to the research question or if you doubt that people can be open-minded

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                        15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 479

   about a range of answers, it is not a good research question.
· Answerable. You should be able to answer your research question by using the evidence you gather. You

   should be able to consult existing source material on the topic.
· Consequential. The outcome of the debate around your research question should be of consequence. In

   other words, what you or others choose to do going forward should matter and affect others.

You probably will revise the wording of your research question quite a bit before it aligns with the
characteristics listed. Spend time thinking about your research question, and revise it as necessary to prepare
to conduct your case study. See Table 15.1 for examples of how to revise research questions in various fields of
study.

                                        Research Questions

Topic       Research question           Research question is of       Research question is
            doesn't meet basic          some consequence and          specific, open-ended,
            requirements. It is a yes-  could have multiple           consequential, and
            or-no question, of little   answers but needs             suitable for a case study.
            consequence, easy to        further revision to be
            answer, or suggestive of    open-ended, more
            the "right" answer.         specific, or more
                                        consequential.

Sports      Who are the best college    Is it fair to other students  How do colleges
            athletes now?               to pay college athletes?      benefit--or not--from
                                                                      paying student athletes?
            Should college athletes be
            paid?                                                     How do college athletes
                                                                      benefit--or not--from
                                                                      being paid?

Finance     Should you invest in        What are some things the      How are individuals
            stocks or bonds?            U.S. government does to       affected by government
                                        protect the economy?          intervention in free-
            Should the government                                     market economies?
            regulate the economy?

            What was the GDP in the
            year 2016?

Technology  Are high-quality cell       What will be the future of    Why do some people
            phones too expensive?       landlines?                    continue to use landlines?

            Is Apple a monopoly?                                      How do people combine
                                                                      cell phone and landline
                                                                      use?

TABLE 15.1 Revising research questions

Once you select a topic and research question, you can begin looking for background information.
Data Collection

Before starting your actual research, get a sense of the body of knowledge around your topic. Remember, case
studies are about advancing research in a particular field. For a case study to effectively advance knowledge, it
480 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

       must show awareness of the research already done in the field. A literature review section, which includes
       previous research and background about the topic, is typically included in a case study. Browsing trade
       publications and academic journals can help you get a sense of existing research. Looking for articles
       frequently referred to in other articles is a good way to locate important research, as researchers typically cite
       significant studies. Look at important, groundbreaking research in addition to recently published work. The
       information you gather from existing literature may be either qualitative or quantitative. See The Research
       Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources for more information about conducting research.

           Drafting:

       After you have established your research question, you can begin your actual study. Start by planning how you
       will collect your primary source data. First, review the literature in the field if you have not yet done so. Next,
       draft questions to ask your case study participant. The strongest case studies provide a unique perspective
       that is applicable to your specific audience--in this case, students, teachers, and administrators at your college.
       Keep in mind that not every college is the same. Some colleges, such as "open admissions" community
       colleges, admit all who apply, whereas other colleges accept only 5 percent or fewer of their applicants.
       Interview questions are likely to be different depending on the individual characteristics of your college. To
       learn more about your college and its student population, search for information on the college website. Look
       for sections that have titles such as "About Us," "About Our Students," "College Facts" / "Factbook," and so on.
       Brainstorm a list of characteristics that make your college and its students unique. Figure 15.6 shows how a
       student at Midlands Technical College began data collection for a case study on language use.

             FIGURE 15.6 Brainstorming data (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
       Create Interview Questions
       Using your research and brainstorming ideas, draft a series of 10 to 15 questions you plan to ask your case
       study participant. Remember that these questions should be open-ended (no yes-or-no questions) and give the
       participant an opportunity to speak freely and extemporaneously. There are no right or wrong answers. With

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                      15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 481

these questions, keep your purpose in mind: to gather information that will be helpful to students, teachers,
and administrators about how a student at Midlands (or another school) uses language. Here are some sample
questions:

  · What are your hobbies, or what do you do for entertainment? (This question should elicit responses that
      provide insight into the student's leisure activities and the groups they identify with.)

  · What new language uses did you have to develop when you became a college student?
  · If you have a job in addition to being a student, what are some ways you use language to do that job?
  · How do you communicate with friends and family? (Text messages? Apps such as Snapchat? Phone calls?)
  · Describe your style of text messaging. (Probe for details about situations and contexts.)
  When do you send long texts?
  How long do you usually wait for a response before sending a new message?
  How long do you usually wait before responding to a message?
  When do you use standard English?
  When and for what purposes do you use emoji?

  · How do you communicate using voice or video chat (Zoom, video games, iMessage, etc.)?
  · With whom do you communicate, and in what contexts?
  · How do you adjust your use of language in these situations?

Remember to use the brainstorming and research you did previously to draft appropriate questions for your
case study participant. Also, try to find ways to encourage the participant to provide as many details as they
can and to identify an appropriate setting in which you can observe them using language.

Interview the person you have chosen to study. Record their responses on paper or on a digital voice recorder.
If using a digital recorder, briefly note anything you want to review later in writing. If you find an opportunity to
elicit further information or follow up, do so. You may find it helpful to print the bulleted list of questions and
write the participant's answers directly on the page.

Field Observation

The next step is to observe. If you haven't already done so, decide on a setting in which to observe the
participant. You might observe in person and/or use a messaging app or video chat to observe them using
language at work, with their friends and family, or in some other setting. The setting should be one in which
you can get a good idea of how the participant uses language naturally in that context. For example, you would
not want to observe a student playing a video game if they aren't a gamer. Here are some suggestions about
what to note as you observe. Be sure to take detailed notes during your observation. Consider printing this
page as well and writing observation notes on it. See The Research Process: How to Create Sources to learn
more about field research.

  · What are some common words or phrases used?
  · In what ways does the participant replace or substitute certain words with emoji, slang, acronyms, and the

      like?
  · When does the participant's voice indicate shifts in volume, tone, or vocabulary? If you are observing texts

      or writing, how does the participant communicate tone?
  · What specific words and phrases does the participant use? That is, what words and phrases might not be

     understood by you or others but are understood by the participant and the people with whom they are
      communicating?

Analysis of Data

After collecting data, analyze your findings and write your report. First, look closely at the data you have
collected, and decide what the information is telling you about how the participant uses language. You should
have data gathered from both qualitative and quantitative research. If you need more of either one, interview
   482 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

   or observe the participant again, or conduct more background research. Practice identifying qualitative and
   quantitative data.

   Writing the Introduction: Background, Context, and Methods

s  In the introduction, provide background and context for the case study. To begin, write a detailed description

   of the study you have conducted and what you sought to learn from it. Also include the details of your literature

   review and the methods you used to collect data (interviews, observations, and so on). The example below is an

   introduction to the Midlands Technical College student's case study on how students use language:

   Background and Context                                                                   end s

   Midlands Technical College is a two-year public college in Columbia, South Carolina. Over the course of two
   weeks, I observed two students to better understand their uses of language. A generational shift in the average

                                                                                    end s
   college student population is occurring, with millennials graduating and making up less of the college student
   population. At the same time, Gen Z's numbers on college campuses continue to grow. Studying how college
   students use language can provide valuable insights into how to communicate effectively with this population.

   Methods and Participant

         I gathered my data using three methods. In the first method, I researched literature about both Midlands
         Technical College's student population and communication habits and attitudes among Gen Z students, and I
         looked into some case studies about the use of emoji. For the second method, I created a group chat consisting
         of me and two students enrolled in the same section of an introductory psychology course. We used this group
         chat to discuss the course, assignments, due dates, etc. For the third method, I created a survey of 10
         questions asking the students to think about and reflect on how they use language at home versus at school. I
         then interviewed the students to record their answers. Using this data, I was able to analyze how students use
         language among their peers versus how they use language around their family.

   Body: Presentation of Data

   The next step in writing your case study is to present your data and analysis. How you set up your body
   paragraphs is up to you or your instructor. Like the sample study about Leborgne, most case studies are
   organized into sections and subsections, each devoted to an aspect of the study. You have already written an
   introduction in which you presented the scope of your study, the participant, the field of research, and other
   pertinent background information. Now you can continue by organizing each element that you studied into its
   own section, or you can choose another way of setting it up. For example, your overall structure might look like
   the structure in Table 15.2, using your own criteria and as many sections as you need. If you choose another
   structure, create a similar organizer to help you keep focused as you write.

                                                                Qualitative Research Data

   Criterion 1                                                  Quantitative Research Data

   Possible Criterion: Telephone Greetings Additional Information

                                                                Analysis

   TABLE 15.2 Organizational structure

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                  15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 483

                                     Qualitative Research Data

Criterion 2                          Quantitative Research Data

Possible Criterion: Emoji            Additional Information

s Analysis

     Criterion 3                     Qualitative Research Data
end s                                Quantitative Research Data
                                     Additional Information
                                     Analysis

Criterion 4                          Qualitative Research Data
                                     Quantitative Research Data
                                     Additional Information
                                     Analysis

Criterion 5                          Qualitative Research Data
                                     Quantitative Research Data
                                     Additional Information
                                     Analysis

Criterion 6                          Qualitative Research Data
                                     Quantitative Research Data
                                     Additional Information
                                     Analysis

TABLE 15.2 Organizational structure

Provide detailed descriptions of what you observed and the results of your research. Include qualitative data
based on your observations as well as quantitative data based on measurable results. Be sure to acknowledge
what you do not know or were unable to observe. The following example illustrates a typical body paragraph
describing a student's use of capitalization and punctuation in text messages.

      Mateo's use of capitalization and punctuation appeared to change depending on the mood he wanted to convey.
      For example, "what time do u think prof chang will let us go today"--a casual message about class on
      Tuesday--lacked capitalization and punctuation ("What time do you think Prof. Chang will let us go today?"). On
      Thursday, Mateo sent a more formal message regarding the need for the group to study for an upcoming exam:
      "Guys, we need to settle on a time and place--Oscar's or Dawson Library--to study." It's not clear whether
      Mateo's use of capitalization and punctuation is connected to his social group or other factors, as I had limited
      ability to observe the use of capitalization and punctuation by the study participants. However, this question is
      worth exploring in more detail.
484 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

       Using Visuals
       One way in which an oral presentation of a case study will differ from a written case study is the number of
       visuals provided. Presenters are expected to use visuals when sharing data and illustrating points. However,
       writers also use visuals to help communicate abstract ideas. In addition to images, four main types of graphics
       are used to present data:

         · Bar Charts. These charts typically use vertical bars to compare different data points. They are used
             primarily to compare similar groups to one another.

                      FIGURE 15.7 Bar chart (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
         · Line Graphs. These graphs typically use one or more lines to show how a data point (or points) has

             changed over time. Line graphs are often used to show trends over a given period.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                   15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 485

            FIGURE 15.8 Line graph (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
· Pie Charts. These charts typically divide a circle (or "pie") that represents a group into sections that

   express a percentage of the whole. They are used to show relationships and proportions of these parts.

             FIGURE 15.9 Pie chart (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
· Tables. Tables typically break down a set of specific data points that are hard to manage in words or

   charts. They present data in a linear way to help people locate a specific data point easily.
486 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

                            FIGURE 15.10 (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
       When selecting visuals, ensure that they are clear and related to the topic. A visual's purpose is to illustrate a
       point that is too long or complex to express in words. Visuals should have a clear purpose and be clearly
       labeled. Your audience should be able to interpret and see the point of the visual without explanation. Include
       visuals to support your work, not simply because you are expected to include them.
       Conclusion: What It All Means
       Once you collect all your data, analyze it further and collectively to form your conclusions. Take a close look
       again at your interview responses and observation notes. What did the participant say in the interview that led
       to insights about their use of language? Try to identify any words or phrases that tell you something about the
       participants. See Analytical Report: Writing from Facts for more information about analyzing data. How does
       the data from your interviews and observations reveal something that might lead to a generalization about how
       students use language?
       Arriving at conclusions can be tricky. Base your conclusion on observations of consistent behavior rather than
       reaching a broad conclusion based on limited evidence. Your conclusion should be something you notice that
       challenges your previous understanding or assumptions. For example, younger people appear to avoid the
       "laughing with crying eyes" emoji because it has been so overused that it now seems insincere. Young people
       are often the driving force behind new uses of language. To replace the "insincere" laughing-with-crying-eyes
       emoji, many young people turned to the skull emoji to indicate "I'm dead" (from laughing).
       Your conclusion should present your theories. Based on the evidence you gathered, what are some
       generalizations you can make about how students use language? What did you observe that provides

         Access for free at openstax.org.
           15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 487

   opportunity for further study? The example conclusion from a case study on emoji below presents a theory on
   how students use them.

   Overall, I observed that students tend to be more informal when communicating to other students in the same

   age group. These students used emoji to communicate thoughts and feelings that differed from the more literal

s  and more widely understood meaning of the emoji. I believe that students of this generation want to use

   language in a way that separates them from their older siblings, parents, and teachers. Thus, their use of emoji

   reflects that desire as they seek to change the meanings of some emoji. Whether this trend continues as

   students age is up for debate and presents an opportunity to further understanding of language use within this

   group.

                                                                       end s

   Peer Review: Conferencing Electronically

   After you finish your draft, receiving feedback from a peer will help you identify the strengths and weaknesses
   in your case study. Writers sometimes find it hard to view their work from the perspective of their audience.
   Therefore, peer feedback will help you focus on your writing in ways that are not obvious to you. Similarly,
   when you review your peer's work, react to their draft as a serious and conscientious reader. What suggestions
   can you offer to make this case study more informative or something you would want to read?

   Technology has facilitated giving and receiving feedback. You are probably familiar with getting feedback
   during in-class peer reviews and conferences, but if you haven't done so already, consider electronic peer
   reviews. Conferencing electronically offers several advantages:

   · Convenience. You don't have to be in the same room with your conferencing partner to give each other
      feedback. Within a reasonable time frame, you can review your partner's writing at a time that is
      convenient for you.

   · Time. You have more time to think about your reactions to, and your feedback on, your conferencing
      partner's writing than you would in person.

   · Permanence. The feedback you give and receive is stored digitally and easy to access.
   · Shareability. Electronic feedback is easier to reproduce and share with others, such as an instructor or a

      tutor.

   Multiple technologies exist to help you conference electronically.

   · Cloud Storage. Cloud storage providers such as Microsoft's OneDrive and Google Drive store files on the
      Internet. You can access these sites from any device. Sharing, too, is easier because changes to the
      document are saved automatically. Therefore, every time you or someone else accesses the document,
      they are viewing the latest version.

   · Word Processors. Microsoft Word and Google Docs have review features such as comment boxes and
      Track Changes as well as the capacity to suggest, accept, and reject changes.

   · Collaboration Platforms. Slack, Google Hangouts, Zoom, and Microsoft Teams allow you to create a space
      where you can communicate with people in a shared online workspace. Features of collaboration
      platforms include file sharing and storage, chat, video conferencing, and task organizing.

   When you are assigned a partner, open their draft and begin reviewing it. The following tutorial will explain
   how to use the review features of Microsoft Word. Other Microsoft Office and non-Office products (Google Docs
   and Apple's Pages) offer similar commenting and markup features.

   1. Open the document you want to review, and click the Review tab above the tools ribbon.
   2. Read the draft as you normally would, looking for areas to comment on. Note the places where you can

        provide positive comments as well as possible places for revision.
   3. To add a comment, highlight the word, sentence, or phrase to which you want to add a comment.
   4. Click New Comment in the tools ribbon to create a comment box in the margin.
   5. Type your comment in the box.
488 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

        6. Click anywhere outside the box to save the comment.
        7. To delete a comment, click inside the comment box, and then click Delete next to or beneath New

             Comment in the tools ribbon.
       Specific Comments
       Provide specific comments when reviewing your peer's draft. Vague, general comments such as "revise this"
       don't explain the reason for revision or how to revise. When conferencing electronically, specificity is even
       more important because what you write might be the only feedback your peer receives, unless you conference
       over video chat.
       Comments can generally be categorized as vague, somewhat helpful, and specific and clear.

         · Vague comments might offer praise that doesn't point to anything specific about the writing, or they might
             offer criticism without providing a suggested revision or explaining why something should be revised. For
             example, a comment such as "Revise this sentence" is not helpful. Although it specifically identifies the
             sentence as needing revision, it doesn't indicate why or suggest how to revise.

         · Somewhat helpful comments are still general, but they comment on something specific about the
             writing. They may also suggest some direction for a revision. For example, a comment such as "Revise this
             question so that it's more debatable" identifies the aspect that needs revision and briefly explains why.
             However, it does not provide further details about why the question is not debatable or how to revise it.

         · Specific and clear comments identify precisely why the writing is good or needs revision. They also
             suggest a specific revision or revision strategy the writer can use. For example, "I think this question could
             be more debatable. `Do college students struggle with time management skills?' is a yes-or-no question
             and would not lead to a strong argument either way. A better question could be `How does lack of time
             management skills affect college students as a whole?' or `What should be done about students' lack of
             time management skills?'"

           Revising: Accepting and Rejecting Suggestions

       After your partner finishes reviewing your draft, you will need to accept or reject their suggested changes. Use
       the image below to locate the tools in Word you will need to use. You can accept or reject edits to the wording,
       edits to the formatting, and comments in the margins.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                       15.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About How People and Language Interact 489

 FIGURE 15.11 Microsoft Word Review ribbon (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
 license)
 Edits made directly to your document will appear in red (for added text) or red text with a strikethrough (for
 deleted text).
 1. To accept or reject changes in a Word document, open the document and click the Review tab above the

       tools ribbon.
 2. To ensure that changes you make to the document will not be saved as edits, go to the tools ribbon, and

       toggle Track Changes to off.
 3. To open a panel that displays all changes, click Reviewing or Reviewing Pane in the tools ribbon.
 4. To navigate to a specific revision, click the revision in this panel.
 5. To navigate consecutively through changes, click the Previous and Next buttons beside the Accept and

       Reject options in the tools ribbon.
 6. To accept a revision, click Accept in the tools ribbon.
 7. To reject a revision, click Reject in the tools ribbon.
 8. The arrows below or beside the Accept and Reject buttons open drop-down menus that give you the option

       either to accept or reject a change and then move to the next revision or to accept or reject all changes at
       once. Be careful not to accept or reject all changes without addressing each one individually.
 9. When you finish, be sure you have accepted or rejected all of the edits and deleted all comments so that
       they don't appear in the final draft.
10. Check that no red text remains in the paper and that no comments remain in the right margin.
11. When you are finished, be sure to save your changes.

Sharing Your Work

 Seek out a student conference or publication to present your case study. Many colleges host events and
 conferences to showcase student work. Your teacher or advisor can probably direct you toward opportunities
 to present your work at your college or in the community.
 For example, the University of Central Oklahoma hosts the annual Language and Linguistics Student
 Conference (https://openstax.org/r/languageandlinguistic), which is open to all undergraduate and graduate
 students. Presenting at a student conference is a great opportunity not only to share your work but also to
490 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

network and gain experience that will make you stand out when applying to other schools, for scholarships,
and for jobs.

In addition, a number of academic journals publish student research. For instance, Spectrum
(https://openstax.org/r/spectrum), sponsored by the University of Alberta, is a student-run interdisciplinary
journal that showcases students' work. See more undergraduate publishing opportunities provided by the
Council on Undergraduate Research (https://openstax.org/r/ugjournalslisting).

If you publish or present your case study, remember to adhere to ethical standards. As explained in Tracing a
Broad Issue in the Individual, many universities and professional organizations will provide guidance on what
standards to follow when conducting a case study. Be sure to review these guidelines with the organization
sponsoring the conference or publication.

Another option for sharing is to gather the case studies done by all class members and, with the approval of
your instructor, go through them to ascertain what, if any, trends emerge. If you and your classmates think
these studies might be useful to college administrators, consider sending them, along with a detailed cover
letter, to the Office of Admissions, the Dean of Students, or another appropriate administrative office.

15.6 Editing Focus: Words Often Confused

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define and give examples of homonyms, homographs, and homophones.
  · Demonstrate correct use of commonly confused words.

When writing about language, you don't want to make the mistake of misusing language. Homonyms are
words that sound the same and are spelled the same but have different meanings. Homographs are words that
are spelled the same but may sound different and have different meanings. Homophones are words that
sound the same but might have a different spelling, a different meaning, or both. Because they sound the
same, they are often confused. Other words frequently confused sound slightly different and have slightly
different spellings. It's important to recognize and correct commonly confused words because spell checkers
don't always catch these errors.

Homonyms

Because homonyms' spelling and pronunciation are the same but their meanings are different, you probably
don't have to worry about misusing them, although they often belong to different parts of speech. However,
some awareness of homonyms and their multiple meanings will help ensure that your language is precise. For
more information about homonyms, see "Words and Language."

Here are some common homonyms and their meanings:

band  Verb: to come together
      Noun: group of musicians

            Verb: to move back and forth
rock

            Noun: hard material found in the earth

            Verb: to become sleepy or lose energy
tire

            Noun: ring-shaped rubber component that fits over the wheel of a vehicle

TABLE 15.3

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                         15.6 · Editing Focus: Words Often Confused 491

current  Noun: flow of water or electricity
         Adjective: up to date

train    Verb: to teach or learn through practice
         Noun: group of connected railroad cars

TABLE 15.3

Homographs

Homographs have the same spelling but different meanings. They are considered different from homonyms
because they may be pronounced differently. Some disagreement exists among scholars as to whether
pronunciation must be different for a word to be considered a homograph. Some experts insist that origins
must differ as well. However, all agree that meanings differ. For more information about homographs, see
Words and Language.

Here are some common homographs and their meanings:

                                       Noun: a metal (pronounced led)
                           lead

                                       Verb: to be at the front, to guide (pronounced leed)

            Verb: to bend forward

            Noun: a position in which one bends forward
bow

            Noun: the front of a ship
            Noun: a type of knot (pronounced boh)

object      Noun: a material item; a grammatical term (accent on first syllable)
            Verb: to express disapproval (accent on second syllable)

close       Adjective: near (s pronounced like ss)
            Verb: to bar passage; to shut down (s pronounced like z)

minute      Noun: 60 seconds (pronounced minit)
            Adjective: tiny (pronounced my-noot or my-nyoot)

TABLE 15.4

Homophones

Homophones are words that are spelled differently and have different meanings but sound the same.
Homophones are often the words that cause the most confusion and the most frequent errors. For more
information about homophones, see Words and Language.

Here are some common homophones and their meanings:
492 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

weather/          Weather means the conditions outside, such as temperature and sunshine.
whether           Whether is a conjunction that joins words or other parts of a sentence.
meat/meet
hear/here         Meat is animal-based food.
                  When you meet someone, you encounter or get together with that person.
two/too/to
                  Hear is what you do when you listen to music.
                  Here is a place nearby.

                  Two is a number, more than one and less than three.
                  Too may mean "also," or it may mean "very" or "more (adjective) than desired."
                  To is a preposition indicating direction or motion, as in "I wrote to the manager after I'd gone to
                  the office."

TABLE 15.5

The following homophones are often confused. Note that one of each group is a contraction: two words
shortened and joined by an apostrophe.

their   Possessive pronoun, belonging to them: "The family packed their suitcases for their vacation." Both the
        suitcases and the vacation belong to the family.

            Contraction joining they and are: "They're leaving for the airport at 10:30." In other words, they are
they're

            leaving.

there   Referring to a location: "`Baggage claim is over there,' the airport worker said while pointing to the
        baggage carousels." This form indicates a physical place.

            Possessive pronoun, belonging to you: "Your new phone will be mailed on November 4." The phone
your

            belongs to you.

you're  Contraction joining you and are: "You're registered for the conference." In other words, you are
        registered.

        Possessive pronoun, belonging to it: "Its positive qualities outweigh its negative ones." Both the positive

its     and the negative qualities belong to it. It could be a book, house, car, movie, phone, or any other object

        or idea.

it's    Contraction joining it and is: "It's raining today." In other words, it is raining.

TABLE 15.6

What Is the Effect? Or Is It Affect?

One final category of commonly confused words are words that sound and look similar but have different
meanings.

Access for free at openstax.org.
        15.7 · Evaluation: Presentation and Analysis of Case Study 493

Affect  Verb: to influence an outcome: "Increasing the minimum wage will affect the incomes of millions of
        Americans."

        Noun: body language that accompanies an expression of emotion: "The crime victim showed normal
        reactions and affects."

Effect  Noun: the outcome or result of an influence: "The effect of the increased minimum wage will be a 10
        percent decrease in the federal poverty rate."

        Verb: to cause to come into existence: "Congress will effect the new law."

              Verb: to protect against damage or loss: "Homeowners must insure their property for the cost of full
 Insure

              replacement."
              Verb: to make certain of: "This policy will ensure that the bank doesn't incur a loss as a result of
 Ensure
              irreparable damage to the home."
TABLE 15.7

Practice

 Choose the correct word to complete each sentence.

 1. Can you (hear/here) the phone ring from (hear/here)?
 2. Are you going (to/too/two) the movie theater at (to/too/two) p.m., or is that (to/too/two) early for you?
 3. This show always has a depressing (affect/effect) on me.
 4. (Its/It's) hard to find small apartments for rent in this neighborhood.
 5. Let's (meet/meat) at the pizza place so that I can eat something without (meet/meat).
 6. Although it will need work, (its/it's) basic structure is sound.
 7. Check about (ensuring/insuring) personal items in your apartment.
 8. You can set the groceries on the table over (their/there/they're).
 9. I'm going to watch the game at (their/there/they're) house.
10. How do you think the elections will (affect/effect) the neighborhood?
11. (Their/There/They're) listening to music on (their/there/they're) headphones.
12. (You're/Your) going to trip if you don't tie (you're/your) shoelaces.
13. Bring (you're/your) phone to the store to exchange it for a new one.
14. (Weather/whether) we travel depends on the (weather/whether).

15.7 Evaluation: Presentation and Analysis of Case Study

 LEARNING OUTCOMES
 By the end of this section, you will be able to:

   · Revise writing to follow the genre conventions of case studies.
   · Evaluate the effectiveness and quality of a case study report.

 Case studies follow a structure of background and context, methods, findings, and analysis. Body paragraphs
 should have main points and concrete details. In addition, case studies are written in formal language with
 precise wording and with a specific purpose and audience (generally other professionals in the field) in mind.
 Case studies also adhere to the conventions of the discipline's formatting guide (APA Documentation and
 Format in this study). Compare your case study with the following rubric as a final check.
494 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

Rubric

Score         Critical Language          Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

5             The text always            Paragraphs are unified under     The writer clearly and consistently
Skillful      adheres to the             a single, clear topic. Abundant  recognizes and works within the limits
              "Editing Focus" of this    background and supporting        and purpose of the case study. The
              chapter: words often       details provide a sense of       writer engages the audience by inviting
              confused, as               completeness. Evidence of        them to contribute to the research and
              discussed in Section       qualitative and quantitative     suggests ways for doing so. The
              15.6. The text also        data collection is clear.        implications, relevance, and
              shows ample evidence       Transitions and subheads         consequences of the research are
              of the writer's intent to  connect ideas and sections,      explained. The study shows mature
              consciously meet or        thus establishing coherence      command of language and consistent
              challenge                  throughout. Applicable           objectivity. Quotations from
              conventional               visuals clarify abstract ideas.  participant(s) are accurate and
              expectations in                                             relevant.
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

4             The text usually           Paragraphs usually are unified   The writer usually recognizes and
Accomplished  adheres to the             under a single, clear topic.     works within the limits and purpose of
              "Editing Focus" of this    Background and supporting        the case study. The writer engages the
              chapter: words often       details provide a sense of       audience by inviting them to contribute
              confused, as               completeness. Evidence of        to the research and usually suggests
              discussed in Section       qualitative and quantitative     ways for doing so. The implications,
              15.6. The text also        data collection is clear.        relevance, and consequences of the
              shows some evidence        Transitions and subheads         research are explained. The study
              of the writer's intent to  connect ideas and sections,      shows command of language and
              consciously meet or        thus establishing coherence.     objectivity. Quotations from
              challenge                  Applicable visuals clarify       participant(s) are usually accurate and
              conventional               abstract ideas.                  relevant.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

TABLE 15.8

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                       15.7 · Evaluation: Presentation and Analysis of Case Study 495

       Score  Critical Language        Clarity and Coherence              Rhetorical Choices
 3                Awareness
 Capable
              The text generally       Paragraphs generally are           The writer generally recognizes and
 2            adheres to the           unified under a single, clear      works within the limits and purpose of
 Developing   "Editing Focus" of this  topic. Background and              the case study. The writer sometimes
              chapter: words often     supporting details provide a       engages the audience by inviting them
TABLE 15.8    confused, as             sense of completeness. Some        to contribute to the research but may
              discussed in Section     evidence of qualitative and        not suggest ways for doing so. The
              15.6. The text also      quantitative data collection is    implications, relevance, and
              shows limited            clear. Some transitions and        consequences of the research are
              evidence of the          subheads connect ideas and         explained, if not fully. The study shows
              writer's intent to       sections, generally                some command of language and
              consciously meet or      establishing coherence.            objectivity. Quotations from
              challenge                Visuals may clarify abstract       participant(s) are generally accurate, if
              conventional             ideas or may seem irrelevant.      not always relevant.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

              The text occasionally    Paragraphs sometimes are           The writer occasionally recognizes and
              adheres to the           unified under a single, clear      works within the limits and purpose of
              "Editing Focus" of this  topic. Background and              the case study. The writer rarely
              chapter: words often     supporting details are             engages the audience by inviting them
              confused, as             insufficient to provide a sense    to contribute to the research or
              discussed in Section     of completeness. There is          suggests ways for doing so. The
              15.6. The text also      little evidence of qualitative or  implications, relevance, and
              shows emerging           quantitative data collection.      consequences of the research are
              evidence of the          Some transitions and               haphazardly explained, if at all. The
              writer's intent to       subheads connect ideas and         study shows little command of
              consciously meet or      sections, but coherence may        language or objectivity. Quotations
              challenge                be lacking. Visuals are either     from participant(s) are questionable
              conventional             missing or irrelevant.             and often irrelevant.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective
              ways.
496 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

       Score  Critical Language        Clarity and Coherence          Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness
 1
 Beginning    The text does not        Paragraphs are not unified     The writer does not recognize or work
              adhere to the "Editing   under a single, clear topic.   within the limits and purpose of the
TABLE 15.8    Focus" of this chapter:  Background and supporting      case study. The writer does not engage
              words often confused,    details are insufficient to    the audience by inviting them to
              as discussed in          provide a sense of             contribute to the research. The
              Section 15.6. The text   completeness. There is little  implications, relevance, and
              also shows little to no  evidence of qualitative or     consequences of the research are
              evidence of the          quantitative data collection.  haphazardly explained, if at all. The
              writer's intent to       Transitions and subheads are   study shows little command of
              consciously meet or      missing or inappropriate to    language or objectivity. Quotations, if
              challenge                provide coherence. Visuals     any, from participant(s) are
              conventional             are either missing or          questionable and often irrelevant.
              expectations in          irrelevant.
              rhetorically effective
              ways.

15.8 Spotlight on ... Applied Linguistics

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify cultural and linguistic variations in the English language.
  · Explain how case studies are used in the field of applied linguistics.
  · Explain how the field of applied linguistics has contributed to understanding of language.

Scholars engaged in the field of applied linguistics seek to identify and offer solutions to real-life problems
involving language. For example, immigrants who don't speak the primary language of their new country
might have difficulty attending school, finding a job, or accessing services. One subfield of applied linguistics
is language acquisition theory, which focuses on the ways in which people learn language.

Solving Language-Related Problems

Applied linguistics has far-reaching implications that affect the real world. Effective communication in the
workplace is one of the language-related problems that linguists study.

For example, globalization of business means a greater likelihood that workers will need to collaborate with
people from other cultures. It is not uncommon for American businesses to be owned by foreign companies or
to hire foreign workers with temporary work visas. When different cultures interact, misunderstandings may
occur. For example, directness when speaking is common and valued in American business culture, but
indirectness is the norm in some other cultures. Understanding this difference can help workers communicate
more effectively.

The work of UCLA professor John Schumann in applied linguistics has helped researchers understand how
people learn new languages. In 1976, Schumann conducted a case study of non-English speakers. His
observations of one participant, Alberto, a 33-year-old man from Costa Rica, led Schumann to develop the
acculturation model of second-language acquisition. Discounting Alberto's age and ability, Schumann
hypothesized that Alberto's inability to learn English resulted from lack of contact with native English

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                   15.8 · Spotlight on ... Applied Linguistics 497

speakers. This theory thus suggests that learning a new language depends on societal and cultural
factors--that is, the most successful language learners are those who immerse themselves most in the culture
associated with the language.

Consider also the research done by Dr. Kristine Hildebrandt (https://openstax.org/r/KristineHildebrandt), a
researcher at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Hildebrandt's studies of endangered languages of
Nepal led her to start the research project "Narrating Disaster: Calibrating Causality and Responses to the
2015 Earthquakes in Nepal." Soon after the earthquake that year, she and her team interviewed people in
Nepal's remote villages--remote both physically and linguistically--to learn more about their feelings and
actions following the quake. From hearing the firsthand stories of how people in the region responded,
adapted, and rebuilt shortly after the disaster, Hildebrandt hoped that the project's findings could improve
outside response to disasters in these areas by considering the perspectives and actions of their residents.
Also of particular interest to her were the effects of culture on the response to disaster and the effects of
disaster on the social, economic, and linguistic structures of a community.

Language Evolution

The work of linguists also guides people in how to use language and how to adapt it to contemporary
situations. For example, speakers of English continue to revise their language to be more inclusive. The
Associated Press and many other professional organizations have recently updated their stylebooks to refer to
Americans of African descent as "Black" with a capital B instead of "African American." These organizations
considered and debated the change for a long time but ultimately concluded that using Black better reflects the
shared experience and common culture of Black people living in the United States.

Similarly, language is evolving to be more inclusive of people's gender identities. For a long time, many
considered it grammatically incorrect to use the plural pronoun they with a singular verb. However, it is now
widely accepted that they is a useful gender-neutral pronoun to refer to an individual person whose gender is
unknown--and to include those who fall outside the gender binary.

Linguistics-Related Task

To learn more about language acquisition, set up an interview with a person you know who has learned
another language. It may be English as a second language, another spoken language, a language no longer
spoken, American Sign Language, Braille, or even musical notation. Ask questions similar to those you asked
your case study participant(s) to find out how they acquired this language. Consider asking some of the
following questions:

  · What is your first language?
  · What caused you to learn a second language?
  · Under what conditions did you learn this language? (School? Surroundings? Family? Other?)
  · With whom do you use each language?
  · In which language do you feel more comfortable? Why?
  · How often and in what circumstances do you use both languages?
  · Do you think in your first language and then translate into the second language?
  · In which language do you have a larger vocabulary?

When you have enough information, write a summary of the information you gathered, and draw a conclusion
about this person's experience. Finally, suggest a question for further research.
498 15 · Case Study Profile: What One Person Says About All

     15.9 Portfolio: Your Own Uses of Language

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Write a reflection on the development of your composing processes.
         · Articulate how those processes affect your work.
         · Participate effectively in collaborative processes.
       Think about the different groups to which you belong. When you go to work, you are part of a group in which
       you and your colleagues complete specific tasks to earn money. When you are with your family, you are with a
       group of people who are related to you. When you are with your friends, you are with a group of people who
       share interests similar to yours. When you are at school, you are with a group of people who are there to teach
       and to learn. These groups usually have hierarchies, language terms, dress codes (official or unofficial), and
       rules of behavior.
       For example, think about the differences between standard English (formal, grammatically correct English)
       and the way you or people you know speak. Southerners might use expressions such as y'all and ain't, long
       considered slang and/or incorrect. Some people pluralize nouns that would be grammatically correct as
       singular. Specific uses of English variants are often linked to a geographical region, ethnicity, or both.
       Variations of standard English are often the norm among people of color, and people who hold power over
       social mobility, such as teachers, hiring managers, and so on, traditionally consider use of standard English
       necessary to demonstrate education and professionalism. Thus, people of color often have to use two
       variations of English to navigate between professional and personal settings. A formal, grammatically correct
       sentence in standard English might impress an employer but might make you look out of touch to some in
       your community.

      How Language Use Speaks to Who You Are

       Pick a specific group of which you are a part, and reflect on that group's use of language. The group you pick
       can be somewhat broad, such as "employees of Target," or more specific, such as "members of the University
       of North Carolina marching band." Ask yourself: What words are used in this group that might not be
       understood by people outside the group? Has the group changed the spelling or meaning of any words to
       communicate with one another? Does the group use any acronyms? Reflect on how language is used in your
       group to communicate ideas.
       Then, reflect on how language within your group is used to evaluate ethos, or credibility, of its members. In
       other words, how is language used to identify people who are initiated as "part of the group"? What flaws in the
       use of language would show that someone is not part of the group?
       Write your reflection in your notebook. If appropriate, discuss your reflection with another student, noting
       areas of similarity and difference. Add this reflection to your portfolio along with your case study profile.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      15 · Further Reading 499

Further Reading

Colapinto, John. "Brain Games." New Yorker, 4 May 2009, www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/05/11/brain-
    games.

"Guiding Principles for Ethical Research." National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human
    Services, 16 Mar. 2016, www.nih.gov/health-information/nih-clinical-research-trials-you/guiding-
    principles-ethical-research.

LaPointe, Leonard L. Paul Broca and the Origins of Language in the Brain. Plural Publishing, 2013.

Works Cited

Colapinto, John. "Brain Games." New Yorker, 4 May 2009, www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/05/11/brain-
    games.

"Explaining AP Style on Black and White." Associated Press News, 20 July 2020, apnews.com/article/
    9105661462.

Guenther, Katja. "`It's All Done with Mirrors': V. S. Ramachandran and the Material Culture of Phantom Limb
   Research." Medical History, vol. 60, no. 3, 13 June 2016, pp. 342-358, doi:10.1017/mdh.2016.27.

"SIUE Researcher Gathers Stories in Nepal." Edwardsville Intelligencer, 28 July 2015,
    www.theintelligencer.com/local/article/SIUE-researcher-gathers-stories-in-Nepal-10441044.php.

Steinmetz, Katy. "People Have Invented More Than 200 Gender-Neutral Pronouns. Here's Why `They' Is Here
   to Stay." Time, 17 Jan. 2020, time.com/5763175/they-as-singular-pronoun/.

Worthy, L. D., Trisha Lavigne, and Fernando Romero. "Berry's Model of Acculturation." Culture and Psychology:
   How People Shape and Are Shaped by Culture, Glendale Community College, 2020, open.maricopa.edu/
    culturepsychology/chapter/berrys-model-of-acculturation/.

"Writing Guides." Writing@CSU, Colorado State U, 2021, writing.colostate.edu/guides/index.cfm.
Unit 3

Navigating Rhetoric in
Real Life

Introduction

Unit 3 is about the real world--the world outside the walls of your college or
university. There is a common misconception among students that the writing
they do in the classroom is not related to the real world. The works of the
Trailblazers in this text have argued against this idea. They are all using the
genres taught in the text in new and interesting ways as part of their work in the
real world. As technology evolves, increasing numbers of platforms are
available for people to publish their ideas for professional and personal
purposes. However, with these options come new responsibilities to present
one's ideas fairly, accurately, and respectfully. Your voice has power, and your
developing ability to present it effectively to the public means your journey with
writing is really just beginning.
Read Print or Textual Analysis: What You 16

FIGURE 16.1 Consider the subject of this painting, Man on the Street, by Russian artist Olga Rozanova
(1886-1918). Now, consider the way the subject is presented: cool colors, fragmented lines, distorted perspective.
What is the artist saying about the man on the street by presenting him in this way? As soon as you begin to answer
this question, you are analyzing a visual text. When you read a story, you might ask the following questions: Why
does this character act this way? How would the story be different if it were set in another time or place? What is the
author saying about life in general? How does the author make these points? When you begin to answer these
questions about a work of fiction or literary nonfiction, you are analyzing a literary text. (credit: "Man on the Street
(Analysis of Volumes)" by Olga Rozanova/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

16.1  An Author's Choices: What Text Says and How It Says It
16.2  Textual Analysis Trailblazer: bell hooks
16.3  Glance at Genre: Print or Textual Analysis
16.4  Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison
16.5  Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text
16.6  Editing Focus: Literary Works Live in the Present
16.7  Evaluation: Self-Directed Assessment
16.8  Spotlight on ... Humanities
16.9  Portfolio: The Academic and the Personal

INTRODUCTION In the real world, you are surrounded by text--both visual and print. It appears in media,
502 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

       advertising, and even text messages. Often, text is not one-dimensional, in the sense that words and the ways
       in which they are used or arranged can have different meanings depending on the relationship between the
       text and the reader. In such cases, a text is open to analysis and interpretation. Usually, there is no one right
       way to analyze and interpret a text; readers, like viewers, may understand elements in different ways and draw
       different conclusions. Whatever they are, however, will be the result of reading critically: examining parts of
       the text as they relate to the whole, supporting ideas with evidence, and drawing conclusions on the basis of
       analysis.

       The practice of analysis will benefit you in several ways. It can help you enter an ongoing conversation with a
       new and fresh perspective. It also can help you understand meaning beyond the surface of a text--including
       historical contexts and cultures, new approaches to thinking, and new knowledge.

       Although the word text tends to imply words, writing, or books, virtually all works created by human beings
       can be considered texts that are open to analysis--films, plays, music and dance performances, exhibits,
       paintings, photographs, sculptures, advertisements, artifacts, buildings, and even whole cultures. In this
       chapter, you will focus on the analysis of print texts. In Image Analysis: What You See, you will move to the
       analysis of visual and digital texts.

     16.1 An Author's Choices: What Text Says and How It Says It

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Define textual analysis and explain its place in academic and real-world contexts.
         · Identify the components of textual analysis and compare it to rhetorical analysis.
         · Demonstrate critical thinking and communicating in various rhetorical contexts.

       You may already be familiar with what is called textual analysis in academia. In fact, you do it frequently when
       you read or interact in other ways with language. It is important, though, to distinguish between what textual
       analysis is and what it is not. For example, imagine you and a friend have just finished watching a TV show or
       movie. You'll probably say whether you liked it and what in particular prompted your opinion. This brief and
       casual opinion-based conversation is just that, a casual conversation. It is not analysis, which goes far beyond
       liking or disliking a text. Perhaps you continue your conversation. Do you and your friend agree that everything
       in the show is obvious and clear or is inconsistent and muddy--characters' motivations, their development
       over the course of the story, how the setting affects the story, the point the story is making, the extent to which
       the characters seem realistic or relatable, whether the dialogue seems natural, or any other elements? Or do
       you and your friend view some of these elements differently? Do you have different views about what you think
       is the main idea or what a character represents? For instance, do you think the main character represents a
       force of good, while your friend thinks the main character is a boring wimp? If you agreed on everything--and
       everything seems straightforward--then that's that: the film offers little to interpret and most likely is not a
       strong text for analysis because it doesn't invite interpretation. However, if you do have questions about some
       of the elements or disagree about them, then you are on your way to analyzing and interpreting a text.

      Analyzing and Interpreting

       What exactly, then, is textual analysis? To analyze a text is to examine its various parts to explain its meaning.
       Analyzing a text implies that the text can be read in more than one way. Your analysis is your reading of it: your
       explanation of various text elements, your understanding of the text, and how you understand it in a larger
       context. Others may read and understand it differently. To find out what a text--fiction or nonfiction--means,
       you look at its language, examine how it is put together, perhaps compare or contrast it with similar texts or
       other works, and notice how it affects you or how it fits into events outside it, and you keep asking why. Always
       keep in mind, however, that a textual analysis is not about whether you like a text; it is about the meaning of
       the text--how the author created it and intended it to be understood.

       Any written work can be analyzed as a text. But an editorial or opinion piece or something written, for

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    16.2 · Trailblazer 503

example, as part of an ongoing argument of viewpoints is more likely to be looked at for the rhetorical or
persuasive strategies it employs to create or change an opinion. (This kind of rhetorical analysis is the focus of
Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric.) Literary works, whether fiction or nonfiction, film or text,
print or digital, are those analyzed as texts. Their impact on real events in real life is likely less direct than that
of rhetorical, or persuasive, writing, but many characters and themes that "live" in these works tend to exist for
a very long time and are open to analysis as part of a person's growth and education--and even more, a part of
and a reflection of the human condition.

Writers have many options when considering what to say and how to say it. The best texts for analysis are
those that are most problematic--texts whose meanings seem elusive or complex--because these texts give you
the most room to argue for one meaning over another. Like your goal in rhetorical analysis, your goal in textual
analysis is to make the best possible case to demonstrate to readers that your analysis is reasonable and
deserves serious attention. Remember, too, that argument in academic terms means taking a position and
supporting it. Therefore, when you analyze a text, you take a position on an aspect (or several aspects) of that
text and support it with evidence from the text itself and, if applicable, from borrowed sources, which you
acknowledge.

Textual analysis is a complex task that draws on your critical reading, reasoning, and writing skills. Depending
on your topic and thesis, you may have to describe real or fictional people and situations, retell events, define
key terms, analyze passages and explain how they work in relation to the whole, and examine and interpret
contexts and themes--perhaps by comparing or contrasting the text with other texts. Finally, you will "argue"
for the meaning as you understand it, rather than another possible meaning. In other words, as you do for
most academic writing, you develop a thesis and defend it with sound reasoning and convincing textual
evidence.

16.2 Trailblazer

Textual Analysis Trailblazer: bell hooks

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Demonstrate critical thinking and communicating in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Integrate the writer's ideas with ideas of others.
504 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

FIGURE 16.2 bell hooks (https://openstax.org/r/bell-         "Writing and
hooks) (credit: "Bellhooks" by Cmongirl/Wikimedia        performing should
Commons, Public Domain)                               deepen the meaning of

                                                           words, should
                                                      illuminate, transfix, and

                                                             transform."

Talking Back

Born Gloria Jean Watkins, bell hooks adopted the name of her great-grandmother, a woman known for
speaking her mind. In choosing this pen name, hooks decided not to capitalize the first letters so that
audiences would focus on her work rather than her name. However, this stylistic choice has become as
memorable as her work.

She is well known for her approach to social critique through textual analysis. The writing interests and
research methods hooks uses are wide ranging. They began in poetry and fiction writing and eventually
developed into critical analysis. She started writing at an early age, as her teachers (in the church) impressed
on hooks the power in language. With this exposure to language, hooks began to understand the "sacredness of
words" and began to write poetry and fiction. Over time, hooks's writing became more focused on advancing
and reviving the texts of Black women and women of color, for even though "black women and women of color
are publishing more... there is still not enough" writing by and about them. Texts live on through others'
analyses, hooks argues. Therefore, she believes the critical essay "is the most useful form for the expression"
between her thoughts and the books she is reading. The critical essay allows hooks to create a dialogue, or
"talk back" to the text. The critical essay also extends "the conversations I have with other critical thinkers." It
is this "talking back" that has advanced hooks's approach to literary criticism. This action, for which hooks
eventually named a volume of essays, refers to the development of a strong sense of self that allows Black
women to speak out against racism and sexism.

Although young hooks continued to write poetry--some of which was published--she gained a reputation as a
writer of critical essays about systems of domination. She began writing her first book, Ain't I a Woman: Black
Women and Feminism, when she was 19 and an undergraduate student at Stanford University. The book is
titled after Sojourner Truth's (1797-1883) "Ain't I a Woman" speech (https://openstax.org/r/Aint-I-a-Woman)
given at the Woman's Rights Convention in Akron, Ohio, in 1851. In this work, hooks examines the effects of
racism and sexism on Black women, the civil rights movement, and feminist movements from suffrage to the
1970s. By "talking back" to formerly enslaved abolitionist Sojourner Truth throughout, hooks identifies ways
in which feminist movements have failed to focus on Black women and women of color. This work is one of
many in which thorough analysis "uncovered" the lived experiences of Black women and women of color.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                        16.3 · Glance at Genre: Print or Textual Analysis 505

Discussion Questions

1. What are your thoughts about hooks's approach to analysis through "talking back" to a text? What might
    this approach look like in an essay or text: how might you "talk back"?

2. What purpose does hooks's approach to entering into conversation with other critical thinkers through
    critical analysis serve?

3. Much of hooks's work is based on her goal of "reviving" and "uncovering" historically marginalized
    women's voices. In what ways does critical analysis highlight the work of others?

16.3 Glance at Genre: Print or Textual Analysis

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define key terms and organizational patterns of textual analysis.
  · Explain how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
As a genre--or literary category in which works feature similar forms, styles, or subject matter--textual
analysis is less of a genre in itself and more of an exploration and interpretation of other genres. That is,
textual analysis is explanatory and interpretive. When you receive an assignment to analyze a text, you focus
on the elements that give it meaning. Usually your instructor will assign a specific writing task: to analyze and
explain certain aspects of a text, to compare or contrast certain elements within a single text or in two or more
texts, or to relate certain text elements to historical context or current events (as student writer Gwyn Garrison
has done in the Annotated Student Sample). These writing tasks thus explore genre characteristics of fiction,
drama, poetry, literary nonfiction, film, and other forms of literary language.

FIGURE 16.3 Like scientists who analyze components of a substance, writers of textual analysis examine a fiction
or literary nonfiction work to understand and interpret its meaning by looking at its components. (credit:
"Complexometric titration" by Alina.Popova.26/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0)
506 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

       When you write a textual analysis, ask yourself questions such as these:
         · In what ways can this text be read?
         · What are some different ways of reading it?
         · Which reading makes the most sense to me?
         · Which passages in the text support this reading?
         · Whom does my analysis need to convince? (Who is my audience?)

      Textual Analysis and Interpretive Communities

       How you read and analyze a text depends on who you are. Who you are depends on the influences that have
       shaped you, or the communities to which you belong. Everyone belongs to various communities: families,
       social and economic groups (e.g., students or teachers, middle or working class), organizations (e.g.,
       Democratic or Republican Party, Masons, Habitat for Humanity), geographic locales (e.g., rural or urban, north
       or south), and institutions (e.g., school, church, fraternity). Your membership in one or more communities
       may determine how you view and respond to the world. The communities that influence you most are called
       interpretive communities; they influence the meaning you make of the world. People who belong to the same
       community may well have similar assumptions and therefore are likely to analyze texts in similar ways.
       Before writing an interpretive or textual analysis essay, it is helpful to ask, Who am I when writing this piece?
       Be aware of your age, gender, race, ethnic identity, economic class, geographic location, educational level, or
       political or religious persuasion. Ask to what extent and for what purpose any of these identities emerges in
       your writing. Readers will examine the biases you may bring to your work, understanding that everyone views
       the world--and, consequently, texts--from their own vantage point.
       College is, of course, a large interpretive community. The various smaller communities that exist within it are
       called disciplines: English, history, biology, business, art, and so on. Established ways of interpreting texts
       exist within disciplines. Often when you write a textual analysis, you will do so from the perspective of a
       traditional academic interpretive community or from the perspective of one who challenges that community.
       Whether you deliberately identify yourself and any biases you might bring with you in your essay depends on
       the assignment you are given. Some assignments ask you to remove your personal perspective as much as
       possible from your writing, others ask that you acknowledge and explain it, and others fall somewhere in
       between.

       FIGURE 16.4 The individuals in this group of student volunteers and staff represent both similar and different
       cultural and interpretive communities. (credit: "Alternative Spring Break (ASB) group from Rice University, volunteer

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                         16.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison 507

at Mason Neck State Park" by Virginia State Parks/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

Conventions of Textual Analysis

When asked to analyze or interpret a literary work, whether fiction or nonfiction, you will likely focus on some
of these literary elements to explain how an author uses them to make meaning.

  · Alliteration: literary device consisting of repetition of initial consonant sounds. ("Away from the steamy
      sidewalk, the children sat in a circle.")

  · Analysis: close examination and explanation of a text, supported by reasoning and evidence.
  · Antagonist: character or force opposing the main character (protagonist) in a story.
  · Climax: moment of emotional or intellectual intensity or a point in the plot when one opposing force

      overcomes another and the conflict is resolved.
  · Epiphany: flash of intuitive understanding by the narrator or a character in a story.
  · Figurative language: language that suggests special meanings or effects. Similes and metaphors are

      examples of figurative, rather than literal, language. ("She stands like a tree, solid and rooted.")
  · Imagery: language that appeals to one (or more) of the five senses. ("The cicadas hummed nonstop all day,

      but never loud enough to dull the roar of the leaf blowers.)
  · Metaphor: direct comparison between two unlike things. ("She is a sly fox in her undercover work for the

      government.")
  · Narrator: someone who tells a story. A character narrator is a part of the story, whereas an omniscient

      narrator tells a story about others.
  · Persona: mask to disguise or cover the author's real self when presenting a story or other literary work.
  · Plot: sequence of events in a story or play.
  · Point of view: vantage point from which a story or event is perceived and told. The most frequently used

      points of view are first person and third person. In first person, the narrator is a character or observer in
      the story (fiction) or the author of it (nonfiction). In third person, the narrator has no part in the story other
      than telling it.
  · Protagonist: main character or hero in a story.
  · Rhyme: repetition of sounds, usually at the ends of lines in poems, but also occurring at other intervals in
      a line.
  · Rhythm: rise and fall of stressed sounds within sentences, paragraphs, and stanzas.
  · Simile: indirect comparison of unlike things using the word as or like. ("When he does undercover work,
      he is as sly as a fox.")
  · Symbol: object that represents itself and something else at the same time. A red rose is both a rose of a
      certain color and the suggestion of something romantic.
  · Theme: meaning or thesis of a literary text.

16.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Demonstrate understanding of how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and expectation.
  · Demonstrate critical thinking and communicating in varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Make connections between ideas and patterns of organization.
  · Evaluate literary elements and strategies used in textual analysis.

Introduction

Student Gwyn Garrison wrote this textual analysis for a first-year composition class. In the essay, Garrison
extends her analysis beyond the texts to discuss outside events and real individuals, making connections
among them.
   508 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

   LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

   The Power of Language

s  send s Language is the medium through which the communication of ideas takes place. One of language'senmdasny

   attributes is its ability both to reflect and to shape social attitudes. Language has the power to perpetuate

   oppression ewnhdesn deonmdisnant social groups choose the ways in which rebellious behavior is described. Thus, people

   in power historically have used language as propaganda to perpetuate the ideas that they want to reiterate. For

   example, if a woman in modern society is described as ladylike, the message is that she conforms to traditional

   gender expectations of politenesesn, dmsodesty, and deference. However, if a woman is called a whore, the message is

   that the woman does not conform to these traditional gender standards. In recent years, oppressed social groups

   heanvde slearned that they can reclaim the language of the oppressor by redefining such words and their connotations.

   GanwnyontaGtarrison uses reaction--reflection or thinking--to introduce the "big idea" of the thesis: language has the
   power to shape cultural and social attitudes.end annotat

   American authors such as Kate Chopin and Shirley Jackson, sociopolitical activists such as Hillary Clinton and
   Chrissy Teigen, and California rape survivor Chanel Miller-- artists/writers in their own ways--take on this
   essential work of reclaiming language on behalf of all women. This confiscation of the tools of the oppressor is
   an essential step toward building a society in which women may be free to be who they are. Negative
   stereotypical labeling no longer has the effect of disempowering women because language can be reclaimed
   from the oppressor as a form of empowerment.

   Gananrroistaotn's thesis statement highlights her analytical approach. She makes a connection between women's rights
   and a series of texts by significant women.end annotat

   Writers can use the short story form to shift perception away from the lens of the status quo and focus
   perception in a new way. In Kate Chopin's 1898 short story "The Storm" (text follows this discussion),
   protagonist Calixta engages in a passionate extramarital affair with an old friend, Alcée. Readers may argue that
   Calixta's actions should be labeled as immoral by both societal and religious standards because she breaks the
   social and religious contract defined by her marriage vows. Yet every other action of Calixta's complies with
   traditional gender roles: she is a wife, mother, and caretaker. In some ways, committing this one social
   transgression seems completely out of character when she meets traditional gender expectations in all other
   areas of her life.

   Gananrroistaotn provides publication information as well as a brief plot summary and context for the story. You can read
   "The Storm" in its entirety at the end of this feature.end annotat

   When Calixta acts outside of societal norms, however, she discovers the freedom of self-expression and
   passion.

   Tanhnisottraatnsitional topic sentence supports the overall thesis while also identifying what the paragraph will be about.end annotat

   All parts of her womanhood that have no place in the society in which she lives have been repressed until this
   one moment. In this scene, Chopin takes possession of the term whore and redefines Calixta's behavior as a
   transformative awakening.

   Tanhnisoetaxtplanation makes a reference to the language of the text and explains the significance of the scene as it
   relates to the entire story and to Garrison's thesis.end annotat

   Chopin's diction evokes a spiritual transcendence that allows Calixta to live momentarily outside social norms
   present only in the physical plane of existence: "when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon together at the
   very borderland of life's mystery."

   Hanenreo,taGtarrison correctly cites textual evidence--an example of the protagonist's diction-- to support her reasoning.end annotat

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                     16.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison 509

   The affair becomes a vehicle that allows Calixta to get to a place of true self-expression. The storm, an aspect

   of nature or the natural world, acts as the catalyst in Calixta's natural self-realization of womanhood. As the

   storm breaks externally, it also breaks internally for Calixta. Chopin's depiction of Calixta's sexual liberation and

   fulfillment outside of her marriage is an early step in the fight to bridge the gap between women's bodies and

s  their sociopolitical lives. By presenting female sexuality in a way that is enlightening rather than degrading,

   Chopin helps destigmeantidzeslabels such as whore, which have been used to shame women for acting outside of

   traditional gender expectations.

   Gananrroistaotn further elaborates on the significance of the textual evidence and connects it to the topic sentence and
   thesis. In this case, it is the storm--an element oefnbdosth plot and setting as well as a symbol.end annotat

                                                                                              end s
         In Shirley Jackesnodns's novel We Have Always Lived in the Castle, Merricat and her sister Constance are rumored
         to be witches who, according to village gossip, eat children. The label of witch has long been a device to

         oppress women who do not conform to traditional gender roles. In Salem, Massachusetts, during the 17th-

         century witch trials, women who could read or write, who refused marriage, or who practiced alternative

         religions often were labeled as witches and burned to death.

   Ianntnrotdautcing a second text for comparison, Garrison revisits the idea of language reclamation introduced earlier.end annotat

   In Jackson's novel, Merricat embraces the notion of being labeled a witch. In fact, she facilitates the rumors by
   burying talismans, identifying magical words, and talking to her cat, Jonas. In contrast to the witch trials,
   Merricat burns her own house to rid it of her male cousin. And she survives the fire, purging herself and her

                                                     end s
   sister of the family's patriarchal tendencies. By claiming the role of witch, Merricat insulates herself and her
   sister from their patriarchal family and society. In the end, Merricat creates a space where she and Constance
   can live together in a woman-centered territory outside the reach of the villagers.

   Faoncnuostaintg on language and its implications, Garrison discusses the use of witch, a label the character is happy to
   embrace as a means of asserting her womanhood.end annotat

   With this story, Jackson does the important work of reclaiming the word witch, stripping it of its oppressive
   power and redefining it for womankind.

   Iannnthoetastection that follows, Garrison moves outside literary texts and extends her analysis to language use in
   contemporary political situations, thus connecting literature with reality. Notice that Garrison has used the literary
   present tense in discussing both Chopin's and Jackson's fiction. She switches and uses mostly past tense now in
   discussing nonliterary events.end annotat

   Similarly, in a more recent political climate, former U.S. president Donald Trump employed stereotypical
   derogatory language against women whom he considered dissenters. He used phrases like "such a nasty
   woman" (Ali) to describe former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and "filthy mouthed wife"
   (@realDonaldTrump) to describe model Chrissy Teigen to try to shame women with social influence into
   submission. It is noteworthy, too, that he describes Teigen by her role in relation to a man rather than by her
   name, which would indicate her individuality. Both Clinton and Teigen, along with millions of women around the
   world, have worked to empower women by redefining such language. Almost immediately following the
   accusation of "such a nasty woman," women and girls around the country donned t-shirts and ball caps with
   the phrase, showing their pride in being "nasty" (Ali). In this context, the term came to describe women who
   speak truth to power. Although Teigen acknowledges that she had previously been blocked by Trump for trolling
   him, she shot back defiantly at him with a tweet that read in part: "lol what p-- a-- b--" (@chrissyteigen).
   Shortly thereafter, the phrase was trending as a Twitter hashtag (Butler). In this instance, people, particularly
   women, appreciated Teigen's ability to respond to female shaming with language that Trump himself was
   recorded using and that is also traditionally used to shame and degrade women. This time, however, it was
   directed toward a powerful man. This reclamation of power through language is one step women have taken to
   revise the social gender narrative for a modern context.
   510 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

   Aangnaoint,aGt arrison introduces texts for comparison, bringing her argument regarding the reclamation of language into
   the modern day.end annotat

   After four years of being known as "the girl raped by Stanford swimmer Brock Turner," sexual assault survivor

   Chanel Miller has reclaimed the narrative of her story with the publication of her memoir Know My Name. After

s  a Stanford University fraternity party in January 2015, Turner assaulted (with intent to rape) an intoxicated and

   unconscious Miller behind a dumpster at approximately 1:00 a.m. Some passing students interrupted the act,

   and Turner was taken by the police after the students restrained him. He was later brought to trial and found
   guilty. The sympathetic male judge sentenced Turner to only siexnmdosnths in county jail, from which he was
   released after three meonndthss for good behavior. When speakinegndons television to 60 Minutes on September 22,

   2019, Miller expressed outrage that media coverage during the trial had focused not on what Miller had already

   lost but on what Turner had to lose if found guilty--his education, his swimming career, his Olympic prospects

   (Miller). Because Miller remained anonymous during the trial, the media and Turner's lawyers controlled how

   she was perceived to the world--as a girl who got drunk and put herself into a compromising situation.

   Gananrroistaotn emphasizes the role of language in Miller's telling her story and ceasing to feel aesnhdams ed.end annotat

         This male-centric characterization of events left Miller feeling ashamed and disempowered. By writing her book
         and reclaiming her story, Miller took a vital step in healing and trauma management, emphasizing that she now
         controls the language of her narrative. She is not a girl who deserves what she got, as some would argue. Miller
         readily acknowledges she deserved a hangover for her actions, but never a rape.

   Nanontiocteathe switching of tenses to indicate events in the past and present. Notice, too, that Garrison returns to the
   literary present tense in the paragraph that follows.end annotat

   Miller's story is all too common in the college partying scene, and the regularity of such attacks contributes to
   the perpetuation of an environment in which women are made to feel responsible for being attacked and men
   are free to act as they choose. The awareness of Miller's story and, more importantly, her published story,
   reframe the narrative around rape culture so that the victims are not further victimized, as women work to
   educate men so that these attacks stop.

   Gananrroistaotn introduces a final contemporary text for comparison. By citing multiple texts across time, Garrison
   strengthens her argument.end annotat

   Artists and writers such as Chopin, Jackson, Clinton, Teigen, and Miller engage in the gritty work of social
   reform that cannot be achieved through any other medium because culture cannot change unless the language
   in which people talk about the culture changes. This socially reformed reality is conceived only from the
   creativity of intelligent minds that are able both to envision and then to describe the world as it is yet to exist. In
   this way, artists who work with the medium of language become the prophets.

   Tanhnisoctaotnclusion looks to the future, which is a productive rhetorical or persuasive technique to give the audience an
   idea about what they can take away from this project.end annotat

                                                            Works Cited

   Ali, Lorraine. "`Such a Nasty Woman': Trump's Debate Dig Becomes a Feminist Rallying Cry." Los Angeles Times, 20
       Oct. 2016, www.latimes.com/entertainment/tv/la-et-nasty-woman-trump-clinton-debate-jane-
       jackson-20161020-snap-story.html.

   Butler, Bethonie. "Trump Called Chrissy Teigen a `Filthy Mouthed Wife.' Her Response Reflects Years of Social Media
      Savvy." Washington Post, 10 Sept. 2019, www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2019/09/10/trump-
       called-chrissy-teigen-filthy-mouthed-wife-her-response-reflects-years-social-media-savvy/.

   Chopin, Kate. "The Storm." 1898. American Literature.com, 2018, americanliterature.com/author/kate-chopin/
       short-story/the-storm.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                         16.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison 511

@chrissyteigen. "lol what a pussy ass bitch. tagged everyone but me. an honor, mister president." Twitter, 8 Sept.
    2019, 11:17 p.m. https://twitter.com/chrissyteigen/status/1170914148919590914?lang=en.

Jackson, Shirley. We Have Always Lived in the Castle. Penguin Classics, 1962.
Miller, Chanel. "Interview with Bill Whitaker." 60 Minutes. 22 Sept. 2019.
@realDonaldTrump. "...musician @johnlegend, and his filthy mouthed wife, are talking now about how great it is -

    but I didn't see them around when we needed help getting it passed. "Anchor"@LesterHoltNBC doesn't even
   bring up the subject of President Trump or the Republicans when talking about..." Twitter, 8 Sept. 2019, 10:11
    p.m.
Garrison follows MLA guidelines to cite her sources.

Discussion Questions

1. How might Gwyn Garrison have used action to introduce her thesis? Dialogue? Is reaction the best choice?
    Why or why not?

2. What reasoning does Garrison offer to support her thesis?
3. What textual evidence does Garrison offer to support her thesis?
4. How does Garrison connect literary elements--particularly language and character--with real-world

    events? Explain why you think these connections are valid or not.
5. Are you convinced or unconvinced of the validity of the thesis? Why or why not?

For Reference: "The Storm" by Kate Chopin (1850-1904)

FIGURE 16.5 American author Kate Chopin, 1894 (credit: "KATE O'FLAHERTY BEFORE HER MARRIAGE TO OSCAR
CHOPIN" by J.A. Scholten/The State Historical Society of Missouri, Photograph Collection, Public Domain)
512 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

                 The leaves were so still that even Bibi thought it was going to rain. Bobinôt, who was accustomed to converse

                 on terms of perfect equality with his little son, called the child's attention to certain sombre clouds that were

                 rolling with sinister intention from the west, accompanied by a sullen, threatening roar. They were at

                 Friedheimer's store and decided to remain there till the storm had passed. They sat within the door on two

public domain t  empty kegs. Benibdi wpuabslficoudroymeaairns told andelnodokpeudblviecenrdydowmpeuinasbdeinl.ipctudebonlimdc adpiounmbtlaicindot main t end public domain t

                 "Mama'll be 'fraiedn, dyepsu,"bhliec dsuogmgaeisntet d withenbdlinpkuinbgliceydeosm. ain t

                                                   end public domain t

                 "She'll  shut  the house. Maybe she got   Sylvie helpin' her  this  evenin',"               Bobinôt  responded  reassuringly.
                                   end public domain tend  public domain t

                 "Neon;dshpeubelnict gdootmSayilnvite. Sylvie was helpienn' dhepruybislietcindddaoypm,"uabpilniipcteddoBmibaii.n t end public domain t

                 Bobinôt arose and going across to the counter purchased a can of shrimps, of which Calixta was very fond. Then
                 he returned to his perch on the keg and sat stolidly holding the can of shrimps while the storm burst. It shook
                 the wooden store and seemed to be ripping great furrows in the distant field. Bibi laid his little hand on his
                 father's knee and was not afraid.

II

                 Calixta, at home, felt no uneasiness for their safety. She sat at a side window sewing furiously on a sewing
                 machine. She was greatly occupied and did not notice the approaching storm. But she felt very warm and often
                 stopped to mop her face on which the perspiration gathered in beads. She unfastened her white sacque at the
                 throat. It began to grow dark, and suddenly realizing the situation she got up hurriedly and went about closing
                 windows and doors.

                 Out on the small front gallery she had hung Bobinôt's Sunday clothes to dry and she hastened out to gather
                 them before the rain fell. As she stepped outside, Alcée Laballière rode in at the gate. She had not seen him
                 very often since her marriage, and never alone. She stood there with Bobinôt's coat in her hands, and the big
                 rain drops began to fall. Alcée rode his horse under the shelter of a side projection where the chickens had
                 huddled and there were plows and a harrow piled up in the corner.

                 "May I come and wait on your gallery till the storm is over, Calixta?" he asked.

                 "Come 'long in, M'sieur Alcée."

                 His voice and her own startled her as if from a trance, and she seized Bobinôt's vest. Alcée, mounting to the
                 porch, grabbed the trousers and snatched Bibi's braided jacket that was about to be carried away by a sudden
                 gust of wind. He expressed an intention to remain outside, but it was soon apparent that he might as well have
                 been out in the open: the water beat in upon the boards in driving sheets, and he went inside, closing the door
                 after him. It was even necessary to put something beneath the door to keep the water out.

                 "My! what a rain! It's good two years since it rain' like that," exclaimed Calixta as she rolled up a piece of
                 bagging and Alcée helped her to thrust it beneath the crack.

                 She was a little fuller of figure than five years before when she married; but she had lost nothing of her vivacity.
                 Her blue eyes still retained their melting quality; and her yellow hair, dishevelled by the wind and rain, kinked
                 more stubbornly than ever about her ears and temples.

                 The rain beat upon the low, shingled roof with a force and clatter that threatened to break an entrance and
                 deluge them there. They were in the dining room--the sitting room--the general utility room. Adjoining was her
                 bedroom, with Bibi's couch alongside her own. The door stood open, and the room with its white, monumental
                 bed, its closed shutters, looked dim and mysterious.

                 Alcée flung himself into a rocker and Calixta nervously began to gather up from the floor the lengths of a cotton
                 sheet which she had been sewing.

                 "If this keeps up, Dieu sait if the levees goin' to stan it!" she exclaimed.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                            16.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Artists at Work" by Gwyn Garrison 513

"What have you got to do with the levees?"

"I got enough to do! An' there's Bobinôt with Bibi out in that storm--if he only didn' left Friedheimer's!"

"Let us hope, Calixta, that Bobinôt's got sense enough to come in out of a cyclone."

public domain t She went and stood at theenwdinpduobwlicwditohmaaginretatly disturbed look oennhdeprufabcliec.dSohme awinipteedndthpeufbralimc deotmhaatinwtas
                        clouded with moisture. It was stiflienngdlyphuobtl.icAdlcoémeagionttup and joined her at the window, looking over her

shoulder. The rain was coming down in sheets obscuring the view of far-off cabins and enveloping the distant
wood in a gray mist. The playing of the lightning was incessant. A bolt setrnudckpuabtlaicll dchominaabinetrry tree at the edge of

the field. It filled all visible space with a blinding glare and the crash seemed to invade the very boards they

end pusbtoliocdduopmoanin. t                                                          end public domain t

Calixta put her hands to her eyes, and with a cry, staggered backward. Alcée's arm encircled her, and for an
instant he drew her close and spasmodically to him.

FIGURE 16.6 The Kiss, 1887, by Norwegian painter Edvard Munch (1863-1944) (credit: "Edvard Munch - The Kiss"
by Google Art Project/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      "Bonté!" she cried, releasing herself from his encircling arm and retreating from the window, "the house'll go
      next! If I only knew w'ere Bibi was!" She would not compose herself; she would not be seated. Alcée clasped
      her shoulders and looked into her face. The contact of her warm, palpitating body when he had unthinkingly
      drawn her into his arms, had aroused all the old-time infatuation and desire for her flesh.

      "Calixta," he said, "don't be frightened. Nothing can happen. The house is too low to be struck, with so many
      tall trees standing about. There! Aren't you going to be quiet? say, aren't you?" He pushed her hair back from
      her face that was warm and steaming. Her lips were as red and moist as pomegranate seeds. Her white neck
      and a glimpse of her full, firm bosom disturbed him powerfully. As she glanced up at him the fear in her liquid
      blue eyes had given place to a drowsy gleam that unconsciously betrayed a sensuous desire. He looked down
      into her eyes and there was nothing for him to do but to gather her lips in a kiss. It reminded him of
      Assumption.
514 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

"Do you remember--in Assumption, Calixta?" he asked in a low voice broken by passion. Oh! she remembered;

for in Assumption he had kissed her and kissed her; until his senses would well nigh fail, and to save her he

would resort to a desperate flight. If she was not an immaculate dove in those days, she was still inviolate; a

passionate creature whose very defenselessness had made her defense, against which his honor forbade him

public domain t to prevail. Now--well, now--her lips seemed in a manner free to be tasted, as weelnl dasphuebrlircoduonmd,awinhtite throat

eennddppauunbbdlilcihceddroowmmhaaiitnienrttbreasts.  end public domain t end public domain t  end public domain t

They did not heeenddthpeubcerlinacdsdhpoinumgbaltiiocnrdrteonmtsa,inant d the roar of the elements made her laugh as she lay in his arms.
She was a revelation in that dim, meynsdtepruiobulisc cdhoammabinert; as white as the couch she lay upon. Her firm, elastic

flesh that was knowing for the first time its birthright, was like a creamy lily that the sun invites to contribute its
breatehnadnpdeupnbedlricfpuudmbolemictaodinothmteauinndt ying life of the world. The generous abundance of her passion, wiethnoduptugbuliilcedoormain t

trickery, was like a white flame which penetrated and found response in depths of his own sensuous nature that

had never yet been reached.

When he touched her breasts they gave themselves up in quivering ecstasy, inviting his lips. Her mouth was a
fountain of delight. And when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon together at the very borderland of life's
mystery.

He stayed cushioned upon her, breathless, dazed, enervated, with his heart beating like a hammer upon her.
With one hand she clasped his head, her lips lightly touching his forehead. The other hand stroked with a
soothing rhythm his muscular shoulders.

The growl of the thunder was distant and passing away. The rain beat softly upon the shingles, inviting them to
drowsiness and sleep. But they dared not yield.

The rain was over; and the sun was turning the glistening green world into a palace of gems. Calixta, on the
gallery, watched Alcée ride away. He turned and smiled at her with a beaming face; and she lifted her pretty
chin in the air and laughed aloud.

III

      Bobinôt and Bibi, trudging home, stopped without at the cistern to make themselves presentable.

      "My! Bibi, w'at will yo' mama say! You ought to be ashame'. You oughta' put on those good pants. Look at 'em!
      An' that mud on yo' collar! How you got that mud on yo' collar, Bibi? I never saw such a boy!" Bibi was the
      picture of pathetic resignation. Bobinôt was the embodiment of serious solicitude as he strove to remove from
      his own person and his son's the signs of their tramp over heavy roads and through wet fields. He scraped the
      mud off Bibi's bare legs and feet with a stick and carefully removed all traces from his heavy brogans. Then,
      prepared for the worst--the meeting with an over-scrupulous housewife, they entered cautiously at the
      backdoor.

      Calixta was preparing supper. She had set the table and was dripping coffee at the hearth. She sprang up as
      they came in.

      "Oh, Bobinôt! You back! My! but I was uneasy. W'ere you been during the rain? An' Bibi? he ain't wet? he ain't
      hurt?" She had clasped Bibi and was kissing him effusively. Bobinôt's explanations and apologies which he had
      been composing all along the way, died on his lips as Calixta felt him to see if he were dry, and seemed to
      express nothing but satisfaction at their safe return.

      "I brought you some shrimps, Calixta," offered Bobinôt, hauling the can from his ample side pocket and laying it
      on the table.

      "Shrimps! Oh, Bobinôt! you too good fo' anything!" and she gave him a smacking kiss on the cheek that
      resounded, "J'vous réponds, we'll have a feas' to-night! umph-umph!"

Access for free at openstax.org.
                    16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 515

                    Bobinôt and Bibi began to relax and enjoy themselves, and when the three seated themselves at table they
                    laughed much and so loud that anyone might have heard them as far away as Laballière's.

IV

public domain t     Alcée Laballière wrote to his wife, Clarisse, that night. It was a loving letter, full of tender solicitude. He told her
                 V  not to hurry back, but if she and the babies liked it at Biloxi, to stay a moennthd lpounbgleicr.dHoemwaains tgetting on nicely;

                    and though he missed them, he was willing to bear the separation a while longer--realizing that their health and
                    pleasure were the first thingsetnodbpeucbolnicsiddoemreadin. t

                                                      end public domain t

                    As for Clarisse, she was charmed upon receiving her husband's letter. She and the babies were doing well. The
                    society was agreeable; many of her old friends and acquaintances were at the bay. And the first free breath
                    since her marriage seemed to restore the pleasant liberty of her maiden days. Devoted as she was to her
                    husband, their intimate conjugal life was something which she was more than willing to forego for a while. So
                    the storm passed and everyone was happy.

16.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop a writing project focused on textual analysis.
  · Complete the stages of the writing process, including generating ideas, drafting, reviewing, revising, rewriting,

      and editing.
  · Integrate the writer's ideas with ideas of others.
  · Collaborate in the peer review process.

When analyzing a text, writers usually focus on the content of the text itself and deliberately leave themselves
in the background, minimizing personal presence and bias. To write this way, they avoid first-person
pronouns and value judgments. In reality, of course, writers do reveal their presence by the choices they make:
what they include, what they exclude, and what they emphasize. Although your own subjectivity and situation
will likely affect your inferences and judgments, recognizing these potential biases will help you keep the focus
on your subject and off yourself.

Summary of Assignment

Write an analytical essay about a short story or another short text of your choice, either fiction or literary
nonfiction. If desired, you may choose "The Storm" by Kate Chopin, reprinted above. Consider the author's
form and organization, tone, or stylistic choices, including diction and sensory or figurative language. You
might also consider the historical or social context, the theme, the character development, or the relation
between setting and plot or characterization. If you are free to choose your own text and topic, consider the
following approaches:

  · Analyze the literary components mentioned and focus your essay on their significance in the work.
  · Like student author Gwyn Garrison, choose one or several components and examine how different authors

      use them and how they relate to broader contexts.

Convincing textual analysis essays usually include the following information:

  · overview of the text, identifying author, title, and genre
  · very brief summary
  · description of the text's form and structure
  · explanation of the author's point of view
  · summary of the social, historical, or cultural context in which the work was written
516 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

         · assertion or thesis about what the text means: your main task as an analyst

       When writing about a novel or short story, explain how the main elements function:

         · narrator (who tells the story)
         · plot (what happens in the story)
         · one or more characters (who are acting or being acted upon)
         · setting (when and where things are happening)
         · theme (the meaning of the story)

       Keep in mind that the author who writes the story is different from the narrator and invented characters in it.
       Keep in mind, too, that what happens in the story--the plot--is different from the meaning of the story--the
       theme. Understanding what happens will help you discover what the text means.

       The elements (https://openstax.org/r/elements) of literary or narrative nonfiction are similar to those of a
       fictional story except that everything in the text is supposed to have really happened. For this reason, the
       author and the narrator of the story may be one and the same. Informational nonfiction--essays, reports, and
       textbook chapters--is also meant to be believed; here, however, ideas and arguments must be strong and well
       supported to be convincing. When analyzing nonfiction, pay special attention to the author's thesis or claim
       and to how it is supported through reasoning and evidence. Also note interesting or unusual tone, style, form,
       or voice.

       Another Lens 1. In writing from a personal or subjective viewpoint, the writer and their beliefs and
       experiences are necessarily part of your analysis and may need to be expressed and examined. For example,
       you may write subjectively and compare and contrast your situation with that of the author or a character. You
       might explain how your personal background causes you to read the text in a particular way that is meaningful
       to you. If you choose this option, be sure to analyze the text as you would for a more objective analysis before
       focusing on your personal views.

       Another Lens 2. A leading contemporary example of narrative nonfiction writing is Jon Krakauer's (b. 1954)
       Into the Wild (https://openstax.org/r/Into-the-Wild), the story of Chris McCandless (1968- c. 1992), a young
       college graduate who lived at subsistence level in the backwoods of Alaska for 113 days. The text is somewhat
       similar thematically to Henry David Thoreau's (1817-1862) Walden (1854), written more than a century
       earlier and discussed later in this section. Both are about dropping out of society to create a meaningful life.
       After reading the excerpt of Into the Wild linked above, you may choose to write a textual analysis of it either
       on its own or in light of the sample analysis of Thoreau's writings later in this section. Consider comparing and
       contrasting McCandless's situation with Thoreau's life in Walden and how Krakauer and Thoreau use various
       literary elements in their writing. Topics for analysis might be setting, character traits, motives, cultural
       communities, historical context, and attitudes toward life and society.

             Quick Launch: Start with Your Thesis

       For textual analysis, your thesis should be a clear, concise statement that identifies your analytical stance on
       which readers will expect you to elaborate.

       Develop a working thesis

       A working thesis is referred to as such because the thesis is subject to revision. You may have to revisit it later
       in the writing process, for it is almost impossible to craft a thesis without having analyzed some of the text
       first. Your thesis, therefore, will come from the element(s) you choose to analyze, such as the following:

         · an aspect or several aspects of form and structure and their significance
         · social, historical, or cultural context in which the text was written and its significance
         · style elements such as diction, imagery, or figurative language and their significance
         · aspects of characters, plot, or setting

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                 16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 517

  · overall theme of a single work or more than one work
  · comparison or contrast of elements within one or more works
  · relation to issues outside the text
To develop a working thesis, use the formula shown in Table 16.1, basing your answers on one of the bulleted
items listed above.

                                               What are you doing? + Why are you doing it?

                               What are you doing? Analyzing Kate Chopin's short story "The Storm"

                                                                             +

                                                   Why are you doing it? "To argue that..."

                                                                             =

   In the short story "The Storm," author Kate Chopin uses linguistic variety to add to the character development.

  TABLE 16.1

You can also start with an analytical question: For what reason(s) does Chopin use linguistic variety? Your
initial answer might yield the thesis above. Or you can ask another analytical question, such as this one: In
what ways do the plot and setting of "The Storm" reinforce its theme?

     Drafting: Explore Possible Areas of Analysis for Fiction: Approach 1

Analytical essays (https://openstax.org/r/Analytical-essays) begin by answering basic questions: What genre is
this text--poem, play, story, biography, memoir, essay? What is its title? Who is the author? When was it
published?
Identify and Summarize the Text

In addition to the basic questions, analytical essays provide a brief summary of the plot or main idea.
Summarize briefly, logically, and objectively to provide a background for what you plan to say about the text.
This information may be incorporated into the introduction or may follow it.
Explain the Form and Organization

To analyze the organizational structure of a text, ask: How is it put together? Why does the author start here
and end there? Why does the author sequence information in this order? What connects the text from start to
finish? For example, by repeating words, ideas, and images, writers call attention to these elements and
indicate that they are important to the meaning of the text. No matter what the text, some principle or plan
holds it together and gives it structure. Fiction and nonfiction texts that tell stories are often, but not always,
organized as a sequence of events in chronological order. Poems may have formal structures or other
organizational elements. Other texts may alternate between explanations and examples or between first-
person and third-person narrative. You will have to decide which aspects of the text's form and organization
are most important for your analysis.
For example, this student analyzes the point of view of Gwendolyn Brooks's poem "We Real Cool
(https://openstax.org/r/We-Real-Cool).".
   518 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

   Gwendolyn Brooks writes "We Real Cool" (1963) from the point of view of members of a street gang who speak

   as one voice. The boys have dropped out of school to spend their lives hanging around pool halls--in this case

   "The Golden Shovel." These guys speak in slangy lingo, such as "Strike straight," that reveals their need for a

   melded identity in their rebellious attitude toward life. The plural speaker in the poem, "We," celebrates what

s  adults might call adolescent hedonism--but the speaker, feeling powerful in the group identity, makes a

   conscious choice for a short, intense life over a long, safe, and dull existence.

   Place the Work in Context                                    end s

                                                      end s

   To analyze the context of a text, ask: What circumstances (ehnisdtosrical, social, political, biographical) produced
   this text? How does this text compare or contrast with anotheernbdysthe same author or with a similar work by a

   different author? No text exists in isolation. Each was created by a particular author in a particular place at a

   particular time. Describing this context provides readers with important background information and

   indicates which conditions you think were most influential.

   For example, this student analyzes the social context of Gwendolyn Brooks's poem "We Real Cool."

   From society's viewpoint, the boys are nothing but misfits--refusing to work, leading violent lives, breaking
   laws, and confronting police. However, these boys live in a society that is dangerous for Black men, who often
   die at the hands of police even when they are doing the right thing. The boys are hopeless, recognizing no future
   but death, regardless of their actions, and thus "Die soon."

   Explain the Theme of the Text

   To analyze the theme of a text, determine the implied theme in fiction, poetry, and narrative nonfiction. One
   purpose for writing a textual analysis is to point out the theme. Ask yourself: So what? What is this text really
   about? What do I think the author is trying to say by writing this text? What problems, puzzles, or ideas are
   most interesting? In what ways do the characters change between the beginning and end of the text? Good
   ideas for a thesis arise from material in which the meaning is not obviously stated.

   For example, this student analyzes one theme of Gwendolyn Brooks's poem "We Real Cool."

         For the "Seven at the Golden Shovel," companionship is everything. For many teenagers, fitting in or conforming
         to a group identity is more important than developing an individual identity. Brooks expresses this theme
         through the poem's point of view, the plural "We" repeated at the end of each line.

   Analyze Stylistic Choices

   To analyze stylistic choices, examine the details of the text. Ask yourself: Why does the author use this word or
   phrase instead of a synonym for it? In what ways does this word or phrase relate to other words or phrases? In
   what ways do the author's figurative comparisons affect the meaning or tone of the text? In what ways does use
   of sensory language (imagery) affect the meaning or tone of the text? In what ways does this element represent
   more than itself? In what ways does the author use sound or rhythm to support meaning?

   For example, this student analyzes the diction of Gwendolyn Brooks's poem "We Real Cool."

         Brooks chooses the word cool to open the poem and build the first rhyme. Being cool is the code by which the
         boys live. However, the word cool also suggests the idiom "to be placed `on ice,'" a term that suggests a delay.
         The boys live in a state of arrested development, anticipating early deaths. In addition, the term to ice someone
         means "to kill," another reference to the death imagery at poem's end. The boys are not suggesting suicide;
         they expect to be killed by members of society who find them threatening.

   Support Your Analysis
   Analytical interpretations (https://openstax.org/r/Analytical) are built around evidence from the text itself.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                 16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 519

You'll note the quotations in the examples above. Summarize larger ideas in your own language to conserve
space. Paraphrase more specific ideas, also in your own words, and quote directly to feature the author's
diction. See Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions and Writing Process: Integrating Research for more
information about summarizing, paraphrasing, and quoting directly. If you include outside information for
support, comparison, or contrast, document the sources carefully: MLA Documentation and Format.
Use a graphic organizer such as Table 16.2 to gather ideas for drafting.

                Genre             Analysis                                Your Ideas

If you've chosen to analyze       Consider the role of...
poetry,
                                  Word choice (imagery)

                                  Structure of lines and stanzas          Why does the author... ? What is the
                                  Sound (meter, rhyme, rhythm)            effect on meaning, tone, or audience?

                                  Figurative language (simile, metaphor,
                                  personification)

If you've chosen to analyze       Consider the role of...                 Why does the author... ? What is the
drama,                            Characters and dialogue                 effect on meaning, tone, or audience?
                                  Setting
                                  Plot and conflict
                                  Theme
                                  Structure of acts, scenes, and stage
                                  directions

If you've chosen to analyze       Consider the role of...                 Why does the author... ? What is the
fiction or narrative nonfiction,  Characters (narrator or author in       effect on meaning, tone, or audience?
                                  narrative nonfiction)
                                  Setting
                                  Plot (or real events in narrative
                                  nonfiction) and conflict
                                  Theme
                                  Diction
                                  Structure (chronology, flashback or
                                  forward, foreshadowing, chapters)

TABLE 16.2 Ideas for drafting a textual analysis essay
520 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

Drafting: Explore Possible Areas of Analysis for Literary Nonfiction: Approach 2

Although similar to fiction, narrative or literary nonfiction has a basic orientation toward exposition: relating
real events in a creative way rather than inventing fictional events and characters. In reading and analyzing
expository prose, you also may encounter literary language, narrative structure, characters, setting, theme,
and plot development, depending on the type of prose. Therefore, your approach to analyzing nonfiction will
call on many of the same strategies you use to analyze fiction. Two basic differences, however, are that literary
nonfiction may have less dialogue, depending on the genre, and that the author and narrator may be the same.
In other words, no intermediary or artistic filter may exist between the author and the work. The nonfiction
author is assumed to be speaking a truth, which may be serious, comic, controversial, or neutral. Fictional
characters, on the other hand, are creations of an author's mind; they think and speak as they were created to
do.

Planning the Essay

In writing your essay, you will need to present the same kinds of text evidence as you would when analyzing
fiction to give credibility to your claims and to support your thesis. And you'll need to keep in mind the
rhetorical situation--purpose, audience, stance, context, and culture--as well, for it remains the building block
of an effective analysis. As in most academic essays, body paragraphs refer to the thesis through topic
sentences and move consistently toward supporting it before you finally arrive at a convincing conclusion that
has grown out of the analysis. In nonfiction, because you assume you are dealing with a truthful explanation of
facts and views, your task should be to give a new view and understanding of something that already may be
familiar to readers. In writing your analysis, consider the following plan:

· Begin your analysis of nonfiction with an introductory overview in which you include the work's genre,
   title, author, and publication date.

· Identify the literary point of view, if relevant: first person--I or plural we--or third-person--he, she, or they.
· Continue with a brief summary of the work, and place it in context: the work's social, historical, and

   cultural background will help readers follow your points about its theme.
· Present your thesis near the end of the introduction. It should be argumentative, in an academic sense, so

   that you can "prove" your points.
· Support your thesis with well-elaborated body paragraphs, as you do with all thesis-based writing. Include

   paraphrases, summaries, and quotations from the text (and outside sources, if you do research for the
   assignment). Body paragraphs support the topic sentences, which in turn support the thesis.
· Conclude by restating your thesis (using different words and an appropriate transition). Add a general
   statement about the work and its significance or, if applicable, its relation to culture, history, current
   events, art, or anything else outside it.

Use the applicable suggestions in Table 16.3 in planning your essay (https://openstax.org/r/planning):

Introduction                                                      Title

                                                   Title(s), author(s), publication date(s), historical context, summary,
                                                   thesis

Body paragraphs (as many as needed;                Transition Claims and supporting evidence: your ideas, paraphrases
                minimum of 3)                      and/or quotations from text

Counterclaim (if any)                              Addressing opposing or negative ideas

Conclusion                                         Restatement of thesis, broader generalization

TABLE 16.3 Literary nonfiction planner

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                 16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 521

Literary Nonfiction Model
A frequent theme in literary nonfiction is the examination of alternative ways of living, often solitary and away
from society, and finding truth in individualism and self-sufficiency. Although most people live in social
groups and willingly accept the identity and security that communities offer, dropping out and going it alone
have long been a part of emotional as well as physical life for some.
You have the option to analyze the nonfiction accounts of writers exploring solitary human behavior in
American life. If you select Another Lens 2, you will read an excerpt from the story of Chris McCandless
(1968-c. 1992), who chose a brief and uncomfortable solitary existence in Alaska. Or you can read the
following section dealing with the works of Henry David Thoreau, the American philosopher and author who
dropped out of society temporarily, largely because of his strong opposition to government policies he believed
to be morally wrong and because of his refusal to conform to social practices and expectations he found
objectionable.
Introduction

FIGURE 16.7 Henry David Thoreau, American naturalist, philosopher, and writer (credit: "Henry David Thoreau -
Restored - greyscale" by Benjamin Maxham [1821-1899]/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
Henry David Thoreau (1817-1862) is best known as a thinker and writer on nature, as reflected in his two
famous works, the highly influential Civil Disobedience (https://openstax.org/r/Civil-Disobedience) (1849) and
Walden; or, Life in the Woods (1854). Both works celebrate individual freedoms: the right to protest against
what one believes is morally or ethically wrong and the choice to live as one believes. In describing his life over
a period of precisely two years, two months, and two days in a 10-by-15-foot cabin he built on Walden Pond, 20
miles northwest of Boston near Concord, Massachusetts, Thoreau wrote:
522 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

                  I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately [carefully, unhurried], to front [confront] only

                  the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die,

                  discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to

                  practise resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow

psublic domain t  of life.                         end s                 end s

         Thoreau's insistence on standing by his principles and on living a simple life by choice are two abiding themes
         in his work. Even before the physical move to Walden, Thoreau had refused to epnady shis poll tax (granting him
         the right to vote) for a number of years because he strongly objected to the government's use of his money to
end pubsulicppdoormtaeinnstlavement and the war with Mexico. He went peacefully to jail as a result, untielnhdeswas bailed out
         (the next day). In "Civil Disobedience," Thoreau advocates for more individual freedom and for individuals to
         defy unjust laws in nonviolent ways. His writings on "passive resistance" inspired the thoughts and actions of
         influential figures such as Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi (1869-1948), American religious and civil rights
         leader Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929-1968), and other leaders of nonviolent liberation movements. In Walden,
         Thoreau describes and advocates for a simple life in which a person breaks with society when they feel the
         need to express their individualism, often based on ideas others do not share.

These themes are the focus of analysis in the following excerpts from an essay by student Alex Jones for a first-
year composition class.

                  The Two Freedoms of Henry David Thoreau by Alex Jones

                  Henry David Thoreau led millions of people throughout the world to think of individual freedom in new ways.
                  During his lifetime he attempted to live free of unjust governmental restraints as well as conventional social
                  expectations. In his 1849 political essay "On the Duty of Civil Disobedience," he makes his strongest case
                  against governmental interference in the lives of citizens. In his 1854 book Walden; or Life in the Woods, he
                  makes the case for actually living free, as he did in his own life, from social conventions and expectations.

Tanhneottitalte clearly identifies Thoreau and sets the expectation that two aspects or definitions of freedom will be                    end annotat
discussed in two different works. Alex Jones wants readers to know that millions of people worldwide figure in
Thoreau's legacy. He gives the examples of "unjust governmental restraints" and "conventional social expectations"
as the parts of social life Thoreau rejected, thus limiting the scope of the analysis and preparing for the body of the
essay.

Jaonneostantotes the titles and publication dates of both works and immediately moves ahead to analyze the two works,
"Civil Disobedience" first. He will show how this political statement leads to the narrative of Walden, the actual story
of a man's life in temporary exile.end annotat

                  Thoreau opens "Civil Disobedience" with his statement "that government is best which governs not at all."

Tanhneoatnaatlysis moves immediately to the first work to be discussed and features the memorable quotation regarding a
government that does not govern. The statement may seem contradictory, but for Thoreau it is a direct statement in
that someone who allows himself to be imprisoned will find freedom by distancing himself from all others to prove
his point.end annotat

                  He argues that a government should allow its people to be as free as possible while providing for their needs
                  without interfering in daily life. In other words, in daily life a person attends to the business of eating, sleeping,
                  and earning a living and not dealing in any noticeable way with an entity called "a government."

Jaonneostartepeats "in daily life" to give a rhythm to his own prose and to emphasize the importance to Thoreau of daily
activities that are simple and meaningful. The word government is repeated for emphasis as the negative subject of
this essay--in literary terms, a powerful and constant antagonist that constrains and disempowers.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
   16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 523

   Because Thoreau did not want his freedom overshadowed by government regulations, he tried to ignore them.

   However, the American government of 1845 would not let him. He was arrested and put in the Concord jail for

   failing to pay his poll tax, a tax he believed unjust because it supported the government's war with Mexico as

   well as the immoral institution of slavery. Instead of protesting his arrest, he celebrated it and explained its

s  meaning by writing "Civil Disobedience," one of the most famous English-languaegnedesssays ever written. In it, he

   argues persuasively, "Under a government which imprisons any unjustly, the true place for a just man is also a

   prisoenn"d(s230). Thus, the idea of passive resistance--and aecncdepsting unjust arrest to make a point--was formed, a
   doctrine that advocated protest against the government by nonviolent means:

               How does it become a man to behave toward this American government today? I answer that he

               cannot without disgrace be associated with it. I cannot for an instant recognize that political
               organization as my government wehnidchs is the slave's government also. (224)

                                                                                          end s
   Jaonneostasttrengthens his own writing by calling the essay one of the most famous works ever written. This is not an

   ordinary technique in textual analysis, but when done for emphasis, it helps the analysis gain power. Using "instead

   of protesting" at the start of his sentence is another example of strong contrast and linkage.end annotat

   For nearly 200 years, Thoreau's formulation of passive resistance has been a part of the human struggle for
   freedom. In fact, it changed the world by inspiring the resistance movements led by Mohandas Gandhi and
   Martin Luther King, Jr.

   Tanhneottoattal effect is to make Jones's analytical essay more important for readers, as Thoreau's writings have indeed  end annotat
   changed the world despite being written humbly as the voice of one man's conscience and isolation in his own
   freedom.

   Thoreau also wanted to be free from the everyday pressures to conform to society's expectations.

   Jaonneostattransitions from the first short work to the different and equally famous nonfiction narrative Walden, moving
   smoothly from one freedom to the next with the transition "also wanted." This second analysis of freedom is the
   second part of the essay's thesis.end annotat

   He believed in doing and possessing only the essential things in life. To demonstrate his case, in 1845, he
   moved to the outskirts of Concord, Massachusetts, and lived by himself for just over two years in a cabin he
   built at Walden Pond. Thoreau wrote Walden to explain the value of living simply, far removed from the
   unnecessary complexity of society: "simplicity, simplicity, simplicity! I say, let your affairs be as two or three,
   and not a hundred or a thousand" (66). At Walden, he lived as much as possible by this statement, building his
   own house and furniture, growing his own food, bartering for simple necessities, and attending to his own
   business rather than seeking employment from others.

   Jaonneostautses textual evidence to support his claim. He summarizes Thoreau's activities at Walden and quotes Thoreau
   as evidence to reinforce the freedom of mind that simple living allows.end annotat
524 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

s                                                   end s  end s
                                             end s           end s

FIGURE 16.8 Setting for Thoreau's cabin at Walden Pond near Concord (credit: "Site of Thoreau's Hut, Concord,
Mass" by Detroit Publishing Company/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      Living at Walden Pond gave Thoreau the chance to formulate many of his ideas about living an unencumbered,
      economical life. At Walden, he lived simply to "front only the essential facts of life" (66) and to center his
      thoughts on "living" instead of on unnecessary details of mere livelihood. He developed survival skills that
      freed him from the constraints of city dwellers whose lives depended upon a web of material things and
      services provided by others. He preferred to "take rank hold on life and spend my day more as animals do"
      (117).

Jaonneostautses the poetic language of high rhetoric directly from Thoreau. The body of the essay gives specific evidence
of how Thoreau ate, built, read, and provided for his needs, cutting away all but the essential man in the two settings
of his life.end annotat

      While living at Walden Pond, Thoreau was free to occupy his time in any way that pleased him, which for him
      meant mostly writing and tending his bean patch. The details of his gardening appear frequently, as he
      concentrated on it during his time there. He wasn't troubled by a boss hounding him with deadlines or a wife
      and children who needed his attention. His neighbors accused him of being selfish and did not understand that
      he sought most of all "to live deliberately" (66), as he felt all people should learn to do.

      Then, as now, most people had more responsibilities than Thoreau had and could not just pack up their
      belongings and go live in the woods--if they could find free woods to live in. Today, people are intrigued to read
      about Thoreau's experiences and are inspired by his thoughts, but few people can actually live or do as he
      suggests. The idea of life without cell phones or Internet seems inconceivable, even if one grows one's own
      food and lives mostly off the grid.

Tanhneonteaxtt-to-last paragraph recognizes what could be a counterclaim: not everyone in contemporary times would
view living alone for two years as a pleasure. Rather, they might see it as a different kind of prison, perhaps even a
dangerous one. Indeed, such deprivation has less appeal these days, and people who do go off by themselves may
be seen to have questionable motives.end annotat

      The theme of exploring how a man lives in or outside governmental control is clear in the choices he must make
      to define himself as a free person. Nevertheless, practical or not, Thoreau's writings about freedom from
      government and society have inspired countless people to reassess how they live their lives. Though unable to
      live as Thoreau advocated, readers everywhere remain inspired by his ideals and his belief in the two freedoms.

Jaonneostactoncludes by emphasizing the strength of Thoreau's ideas--his two freedoms--and the influence they have
had in the world.end annotat

Access for free at openstax.org.
                      16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 525

Review the Essay

After reading Alex Jones's essay, complete the following sentences to review his work:

                   ·  He identifies and summarizes the content by ________.
public domain t·      He describes the form and structure of Thoreau's works when ________.
                      He places Thoreau and his works in context by ________.
                   ·  He clearly states his own theme in reading Thoreau, which is ________.
                   ·  He indicates Thoreau's unusual language at times, such as ________.
                   ·  He gives supporting evidence for his points, such as ________.
                   ·  He includes a visual to ________.
                   ·  He concludes with a balanced and convincing viewpoint by ________.
                   ·

                      end public domain t

FIGURE 16.9 Contemporary replica of Thoreau's cabin and statue of Thoreau (credit: "Walden pond - Thoreau's
house" by Luigi Franchini/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

For Reference: excerpt from Walden (https://openstax.org/r/Civil-Disobedience) by Henry
David Thoreau from "Where I Lived and What I Lived For"

      When first I took up my abode in the woods, that is, began to spend my nights as well as days there, which, by
      accident, was on Independence Day, or the Fourth of July, 1845, my house was not finished for winter, but was
      merely a defense against the rain, without plastering or chimney, the walls being of rough, weather-stained
      boards, with wide chinks, which made it cool at night. The upright white hewn studs and freshly planed door
      and window casings gave it a clean and airy look, especially in the morning, when its timbers were saturated
      with dew, so that I fancied that by noon some sweet gum would exude from them. To my imagination it retained
      throughout the day more or less of this auroral character, reminding me of a certain house on a mountain which
      I had visited the year before. This was an airy and unplastered cabin, fit to entertain a travelling god, and where
      a goddess might trail her garments. The winds which passed over my dwelling were such as sweep over the
      ridges of mountains, bearing the broken strains, or celestial parts only, of terrestrial music....
526 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

public domain t  The only house I had been the owner of before, if I except a boat, was a tent, which I used occasionally when
                 making excursions in the summer, and this is still rolled up in my garret; but the boat, after passing from hand
                 to hand, has gone down the stream of time. With this more substantial shelter about me, I had made some
                 progress toward settling in the world. This frame, so slightly clad, was a sort of crystallization around me, and
                 reacted on the builder. It was suggestive somewhat as a picture in outlines. I did not need to go outdoors to
                 take the air, for the atmosphere within had lost none of its freshness. It was not so much within doors as behind
                 a door where I sat, even in the rainiest weather. The Harivansa [important Sanskrit text] says, "An abode
                 without birds is like a meat without seasoning." Such was not my abode, for I found myself suddenly neighbor
                 to the birds; not by having imprisoned one, but having caged myself near them....

                 For theenfdirsptuwbleicekd,owmhaeinnetver I looked out on the pond it impressed me like a tarn high up on the side of a
                 mountain, its bottom far above the surface of other lakes, and, as the sun arose, I saw it throwing off its nightly
                 clothing of mist, and here and there, by degrees, its soft ripples or itesnsdmpouobtlhicrdeoflmecatiinngt surface was revealed,
                 while the mists, like ghosts, were stealthily withdrawing in evereynddirpeucbtiloicndinotmo athinetwoods, as at the breaking up
                 of some nocturnal conventicle. The very dew seemed to hang upon the trees later into the day than usual, as on
                 the sides of mountains.

                 This small lake was of most value as a neighbor in the intervals of a gentle rain storm in August, when, both air

                 and water being perfectly still, but the sky overcast, mid-afternoon had all the serenity of evening, and the

                 wood-thrush sang around, and was heard from shore to shore. A lake like this is never smoother than at such a

                 time; and the clear portion of the air above it being shallow and darkened by clouds, the water, full of light and

                 reflections, becomes a lower heaven itself so much the more important. From a hill top nearby, where the wood

                 had  been  recently  cut  off,  there  was  a  pleasing  vista  southward   across the  pond,  through  a  wide  indentation  in
                                                                                 end public  domain t

                 the hills which form the shore there, where their opposite sides sloping toward each other suggested a stream

                 flowing out in that direction through a wooded valley, but stream there was none. That way I looked between

                 and over the near green hills to some distant and higher ones in the horizon, tinged with blue. Indeed, by

                 standing on tiptoe I could catch a glimpse of some of the peaks of the still bluer and more distant mountain

                 ranges in the north-west, those true-blue coins from heaven's own mint, and also of some portion of the village.

                 But in other directions, even from this point, I could not see over or beyond the woods which surrounded me. It

                 is well to have some water in your neighborhood, to give buoyancy to and float the earth. One value even of the

                 smallest well is, that when you look into it you see that earth is not continent but insular. This is as important as

                 that it keeps butter cool. When I looked across the pond from this peak toward the Sudbury meadows, which in

                 time of flood I distinguished elevated perhaps by a mirage in their seething valley, like a coin in a basin, all the

                 earth beyond the pond appeared like a thin crust insulated and floated even by this small sheet of interverting

                 water, and I was reminded that this on which I dwelt was but dry land.

                 We must learn to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical aids, but by an infinite expectation of
                 the dawn, which does not forsake us in our soundest sleep. I know of no more encouraging fact than the
                 unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a conscious endeavor. It is something to be able to paint a
                 particular picture, or to carve a statue, and so to make a few objects beautiful; but it is far more glorious to
                 carve and paint the very atmosphere and medium through which we look, which morally we can do. To affect
                 the quality of the day, that is the highest of arts. Every man is tasked to make his life, even in its details, worthy
                 of the contemplation of his most elevated and critical hour. If we refused, or rather used up, such paltry
                 information as we get, the oracles would distinctly inform us how this might be done.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                 16.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Text 527

public domain t  I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I
                 could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to
                 live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practise resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I
                 wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all
                 that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest
                 terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanneenssdopfuibt,liacnddopmuabilnisth its
                 meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in
                 my next excursion. For most men, it appears to me, are in a strange uncertainty about it, whether it is of the
                 devil or of God, and have somewhat hastily concluded that it is the chief end of man here to "glorify God and
                 enjoy him forever."

                 Still we live meanly, like ants; though the fable tells us that we were long ago changed into men; like pygmies
                 we fight with cranes; it is error upon error, and clout upon clout, and our best virtue has for its occasion a
                 superfluous and evitable wretchedness. Our life is frittered away by detail. An honest man has hardly need to
                 ceonudntpmubolrice dthoamnahinistten fingers, or in extreme ceansdepsuhbelimc daoymadadinhtis ten toes, and lump the rest. Simplicity,
                 simplicity, simplicity! I say, let your affairs be as two or three, and not a hundred or a thousand; instead of a
                 million count half a dozen, and keep your accounts on your thumb nail. In the midst of this chopping sea of
                 civilized life, such are the clouds and storms and quicksands and thousand-and-one items to be allowed for,
                 that a man has to live, if he would not founder and go to the bottom and not make his port at all, by dead
                 reckoning, and he must be a great calculator indeed who succeeds. Simplify, simplify. Instead of three meals a
                 day, if it be necessary eat but one; instead of a hundred dishes...

                 Why should we live with such... waste of life? We are determined to be starved before we are hungry. Men say
                 that a stitch in time saves nine, and so they take a thousand stitches to-day to save nine to-morrow.

     Peer Review:

After you have completed your first draft, exchange essays with a partner for peer review. Look at the questions
you answered to address the essay about Thoreau. Then, to provide helpful feedback, answer these questions
about your peer's draft.

1. Does the introduction include the author, title of the work, publication date, historical context, and a brief
      summary?

2. What is your peer's main claim, or thesis? Is it clearly stated? If not, how might your peer clarify it?
3. Is the thesis effectively supported throughout the essay? How does each paragraph support the thesis?

      What evidence does each contain? Has the writer included direct quotations, paraphrases, and summary
      as relevant and convincing support? Is there enough information to sustain the writer's claims? How
      might the author improve their support? In working on this section, go through each body paragraph
      separately for these criteria.
4. Does the analysis address counterclaims? If not, how might the writer include them?
5. Which sentence or sentences restate the thesis? If a restatement is not there, what might the writer
      include?

     Revising:

Once you have feedback from a peer, consider their suggestions. Read all comments, and think carefully before
making changes.

  · Use your discretion. Sometimes writers do not agree with their peers' suggestions; indeed, authors do not
      always revise everything suggested by editors. However, it is important to clarify what might have
      prompted a response from a peer, such as "This seems like more of an unsupported opinion than text-
      based evidence." Here you might consider including a source citation either from the text or from an
      outside resource, or consider further explaining your claim. However, if you think your peer reviewer
   528 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

   misinterpreted or read your claim superficially, do not revise it. At all times, though, maintain ownership.

   It is your paper; you are the ultimate judge of whether the ideas in it represent you and your views. Never

   include someone else's idea in your paper if you do not understand it or believe it. Whether or not you

   decide to revise, be sure to read and consider all suggestions carefully.

s  · Focus on global suggestions first. Global feedback applies to your entire paper. You may have to revise

   your topic or thesis so that your paper meets assigned guidelines or does what it should. It is important to

   revise global feedback first, for these revisions might necessitate changes in content and organization,

   among other things.

   · Complete a close revision. Check your paper to revise for clarity at the sentence level, and double-check

   citations, if you have them, for accuracy and style.

   Student Revision Model

   Below is a paragraph from the first draft of Gwyn Garrison's paper. It was reviewed by a peer, who made the

   suggestions  indicated.  First,   read  the draft.  Next,  read  the  reviewer's  suggestions  and  consider  whether  you
                                           end s

   would accept or reject each one. Then, read the paragraph as it appears in the final version. After each

   suggestion, consider why you think Gwyn Garrison accepted or rejected the reviewer's comment.

   Original Draft

   When Calixta acts outside of societal norms, she discovers the freedom of self-expression and passion.
   Chopin's diction evokes a spiritual transcendence that allows Calixta to exist momentarily outside social norms
   that exist only in the physical plane of existence: "when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon at the very
   borderland of life's mystery." The affair becomes a vehicle that allows Calixta to get to a place of true self-
   expression. The storm, an aspect of nature or the natural world, acts as the catalyst in Calixta's natural self-
   realization of womanhood. The storm breaks externally and internally for Calixta. Chopin's depiction of Calixta's
   sexual liberation and fulfillment outside of her marriage is an early step in the fight to bridge the gap between
   women's bodies and their sociopolitical lives. By presenting female sexuality in a way that is enlightening rather
   than degrading, Chopin helps destigmatize labels such as whore, which have been used to shame women for
   acting outside of traditional gender expectations.

   Peer Reviewer's Comments

   1. A transition would help link this paragraph with the previous one.
   2. At the beginning of the paragraph, after the first sentence, add a short description or explanation of what is

         happening in the scene.
   3. The quotation from the text doesn't help explain your claim. Anyway, you left out a word.
   4. Perhaps you could add a quotation about the storm.
   5. Can you clarify the relationship between the storm and Calixta's self-realization?

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                     16.6 · Editing Focus: Literary Works Live in the Present 529

   Final Version

   When Calixta acts outside of societal norms, however, she discovers the freedom of self-expression and

   passion. All of the parts of her womanhood that have no place in the society in which she lives have been

   repressed until this one moment. In this scene, Chopin takes possession of the term whore and redefines

s  Calixta's behavior as a transformative awakening. Chopin's diction evokes a spiritual transcendence that

   allows Calixta to exist momentarily outside social norms that exist only in the physical plane of existence:

   "when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon together at the very borderland of life's mystery." The affair

   becomes a vehicle that allows Calixta to get to a place of true self-expression. The storm, an aspect of nature or

   the natural world, acts as the catalyst in Calixta's natural self-realization of womanhood. As the storm breaks

   externally, it also breaks internally for Calixta. Chopin's depiction of Calixta's sexual liberation and fulfillment

   outside of her marriage is an early step in the fight to bridge the gap between women's bodies and their

   sociopolitical lives. By presenting female sexuality in a way that is enlightening rather than degrading, Chopin

   helps destigmatize labels such as whore, which have been used to shame women for acting outside of

   traditional gender expectations.

   16.6 Editing Focus: Literary Works Live in the Present

                            end s
   LEARNING OUTCOMES
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:

     · Apply methods commonly used for analysis and interpretation in writing.
     · Demonstrate competent use of the literary present tense in textual analysis.

   Although some texts may have been written years ago, they live in the present. This expression means that
   when you analyze a literary text such as a story, play, poem, or novel, you use a form of the present tense in
   your discussion. Narration in the story may be in the past tense--the narrator tells the story as though it has
   already happened--but your discussion of the literary work is done in the present tense. Characters do this or
   say that. The leaves fall or the wind is howling, even though in the text, the leaves fell and the wind was
   howling. Your discussion nevertheless remains in the present tense. Also, when discussing the author in
   relation to the literary text, use the present tense, even if the author is no longer living or wrote the text in the
   past. Look at these examples:

   Incorrect: The narrator stated that the time is now.
   Correct: The narrator states that the time is now.
   Incorrect: Kate Chopin seemed to sympathize with Calixta.
   Correct: Kate Chopin seems to sympathize with Calixta.
   Incorrect: At the end, Clarisse was happy to remain ignorant about her husband and Calixta.
   Correct: At the end, Clarisse is happy to remain ignorant about her husband and Calixta.

   Use the Literary Present Tense with Consistency

   Although the present tense is used in literary discussions and references to literary texts, some instances will
   occur in which you have to distinguish between times of events. Thus, using the present tense may not apply to
   all actions within a text. The characters within a text often have done something, or something has happened,
   in the past--before the action of the story. In such cases, refer to these past actions in the past tense. Also, use
   the past tense when referring to the author and events in the author's life that do not relate directly to the text.
   See the examples below:

   Incorrect: Kate Chopin is born in 1850.
   Correct: Kate Chopin was born in 1850.
   Incorrect: Alcée reminds Calixta of what happens in Assumption years ago.
   Incorrect: Alcée reminded Calixta of what happened in Assumption years ago.
   Correct: Alcée reminds Calixta of what happened in Assumption years ago.
530 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

When revising and editing your textual analysis, review it for consistency and clarity in literary present tense
when you discuss the text, events within the text, and the author's relationship to it. Use the past tense,
however, when dealing with information outside the text, such as historical context or events related to the
author's life. Be sure to distinguish between past and present events by using the correct tense. For more about
the literary present tense, see Verbs.

16.7 Evaluation: Self-Directed Assessment

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply formats and design features for different kinds of texts.
  · Assess your writing for language, clarity, coherence, and rhetorical choices, and by using a rubric.

Many writers find it difficult to assess their own work. Therefore, they rely on insights from someone outside of
the process. While such insights may be useful in helping writers find their way, writers can review their own
work either before someone else does or when outside reviewers are unavailable.

As a student writer, you might choose to read your work aloud or print the work in hard copy to read in a
different medium. Close to the end of the process is a good time to conduct a self-directed assessment to note
whether the points made, the organization, the tone, and the style of the work are helping you achieve goals for
the project, whether personal, professional, or academic. You might think of this process as a type of reverse
outlining, as you go back to the basic structure of your writing. Based on your rubric or evaluative criteria,
create points to check on your own.

Rubric

      Score  Critical Language                     Clarity and Coherence                         Rhetorical Choices
                 Awareness
5
Skillful     The text always adheres to            All paragraphs in the paper reflect its       The tone and
             the "Editing Focus" of this           purpose, stated in the thesis, and allow for  language choices are
             chapter: using the literary           a thorough analysis of a literary work. The   well suited to the
             present tense as discussed            overall organization is clear, and ideas are  audience and
             in Section 16.6. The text             connected with effective transitions.         purpose. The work
             also shows ample                      Paragraphs have topic sentences and           reflects thought,
             evidence of the writer's              proceed logically from them to support the    fairness, general
             intent to consciously meet            thesis.                                       comprehension, and
             or challenge conventional                                                           keen awareness of
             expectations in rhetorically                                                        the rhetorical
             effective ways.                                                                     situation.

TABLE 16.4

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                           16.7 · Evaluation: Self-Directed Assessment 531

Score         Critical Language            Clarity and Coherence                          Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

4             The text usually adheres to  Most paragraphs in the paper reflect its       The tone and
Accomplished  the "Editing Focus" of this  purpose, stated in the thesis, and allow for   language choices are
              chapter: using the literary  a strong analysis of a literary work. The      usually well suited to
              present tense as discussed   overall organization is clear, and most        the audience and
              in Section 16.6. The text    ideas are connected with transitions. Most     purpose. The work
              also shows some evidence     paragraphs have topic sentences and            reflects thought,
              of the writer's intent to    proceed logically from them to support the     fairness,
              meet or challenge            thesis.                                        comprehension, and
              conventional expectations                                                   reasonable
              in rhetorically effective                                                   awareness of the
              ways.                                                                       rhetorical situation.

3             The text generally adheres   Some paragraphs in the paper reflect its       The tone and
Capable       to the "Editing Focus" of    purpose, which may be stated in the            language choices are
              this chapter: using the      thesis, and may not provide a strong focus     somewhat suited to
              literary present tense as    for analysis of a literary work. The overall   the audience and
              discussed in Section 16.6.   organization is discernible, and some          purpose. The work
              The text also shows limited  ideas are connected with transitions. Most     reflects some
              evidence of the writer's     paragraphs have topic sentences but may        thought, fairness,
              intent to meet or challenge  not proceed logically from them to support     comprehension, and
              conventional expectations    the thesis.                                    reasonable
              in rhetorically effective                                                   awareness of the
              ways.                                                                       rhetorical situation

2             The text occasionally        Some paragraphs in the paper reflect its       Lapses in tone and
Developing    adheres to the "Editing      purpose, which may or may not be stated        language choices
              Focus" of this chapter:      in the thesis. The thesis provides minimal     make the writing
              using the literary present   focus for analysis of a literary work. Other   unsuited to the
              tense as discussed in        paragraphs are rambling, unfocused, and        audience and
              Section 16.6. The text also  out of logical order. There is little overall  purpose. The work
              shows emerging evidence      organization and little use of effective       reflects little thought,
              of the writer's intent to    transitions. Most paragraphs lack topic        some unfairness,
              meet or challenge            sentences or have more than one.               questionable
              conventional expectations                                                   comprehension, and
              in rhetorically effective                                                   minimal awareness of
              ways.                                                                       the rhetorical
                                                                                          situation.

TABLE 16.4
532 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

       Score  Critical Language                    Clarity and Coherence                          Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness
 1
 Beginning    The text does not adhere             Few, if any, paragraphs in the paper reflect   Frequent lapses in
              to the "Editing Focus" of            its purpose, which may or may not be           tone and language
TABLE 16.4    this chapter: using the              stated in the thesis. The thesis provides      choices make the
              literary present tense as            little or no focus for analysis of a literary  writing unsuited to
              discussed in Section 16.6.           work. Other paragraphs are rambling,           the audience and
              The text also shows little           unfocused, and out of logical order. There     purpose. The work
              to no evidence of the                is little or no obvious organization and       reflects little or no
              writer's intent to meet or           little or no use of effective transitions.     thought, fairness,
              challenge conventional               Most or all paragraphs lack topic              accurate
              expectations in rhetorically         sentences, have more than one, or are          comprehension, or
              effective ways.                      insufficiently developed.                      awareness of the
                                                                                                  rhetorical situation.

16.8 Spotlight on ... Humanities

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe various disciplines in the humanities.
  · Evaluate employment opportunities for graduates with humanities degrees.

Although all college instructors value good writing, each area of study has its own set of criteria by which
writing is judged. For instance, the loose informal style and speculative content of a reflective essay might be
appropriate for an English class but inappropriate for an anthropology class in which the instructor would
expect the more formal structures established in that subject area.

As a discipline, the humanities include subjects that focus on human culture and values. Some subjects are
literature, languages, classics, art history, film, musicology, philosophy, religion, and often history, which
sometimes is placed in the social sciences. The humanities are the foundation of liberal arts and, as such,
include a wide variety of writing genres. Research reports, biographies, literary analyses, ethnographies,
quantitative reports, proposals, books, journal articles, poetry, film scripts, novels, stories, technical writing,
and professional documents are forms of writing particular to the humanities.

As a rule, knowledge in the humanities focuses on texts and on individual ideas, speculations, insights, and
imaginative connections. Interpretation in the humanities is thus relatively subjective. Accordingly, much of
the writing and research in the humanities is characterized by personal involvement, lively language, and
speculative or open-ended conclusions.

The field of English includes the study of not only literature but of literary theory and history, and not only
composition but creative and technical writing. In addition, English departments often include linguistics,
journalism, folklore, women's studies, cultural or ethnic studies, and film. In other words, within even one
discipline, you might be asked to write several distinct types of papers: personal experience essays for a
composition course, analyses for a literature course, abstracts or case studies for a linguistics course,
procedural texts for a technical writing course, and short stories for a creative writing course. Consequently,
any observations about the different kinds of knowledge and the differing conventions for writing about them
are only generalizations. The more carefully you study any one discipline, the more complex it becomes, and
the harder it is to make a generalization that does not have numerous explanations.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                              16.8 · Spotlight on ... Humanities 533

Careers in the Humanities

Because humanities subjects emphasize critical thinking and clear writing, the skills humanities students
obtain are valued in many fields other than the most obvious ones. Humanities majors have gone on to careers
in law, medicine (humanities plus pre-med), advertising, journalism, TV and film writing and production,
public relations, graphic design, teaching, technical and medical/scientific writing, human resources, and
many others. For more information about career opportunities for humanities students, see these sites:

  · Humanities and Social Sciences Careers (https://openstax.org/r/Humanities)
  · Top 10 Highest Paying Jobs for Liberal Arts Majors (https://openstax.org/r/Top-10-Highest)
  · 25 Great Jobs for Humanities Majors (https://openstax.org/r/Great-Jobs)

Students' Stories

Despite strong interest in the humanities--especially in reading, writing, and language--some students avoid
humanities subjects as majors because they think they won't find jobs after graduation. Such fear, however, is
unwarranted, as many organizations actively seek students who major in languages or in other humanities
disciplines. These graduates are valued for their ability to interpret and analyze text and to write clear, concise,
and compelling prose. Moreover, employers realize that students who concentrate on studying
people--whether real or fictional--develop insights into human behavior and understanding of how to deal
with it. For example, these students who graduated with degrees in humanities subjects have found rewarding
work in humanities-related and business fields.

Gabriela Torres majored in film studies, with a minor in theater. Although more interested in the technical
aspects of both, she took creative writing classes and enjoyed performing in several college productions. Soon
after graduation, Gabriela joined the human resources (HR) department of midsized corporation. Her job is to
train new hires and conduct in-service workshops for current employees. Recently her role has expanded to
writing, producing, and acting in training videos in which she uses the skills she learned in college--and more.

Derrek Wilson became an international studies major after he received a summer stipend to study in Europe.
After only a few weeks there and trips to historic sites, Derrek says he got "hooked on history." The broad focus
of his interdisciplinary major allowed him to take courses in humanities subjects: history, geography, religion,
archaeology, and world literature. He had studied Spanish in high school and continued in college. Derrek
graduated last year and now works as an international program coordinator for his university. Responsible for
logistics of foreign students coming to the United States and for American students going abroad, he oversees
housing accommodations, student visas, and travel arrangements. He loves his job and the time he gets to
spend in different countries, but he plans to go to law school in a few years--with, you guessed it, a specialty in
international and immigration law.

Despite his parents' warnings that he'd never find a good job, Nick Marelli majored in English. He put his
literary interests to work in college as managing editor of the literary magazine and arts editor of the
newspaper. When he graduated, he applied, on a whim (and to please his parents), for a management trainee
position at a large insurance company. Thinking he would get nowhere without business courses, he was
surprised when a recruiter called him for an interview. The interviewer then told him that the company
actively seeks English majors because they know how to read carefully, digest and summarize information,
think critically, and write clearly, concisely, and correctly. Nick says, "I was surprised when I heard someone
other than an English teacher say that. I really like my work, where I'm learning a lot on the spot rather than in
a classroom."

Thinking, Writing, and Publishing

Critical writing requires critical thinking. When an individual or collaborative team articulates their
perspective, they provide new knowledge for audiences. In essence, all texts have potential to create new
knowledge. A writer of any type of text has the potential to enter a conversation and show audiences new ways
534 16 · Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read

       to look at a subject.
       Learning how to write analytically and critically offers a skill set for crafting various genres, such as
       information reports, proposals, cost/benefit analyses, instructions, and so on. After you have completed your
       analysis for this chapter, consider submitting it to an open-access academic journal that highlights the work of
       undergraduate students in the humanities, such as these:
       Undergraduate Journal of Humanistic Studies (https://openstax.org/r/Undergraduate)

     16.9 Portfolio: The Academic and the Personal

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Reflect on the development of composing processes and how those processes affect your work.
         · Identify your strengths in writing and consider how to continue to develop your writing process.

      Reflective Writing: Genres of Reflective Writing

       Reflective writing is not limited to a single genre. Because it is highly personal, it is most frequent in, but
       certainly not limited to, diaries, journals, autobiographies, and memoirs. One common way that it appears is in
       letters or essays that writers craft to reflect on, or think about, their writing process for a particular text they
       have written. Consider the following suggestions when you write reflectively about this assignment for your
       ongoing portfolio compilation:

         · Write this letter, essay, or response as you would to a friend--be kind to yourself and your process, but be
             realistic as well.

         · Highlight what you think are your present capabilities and what you would like to strengthen.
         · Specifically discuss and illustrate--by giving specific examples--how well you have met the assignment

             objectives listed under Evaluation: Self-Directed Assessment.
       To guide your portfolio reflection, answer these questions:

         · What did you learn about yourself and/or the writing process in the course of writing your textual analysis?
         · What did you learn about the topic and/or about writing in general?
         · Which part of the writing process was most beneficial to you: drafting, peer review, conferences, or

             something else?
         · How successfully did you address the assignment guidelines?
         · How might you change your writing process to better support your growth as a writer--for example, time

             management, change in drafting methods, more focus on rubric, extended research, more focus on the
             final draft before submission?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                      16 · Further Reading 535

Further Reading

George, Diana. "Changing the Face of Poverty: Nonprofits and the Problem of Representation." Popular
   Literacy: Studies in Cultural Practices and Poetics, edited by John Trimbur, University of Pittsburgh Press,
    2001.

Gill, Isabelle. "Feminist Figures or Damsels in Distress? The Media's Gendered Misrepresentation of Disney
   Princesses." Young Scholars in Writing, vol. 13, 2016, youngscholarsinwriting.org/index.php/ysiw/article/
    view/230/230.

"Rhetorical Analysis of `Fish Cheeks' by Amy Tan." Bartleby Research. www.bartleby.com/essay/Rhetorical-
    Analysis-Of-Fish-Cheeks-PY2JSYU9ZW6

Safire, William. "A Spirit Reborn." New York Times, 9 Sept. 2002, www.nytimes.com/2002/09/09/opinion/a-
    spirit-reborn.html.

Smith, Steven B. "Empowering Word." New York Times, 2 July 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/07/06/books/
    review/our-declaration-by-danielle-allen.html

Works Cited

Chopin, Kate. "The Storm." 1898. American Literature.com, 2018, americanliterature.com/author/kate-
    chopin/short-story/the-storm.

hooks, bell. Rapture Remembered: The Writer at Work. Holt Paperbacks, 1999.

Krakauer, Jon. Into the Wild. Anchor Books, 1997.

Onori, P. J. "In Defense of Hard: When Easier Isn't Better." Lifehacker, 12 May 2011, lifehacker.com/5800882/
    in-defense-of-hard-why-easy-isnt-always-the-best-answer. Accessed 12 Jan. 2019.

Smitherman, Geneva, and Victor Villanueva, editors. Language Diversity in the Classroom: From Intention to
   Practice. Southern Illinois UP, 2003.

"Students' Right to Their Own Language." College Composition and Communication, vol. 25, 1974,
    www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Groups/CCCC/NewSRTOL.pdf.

Thoreau, Henry David. Walden and "On the Duty of Civil Disobedience." 1854; 1894. E-book, Project
   Gutenberg, 1995, www.gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm.

Wallace, David L. "Alternative Rhetoric and Morality: Writing from the Margins." College Composition and
   Communication, vol. 61, no. 2, 2009, pp. 18-39. http://www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Resources/Journals/
    CCC/0612-dec09/CCC0612Alternative.pdf.
536 16 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Image Analysis: What You See                                                      17

FIGURE 17.1 On the left is a carved medallion, found at Amaravati in a Buddhist shrine that dates from the later
years BCE to the early CE. On the right, the individual images in the carving are outlined and numbered, explaining
the narrative sequence and showing the audience how to "read" the medallion. Together, the two serve as an early
example of visual rhetoric. (credit: "Chaddanta Jataja Amaravati" by Vidya Dehejia/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

17.1  "Reading" Images
17.2  Image Trailblazer: Sara Ludy
17.3  Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric
17.4  Annotated Student Sample: "Hints of the Homoerotic" by Leo Davis
17.5  Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images
17.6  Editing Focus: Descriptive Diction
17.7  Evaluation: Relationship Between Analysis and Image
17.8  Spotlight on ... Video and Film
17.9  Portfolio: Interplay Between Text and Image

INTRODUCTION Many people spend a substantial portion of their time watching and assessing
images--including photographs, memes, graphs, and videos--via television, streaming services, and social
media platforms. Even the college curriculum is as much visual as it is verbal, including as it does Internet
research, computer graphics, and PowerPoint presentations. These forms of media might be relatively new,
but people have been creating and consuming images for millennia, as you can see in Figure 17.1. An
538 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       important part of human development consists of making images, enjoying them, and talking about them.
       Formerly, visual texts were created exclusively by painters, photographers, and others generally designated as
       artists. Today, given the proliferation of technologies that enable the easy capture and manipulation of images,
       such visual texts are created by a multitude of authors. In this chapter, terms for these image creators--artist,
       author, composer, creator--are used interchangeably.
       Chapter 17 examines the elements of visual literacy and analysis most likely to complement the textual
       literacy emphasized in first-year writing classes and addressed in Print or Textual Analysis: What You Read. A
       critical understanding of visual texts is key to helping you both as a consumer of the frequent images you
       encounter in reading and viewing and as a producer who incorporates images into your own writing, as
       addressed in Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image. Overall, this
       chapter provides a solid basis for understanding visual rhetoric and communicating about it in various
       situations. After study and practice, you will be able to do so while drawing on your own cultural context,
       background, and experience and considering your audience, purpose, and rhetorical context.

     17.1 "Reading" Images

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Define the key concepts and elements of visual rhetoric.
         · Interpret visual information using the language of visual rhetoric.
         · Interpret images differently based on cultural considerations.
         · Choose digital and visual media according to the rhetorical situation and cultural context when writing for

             different audiences.
         · Make informed decisions about intellectual property issues regarding images.
       To compose an effective essay or a strong visual, a creator works with a number of elements that are
       remarkably similar from one medium to the other. Both stories and pictures contain information presented by
       a creator who has a particular point of view and arranges the work in two-dimensional space. The information
       is likely to be open to multiple interpret, which may or may not be justified by the text. Although the sharing of
       personal opinions and beliefs has value, the focus here is on interpreting or analyzing texts in combination
       with your personal experiences.

      Interpreting Visual Information

       Both words and pictures convey information, but each does so in different ways that require interpretation.
       Interpretation is the sense a person makes of a piece of communication--textual, oral, or visual. It includes
       personal experience, the context in which the communication is made, and other rhetorical elements. (See
       Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric for a list of key terms related to visual elements
       and rhetoric.) By the time readers get to college, they have internalized strategies to help them critically
       understand a variety of written texts.
       Images present a different set of challenges for critical readers. For example, in a photograph or drawing,
       information is presented simultaneously, so viewers can start or stop anywhere they like. Because visual
       information is presented in this way, its general meaning may be apparent at a glance, while more nuanced or
       complicated meanings may take longer to figure out and likely will vary from one viewer to another.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                         17.1 · "Reading" Images 539

      FIGURE 17.2 Naked Raygun performance, 2007 (credit: "Naked Raygun" by Greg Dunlap/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Some images, however, do not really lend themselves to interpretation. Before trying to engage in rhetorical
discourse about an image, be sure it contributes something of value. For example, Figure 17.2 shows a punk
rock concert featuring the band Naked Raygun with several concertgoers in the foreground. Such pictures are
common forms of memorabilia that serve an archival function. The features common to visual rhetoric--point
of view, arrangement, color, and symbol--do not inspire much in the way of discussion in this particular image.
Parts are blurry, some of the figures are obscure, and the picture's purpose is unclear. Therefore, any analysis
of the image may be guided more by personal opinion than by critical thinking. Such images are not the focus
of this chapter.

         FIGURE 17.3 (credit: "DSCF1343" by K. Kendall, Portland, OR, USA/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
Figure 17.3, in contrast, depicts not merely a moment in time for the sake of memory, although it certainly
does that. It contains a central, dominant figure. The color red is bold and centers the figure, giving the image
540 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       weight. It also conveys several political messages, both obvious and nuanced. The woman in the picture is
       wearing a mask, as people were either asked or mandated to do during the COVID-19 pandemic. The slogan on
       her mask reads "I can't breathe," words that were made infamous after Eric Garner (1970-2014) died as the
       result of an illegal chokehold inflicted by a New York City police officer during arrest. These words were
       repeated by George Floyd (1973-2020) in an 8-minute, 46-second video showing his murder by a Minnesota
       police officer who knelt on Floyd's neck. The phrase became one of several slogans of the Black Lives Matter
       (BLM) movement, symbolizing the struggle that people of color endure when living in an implicitly and
       explicitly racist culture. Breathing--like blood--is fundamental, essential. Without breath, there is no life.
       Thus, this slogan draws attention to the fact that people of color may be brutalized for no reason other than
       their existence.

       Placing the slogan on a mask is a design choice likely to provoke those who have argued against mandated
       mask wearing as an assault on personal liberty and who have proclaimed they could not breathe while wearing
       masks. Juxtaposition, or placing contrasting elements close together, is a technique that image creators often
       use for a variety of purposes: humor, irony, sarcasm, or--as in this case--disgust or outrage. The juxtaposition
       of the mask with a slogan referencing literal asphyxiation emphasizes the wearer's view that state violence
       against people of color is a more serious threat to her existence than a mask. Thus, the image is open to
       multiple interpretations.

       Thinking Critically

       To think critically about visual information, first identify the objects, facts, processes, or symbols portrayed in
       the image. Taking all the information together, ask whether there is a main or unifying idea. Is the meaning
       open to multiple interpretations? Is it suggested but not stated? Is it clear and unambiguous? Are there
       multiple levels of meaning, both stated and unstated? When you view an image, pausing to answer such
       questions will sharpen your critical faculties, increase your understanding of the visual information you
       encounter, and help you use images more meaningfully in texts you create.

      Visual Rhetoric

       Written texts rely on strategies such as thesis statements, topic sentences, paragraphing, tone, and sentence
       structure to communicate their message to their audience. Images rely on different strategies, including point
       of view, arrangement, color, and symbol. When writing about images or including them in your writing,
       think critically about the visual strategies they use and the effect they will have on your audience.

       Using these techniques may or may not make you a proficient artist or creator of images. However, familiarity
       with the technical language of the visual arts will certainly enable you to describe what you observe as you
       build the evidence that allows you to interpret an image, reflect on it, analyze it, and make persuasive
       arguments about it.

       Point of View

       In written texts, point of view refers to the "person" from whose vantage point the information is delivered,
       either a character in the story or a narrator outside the story. However, in photographs, drawings, and
       paintings, point of view refers to the place from which the image creator looks at the subject--where the
       photographer places their camera or the artist their easel.

       Photographs that haven't been manipulated in a darkroom or digitally by a computer only reproduce the
       subject in front of the camera, as it exists in the moment the shutter opens and closes. They do not show
       anything to the left or right, above or below, or what comes before or after. A camera aimed to the east omits
       information from the north, west, and south. In other words, any photograph is the result of placing a camera
       in a certain location, at a certain height and distance, at a specific time of day and using a particular lens, film,
       and perhaps a filter. All of these decisions about where, when, and how to place the camera create the visual
       point of view.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                         17.1 · "Reading" Images 541

You can find good examples of these kinds of limited truths in real-estate advertisements featuring
photographs of houses for sale. The photograph might not reveal a landfill next door or a factory across the
street--though you might infer such limitations from a low selling price or confirm them by driving past the
house.

                        FIGURE 17.4 (credit: "Kodak Digital Waterfall" by Nan Palmero/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
The creator of Figure 17.4 chooses to highlight the digital waterfall with its seductive lighting and colors.
Meanwhile, the people interacting with the computer are barely visible, standing off to the side, some nearly
out of the frame. The silhouetted profiles and darkened faces lack identifying details. These features are
emphasized by the blurred people in the background. These figures, too, are unidentifiable and are looking out
of the frame, uninterested. The effect is to imply that the waterfall and its computer interface dominate human
interaction and possibly even human existence.
To think critically about point of view, answer the following questions:

  · From what place or stance does the image creator view the subject?
  · What effect does this particular point of view have on the way viewers may think or feel about the subject?
  · What would happen if the vantage point were elsewhere--above or below, left or right?
  · What would change in the image if the point of view were changed?
Arrangement
In addition to point of view, artists use arrangement to signal an image's significance to the reader. The term
arrangement in visual texts might be compared to terms such as order, organization, and structure in verbal
texts, though the differences are substantial. While writers arrange, or put together, a story, essay, or poem to
take place over time--that is, the time readers need to follow the text, line by line, through a number of
pages--image creators arrange pictures in the two-dimensional space of their viewfinder, paper, or canvas to
invite viewers to read in space rather than time. This difference is also evident in sculpture and other three-
dimensional works, which require viewers to move around them to read them spatially. In visual texts, then,
arrangement refers to the ways in which the various parts of a picture come together to present a single
coherent experience for the viewer.
In contrast to static images, which are read spatially, videos and some types of multimodal texts--those
incorporating more than one genre, discipline, or literacy (for example, GIFs that incorporate pictures or
videos with language)--combine elements of both time and space. That is, they invite viewers to examine an
image in motion that changes over time. Video creators often mimic linear time by telling a story, or they
542 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       repeat key images to be interpreted differently after being seen in various contexts within the video.
       One element to examine is the use of pattern--predictable, repeated elements within the visual field that the
       eye notices and seems attracted to. Just as sonnets, sestinas, and haiku follow patterns of lines, so do visual
       compositions. But in these, patterns are created by light and color rather than words. Documentary and
       commercial photographers often use visual patterns to lead viewers to an intended meaning. Patterns are
       especially prominent in street art, where the elements of surrounding architecture and infrastructure interact
       with the work, as shown in Figure 17.5.

       FIGURE 17.5 Gaza Strip mural in Prague, Czech Republic, by Blu (credit: "Gaza Strip" by Tom Hughes-Croucher/
       flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Many patterns are suggested by mathematics. For example, the Möbius strip is both a mathematical construct
       and a visual enigma. It has one side and one boundary curve. It looks like a spiral, but it does not intersect
       itself. Thus, it gives the impression of being infinite. In Figure 17.5, the artist capitalizes on these features of
       the Möbius strip, using it to depict the seemingly endless cycle of destruction (green tanks) and reconstruction
       (yellow steamrollers) in one of the world's most contested pieces of real estate: the Gaza Strip.
       Ownership and control of the Gaza Strip are disputed. Approximately two million people live there, many in
       refugee camps. Since the mid-20th century, the region has been fought over by Israel, Egypt, and Palestinian
       Arabs. As you contemplate the mural, think about the way its creator uses pattern and repetition to convey
       various ideas and emotions. The following questions may help:

         · Which elements within the mural are repeated?
         · Where is its center of gravity or weight?
         · Where do patterns of light/dark, large/small, and color lead the eye?
         · How do pattern and balance contribute to meaning in a two-dimensional image?
         · What does the arrangement suggest about the meaning of the image?
       Color and Symbol
       Pattern and arrangement are controlled by the image creator and intended to guide the viewer. Color and
       symbol allow the viewer greater latitude in interpreting the image, in part because particular colors suggest
       specific moods. Think about your personal reactions to different colors. What color might you select to paint
       your bedroom? What is your favorite color for, say, clothing or cars? While these may differ according to
       personal preference, traditional symbolic values are attached to different colors in literature and art. Why, for
       instance, does red often symbolize anger or war on the one hand and romance or passion on the other? Why
       does black often suggest danger or death? And why does white often stand for innocence or purity? Are the

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                         17.1 · "Reading" Images 543

reasons for these associations arbitrary, cultural, or logical?

Particular colors also suggest or reinforce social and political ideas. What, for example, is suggested by adding
a red, white, and blue American flag to a magazine advertisement for an American automobile, political poster,
or bumper sticker? What is the meaning of a yellow ribbon tied to a tree in front of a house or an image of a
yellow ribbon sticker attached to the tailgate of a pickup truck? By themselves, colors do not specify political
positions, arguments, or ideas, but used in conjunction with specific words or forms--a flag or ribbon, for
example--the emotional power of color can be influential.

Color associations globally are complicated and highly nuanced. The following overview is brief and simplified,
to be considered merely as an introduction or starting point for your research and investigations into
individual artistic expressions. When you interpret an artist's use of color, one place to start is with the hues
found in the natural world. Because blood is red, the color is often associated with life, heat, and passion.
Yellow and green appear with the new growth of spring, so these colors often symbolize new beginnings,
freshness, and hope. Both the sea and the sky are blue. Although these elements can be turbulent, many
people find peace and tranquility as they reflect on them, and thus they are often associated with these
emotions.

Regardless of colors' natural associations, people from around the world understand colors differently. In
China, for example, red is a celebratory color associated with holidays, feasts, and the giving of gifts, whereas
in some parts of Africa the color may symbolize the sacrifice necessitated by the fight for independence. In the
Western world, white can represent purity or innocence and is often worn by young women at their weddings.
However, in parts of Asia, white is a color of mourning.

The colors mentioned so far are mostly primary colors: red, yellow, and blue. The secondary colors--orange,
green, and purple--carry more complex meanings. Both orange and the bright shade of green called neon or
chartreuse are easy to see in all light conditions. Therefore, they are often used for safety purposes, on caution
signs or uniforms of emergency workers. The color orange is associated with the robes of Buddhist monks,
thus representing in Buddhist cultures that which is holy, whereas in the Netherlands, orange is the color of
the royal family and used for patriotic purposes.

In addition to connotations of spring, the color green is also associated with Islam. In the Christian tradition,
yellow and gold are colors associated with riches and abundance. Holiness is also associated with the color
blue in Egyptian, Hindu, and Christian cultures (in which blue has other associations as well). Because purple
has traditionally been a difficult color to manufacture, its rarity meant that only the very wealthy, often nobility
or royalty, could afford to wear it--hence its association with royals and even gods. However, some cultures,
such as Thai, Brazilian, and Italian cultures, associate purple with bad luck or death. Again, this overview of
colors' different interpretations and associations is not intended as a guide for interpreting color in a visual
image. Instead, consider all of the different ways in which color can be understood, some ways that the artist
might intend for color to be interpreted, and the associations that colors have for you when you view a visual or
digital image.

In this chapter, you have begun learning about how to interpret visual information through the lens of rhetoric.
Color and its related symbolism help viewers interpret images.
544 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       FIGURE 17.6 State flag of Mississippi (https://openstax.org/r/State-flag), 1894-2020. This is the 1894 version,
       without the white stripe added in 1996. (credit: "Flag of Mississippi (1894-1906)" by Wikimedia Commons/Public
       Domain)

       FIGURE 17.7 The current state flag of Mississippi was adopted 2021. (credit: "Flag of Mississippi" by Rocky
       Vaughan, et al./Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
       Symbols
       Like colors, symbols are interpreted differently by individuals on the basis of their personal and cultural
       experiences. Here is an example of two state flags with very different symbolism: Figure 17.6 depicts the state
       flag of Mississippi that was adopted in 1894; Figure 17.7 depicts the one adopted in 2021. In 2021, under
       pressure from numerous organizations and in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement, Mississippi
       replaced its state flag. The 1894 flag included the battle flag of the Confederacy, referencing Mississippi's
       history of secession and violence during the Civil War (1861-1865); the single blue, white, and red bands were
       a reference to the stripes on the American flag. This historical allusion, coupled with the state's history of
       enslavement and segregation, meant that the 1894 flag served as a stark reminder of efforts to silence Black
       Mississippians. In fact, Mississippi did not formally ratify the Thirteenth Amendment to the
       Constitution--proposed in 1865 to abolish slavery--until 2013, and the state remained segregated long after
       the Supreme Court outlawed the practice.
       Mississippi continued to use the 1894 flag throughout the Reconstruction (1865-1877) and the Jim Crow laws
       (ca. 1877-c. 1950) and civil rights (1950s and 1960s) eras despite multiple and sustained efforts to remove any
       reference to the Confederate flag. In 2020, the increasing prominence of the Black Lives Matter movement

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                         17.1 · "Reading" Images 545

created the context in which state lawmakers were forced to consider these problems as mainstream and
urgent. Further, the state came under pressure from numerous organizations, including the Southeastern
Conference athletics organization (SEC), which threatened to boycott the state by no longer holding major
events there if the flag were not changed.

Submitted to the legislature by Starkville-based graphic designer Rocky Vaughan (b. ca. 1977) and
collaborators Sue Anna Joe, Kara Giles, and Dominique Pugh, the new flag took effect in January 2021 after
voters approved it and the governor ratified it. The current flag (Figure 17.7) features a central vertical band of
blue, flanked by two thin gold bands and encompassed by two broader red ones. The flag's center is dominated
by a single magnolia flower, crowned by a single gold star and encircled by 20 white ones. Beneath the flower
are emblazoned the words "In God We Trust."

The gold coloring is intended to celebrate Mississippi's contributions to the world of art, music, and literature.
The white stars symbolize Mississippi's status as the 20th state of the Union; thus, the new flag symbolizes the
state's reintegration into the Union without reference to its seditious acts in the 19th century or lingering
loyalty to the beliefs that motivated them. In addition, the single gold star honors the state's indigenous people;
no reference is made to the state's history of enslavement and racism.

Thinking critically about color and symbol, ask yourself these questions:

  · Does the color enhance or distort the reality of the image?
  · Imagine the image in shades of black, white, and gray. What would be lost and what would be gained if

      color were subtracted?
  · Does the color work with or against the other compositional elements?
  · What symbols are incorporated into the image? How might those symbols be interpreted in various

      contexts?
  · What, if any, is the significance of referencing Indigenous but not Black Americans on the current flag?

Selecting and Incorporating Digital and Visual Media

In addition to analyzing visual and digital media, you may be asked to find, create, or manipulate such
materials for a variety of situations and audiences. Following are some considerations to keep in mind,
including copyright issues, appropriate selections, and technical manipulations.

Intellectual property laws are complicated, change frequently, and vary by country. Sharing an image is
similar to quoting a text, with one exception: you must not only cite the author in a reference list or
bibliography but also secure permission to use the image. To be safe, unless an image explicitly states that you
are free to share it (public domain), assume it is protected by copyright.

The texts you write will have varying degrees of formality and require different levels of diction (word choice),
syntax (sentence structure), content, and tone. Similarly, the images you select should reflect the tone, or
attitude, that you wish to convey in your text. Ask yourself these questions to decide whether an image is
appropriate for your text:

What is the image's purpose? Include images only if they add to or supplement the text. Do not add images
simply as "filler" or for audience entertainment. Such materials are more likely to confuse or distract readers
than they are to enlighten or inform them.

Is the image humorous or sarcastic? Humor has value as entertainment by keeping the audience interested
and engaged in your text and making it more memorable. However, determining what makes something funny
is deeply personal. An image you find funny could be read with confusion or even offense by someone else. In
formal communications, humor and sarcasm are better avoided because of the risk of misunderstanding. In
creative contexts, you have greater latitude.

Does the image include text? Because you are already creating a text, you may wish to question the value of
546 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       inserting an image with text. Consider what information the image provides in addition to the text. For
       example, in Figure 17.3, the text "I can't breathe" is enhanced by its placement on a mask and, further, by the
       mask's presence on a Black woman. These details make the image with its text a valuable addition to a
       discussion or analysis.
       Consider also the language of the text. You may be fluent in multiple languages, so an image with text in
       Spanish, French, or Japanese could have meaning for you. Will it have meaning for your audience? The same
       applies to images that include slang, jargon, or slogans with a limited shelf life. If you have to explain the
       image's meaning before your readers understand it, the image is probably not worth including.
       What is the image's context? Where and when the image is placed can affect the viewer's understanding and
       interpretation. A picture of poverty in one country is likely to look very different from poverty in another
       country. Some images can be considered universal, meaning they depict situations that have significance for
       all people, regardless of culture, ethnicity, or historical context. For example, an image of a mother and an
       infant is easily recognized by anyone anywhere and is likely to evoke similar thoughts and emotions.
       What digital or technical requirements or manipulations are needed? Finally, when you think about
       including an image, you'll need to consider the digital and technical requirements and manipulations
       necessary to do so. Aspects to consider include compatibility requirements, visibility on different devices and
       platforms, sizing, and placement. The technical details associated with these considerations are changing
       rapidly, so this chapter makes no recommendations regarding software programs or specifications. However, if
       an image is blurred or distorted--or invisible--the result will be confusion and frustration on the part of your
       reader.
       Selecting an Appropriate Image
       To practice selecting appropriate images, imagine you are writing an informational webpage about the
       Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and its responsibilities in relation to the Clean Water Act. To illustrate
       those responsibilities, which of the following images would you use? Why? (Suggested answers follow.)

       FIGURE 17.8 Sample image 1: EPA flag with logo (credit: "Environmental Protection Agency building" by USEPA
       Environmental-Protection-Agency/flickr, Public Domain

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                         17.1 · "Reading" Images 547

FIGURE 17.9 Sample image 2: Water pouring from a faucet into a clear glass (credit: "Water pouring from a faucet
into a clear glass cup" by USEPA Environmental-Protection-Agency/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

FIGURE 17.10 Sample image 3: Woman holding a cup of brown liquid (credit: "Safe Drinking Water Act" by Erik
Calonius/USEPA Environmental-Protection-Agency/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
Suggested Answers

  · Sample image 1 seems like an obvious choice. It depicts the name and logo of the agency you are writing
      about, and nothing about it is likely to be considered controversial. However, by itself, it does not convey
      any useful information, so its purpose is unclear.

  · Sample image 2 depicts safe, clean drinking water from the tap. The glass emphasizes the clarity of the
      water, and its proximity to the tap shows the intimate role that water plays in daily life. It features no
      characters or setting, so it is not restricted by any obvious contextual clues. It is perfect for this piece.

  · Sample image 3 is emotionally powerful. It depicts a woman, older and likely with a low income, holding a
548 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

             jar of brownish liquid. The image appears to be old, based on the coloring of the photograph, the woman's
             dress, and the home in the background. Its age could help make the rhetorical point that the EPA's
             enforcement of the Clean Water Act, passed in 1972, has been effective. However, its context is unclear,
             raising questions about its composition. When and where was the photo taken? Is it set in the United
             States? And what is the liquid in the jar--water? Oil? Moonshine? The image raises too many questions to
             be useful in this context.

     17.2 Trailblazer

     Image Trailblazer: Sara Ludy

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Interpret images through the conceptual lens of hybridity to learn, think critically, and communicate in a variety
             of rhetorical and cultural contexts.

         · Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.

                                                        "The digital sublime
                                                          emerges from a
                                                          collectively built
                                                          hyperobject that

                                                       globally connects our
                                                        nervous systems."

FIGURE 17.11 Images from nature inspire artists
such as Sara Ludy (https://openstax.org/r/Sara-Ludy).
(credit: "Plants OB 934" by USDA NRCS Montana/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Sara Ludy and Hybridity

This chapter focuses on images. Still, most of the images with which viewers interact have been either created
or manipulated digitally (https://openstax.org/r/digitally) and contain textual, animated (https://openstax.org/
r/animated), and cinematic content. In the field of digital manipulation, Sara Ludy (https://openstax.org/r/
Sara--Ludy) is a pioneer, combining painting, sculpture, floral arrangements, animation, sound, and video. She
was raised in Bluemont, Virginia, a small town in the Appalachian region. She studied at the School of the Art
Institute of Chicago (SAIC) and lived and worked in New Mexico and California before settling in Chicago. Her
work includes images of water, clouds, water vapor, birds, fabric, glass, and plants. American painter Georgia

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    17.2 · Trailblazer 549

O'Keeffe's (1887-1986) influence--see Figure 17.12--on Ludy's work is obvious in its lush, open petals and
wings, as well as in the vibrant natural colors.

FIGURE 17.12 Red Canna, 1919, by Georgia O'Keeffe (credit: "Georgia O'Keeffe Red Canna 1919" by Georgia
O'Keeffe/High Museum of Art, Atlanta/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
But Ludy also names British primatologist Jane Goodall (b. 1934); Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges
(1899-1986); and American architect, inventor, designer R. Buckminster Fuller (1895-1983) among her
inspirations, emphasizing the hybrid nature of her work.
The concept of hybridity pervades Ludy's work, which occurs in different media and includes a variety of
topics. The concept refers to mixing and is used in disciplines that encompass discussions of language, race,
ethnicity, and culture. Relating to digital and visual media, the term hybridity incorporates pieces from each of
these disciplines as well as the blending of practical, physical, technological, and artistic methods. The result
is a piece of art that represents and speaks to people from multiple walks of life in various visual and tactile
ways.
In particular, the concept of hybridity in the arts refers to the relationship between digital media and the
creation and experience of the artwork. Artists such as Ludy anticipate that mixture by embedding it in their
work, using digital techniques to distort or change it.
The following example of Ludy's work sheds light on her contributions to contemporary art and the multiple
directions in which visual and digital media are headed in the 21st century.
Second Life: Convergence of the Virtual and the Physical
Ludy (https://openstax.org/r/Ludy) works extensively in the genre of Second Life, capturing and then
manipulating images people have created. Second Life cannot be described merely as a video game, given the
seriousness with which many people treat it and the lack of an ultimate goal or winning moment, but it does
share features commonly found in video games. It is an animated alternative world where people spend long
periods of time entertaining themselves. It represents a virtual reality in which participants design settings,
create characters, and engage in a variety of interactions. The goal is simply to be present in this virtual world,
550 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       to create beautiful or intriguing spaces, and to experiment with form and color in ways that may not be
       possible in the real world. Ludy's Second Life work removes viewers even farther from the virtual experience's
       all-encompassing reality and heightens its surrealism using multiple layers of distance.

       In interviews, Ludy encourages viewers to resist the urge to experience her work "consciously"--that is, to
       name or describe it. Instead, she wants them to focus on the sensory experiences they have when
       contemplating it. However, this advice is contrary to the goal of discourse, in which you describe and assess a
       work and your reactions to it. It also contradicts her own practice, in which she has commented on the nature
       of her practice and her intentions. Notice how, in the video, she talks about finding images in Second Life that
       resonate with a sense of familiarity. While many users may see Second Life as a place to invent new or unusual
       designs not permitted by physics, Ludy appears to be after those designs that make people feel at home, at
       least to the extent they can do so in a world constructed of binary code.

       Elsewhere, Ludy describes the sublime as the happenstance that occurs when her virtual-reality-created
       scenes match a real-life experience she later has, much like witnessing an awe-inspiring natural phenomenon
       that appears supernatural and then realizing its natural qualities. Ludy instructs her viewers to "assume a
       prismatic quality" to her work (Ludy, "Artist"). Therefore, viewers should look at her images more than once,
       from different angles and perspectives and with different assumptions. In the case of the discovered floral
       arrangement she discusses, she refers to the pixelation--the radiation--the unintended effects of the digital
       relationship with the light and the camera.

      Discussion Questions

       1. Do you consider Ludy's photographs of design elements created in Second Life to be her own work or the
            work of another person? Explain your response.

       2. In what ways is Ludy's Second Life photography practice "natural"? In what ways is it digital, artificial, or
            manipulated? How do those descriptions or designations affect the way you see, reflect on, or feel about her
            work?

       3. Ludy refers to the "artifacts" she finds in her photographic images, such as the radiant light from the top of
            the floral arrangement creating a pseudo-star. Do you consider such "artifacts" of artistic interest, or do you
            believe they are flaws that represent byproducts of one's digital limitations? Explain your response.

       4. In what ways is the experience of viewing, reflecting on, and discoursing about images similar to the
           Second Life experience? In what ways is it different?

     17.3 Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Analyze and reflect on images using the language of visual rhetoric.
         · Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
         · Determine variations in genre conventions.

       This section examines two sets of genre conventions: those associated with visual rhetoric and those
       associated with writing about visual rhetoric. The former include arrangement, color and symbol,
       composition, juxtaposition, light, line, multimodality, and point of view. These were introduced in `Reading'
       Images and are summarized and defined at the end of this section. The latter conventions--reflecting,
       analyzing, and writing persuasively--are defined here with examples and suggestions for engaging in these
       kinds of writing. They serve as three frameworks for communicating the variety of human responses to
       images--responses that can range from apathy to repulsion, from enjoyment to bliss--using the language of
       visual rhetoric.

       Reflecting and analyzing are addressed below. Writing persuasively is addressed in Writing Process: Thinking

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                               17.3 · Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric 551

Critically and Writing Persuasively about Images in connection with this chapter's writing assignment.
However, remember that all writing about images relies first on description and is persuasive in that its
purpose is to convince readers to consider the ideas presented.

Reflecting on Images

When you reflect on an image, you process its technical elements through the dual lens of critical thought and
personal experience. You may ask questions such as the following:

  · Does this image resonate with me? Why or why not?
  · How does this image make me feel?
  · What memories or associations does this image summon for me?
  · How might my thoughts, feelings, and associations evoked by the image differ from those of someone

      else--someone of a different gender, socioeconomic context, or culture?

FIGURE 17.13 Boats carrying tourists in Ratargul Swamp Forest, Bangladesh (credit: "Ratargul swampland, Sylhet"
by Mostaque Chowdhury/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
To respond to some of these questions, consider Figure 17.13. Images of nature are often used to either soothe
the viewer or inspire a sense of grandeur. Figure 17.13 has the capacity to do both. The repeating horizontal
and vertical lines, gradient color patterns, and whimsical spots of pink and red directly offer a visual appeal
that encourages meditation and reflection. A bare understanding of the context similarly lends a sensation of
awe to the image. Ratargul is both a forest and a swamp in a remote part of Bangladesh that floods regularly.
Tourists frequent the location, and local residents capitalize on that fact by giving them guided boat tours
along the river, despite the inherent dangers.
But this image can be further informed by a viewer's variety of personal experiences. Consider, for example,
the extent to which you have traveled. Is Bangladesh within the realm of possibility for you--in the past, now, or
ever? What are your experiences as a tourist or in the service industry? Do you think the boat operators and
the photographer have similar or different opinions of the scene? When you think and write critically about
such questions, you deepen your understanding of your own experiences and reactions, you interact with the
experiences of others, and you understand the world more broadly and deeply.
Remember that reflecting necessarily contains an element of speculation. Be careful to ground your discussion
in evidence--from the image itself, from the image's context, or from your own experience. Beyond these, such
552 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       discussions devolve into self-indulgent musings that few others can share in or learn from.

      Analyzing Images

       When describing an image, you might state that a line is blue. When you analyze an image, you might discuss
       what the color and the line mean or do. The images in `Reading' Images are analyzed according to genre
       elements specific to visual media. In these discussions, the analysis begins with description, but it does not
       end there. The elements of visual rhetoric are both described and analyzed to discover the artist's intentions.
       (You will read a detailed analysis about painter Charles Demuth's Dancing Sailors in the Annotated Student
       Sample.)

       When you analyze an image, you contribute to an ongoing global discussion, helping create the kaleidoscope
       that makes such rhetorical discussions meaningful. Do not worry about whether your contribution is right or
       wrong. Instead, consider its value to the global discussion. What can you say that would broaden
       understanding of the work of art and your experience of the world? This task may seem overwhelming,
       especially when you consider the work of a well-known artist. But your experiences and opinions are unique
       and valuable.

       So far, this task sounds a lot like reflection, with one difference: reflection focuses on personal responses,
       reactions, feelings, and experiences, whereas analysis broadens that discussion to include the effects of
       various technical elements on a variety of people in different contexts. When analyzing an image, consider
       some of the following questions:

         · Why did the creator select these particular technical elements?
         · How are various audiences likely to react to them?
         · How have interpretations of the image changed over time, or how are they likely to change in the future?
         · What effect does historical or current context have on your interpretation?

      The Language of Visual Rhetoric

       Images speak to viewers in a language that short-circuits their critical thought processes and goes directly to
       their sensory receptors. Yet unlike a simple, instinctive response to stimuli, the goal of critical thought,
       reflection, and discourse is to consider how and why viewers respond the way they do to certain images. To do
       so, viewers should consider the techniques that artists use to elicit such reactions. In this way, artists and
       viewers create a shared language of visual rhetoric in which both can discuss the virtues and demerits of a
       work of art as well as its historical and artistic contributions.

      Key Terms in Visual Rhetoric

         · Arrangement: Artists arrange their work to emphasize certain aspects and to create patterns of repetition
             and variation. The term composition is often used to mean arrangement.

         · Color and symbol: Images communicate their meaning in part through the variety and interplay among
             colors. Even the choice to use black and white or a monochrome color palette is a color choice. Symbols in
             images allude to deeper meanings.

         · Composition: Composition is often used as an umbrella term encompassing all aspects of visual rhetoric.
             It can also be used synonymously with arrangement to indicate how the piece is put together.

         · Juxtaposition: In visual art, juxtaposition is the placement of contrasting images close together to
             emphasize their connection, lack of connection, or incongruity.

         · Light: Unique to images is the use of light to highlight or obscure various parts of an image or to create
             prismatic effects that enhance its repetitive aspects.

         · Line: In addition to outline shapes, artists use line to focus or center the viewer's eye and then to move it
             across the image in certain predetermined patterns.

         · multimodal: Multimodality is the use of more than one type of literacy within a single work. For example,
             an airline display board is a multimodal work because it requires viewers both to understand ways of

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                    17.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Hints of the Homoerotic" by Leo Davis 553

      reading airport codes, time zones, and visual representations of temporal data and to relate that
      information to the their current circumstances. Multimodality is a theory, perspective, or method that
      incorporates the consideration of all elements of an image.
  · Point of view: Also called perspective, point of view encompasses what an image includes, what it
      excludes, and where its focus lies.

17.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Hints of the Homoerotic" by Leo Davis

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Determine the context of an image.
  · Analyze the rhetorical techniques common to images.
  · Analyze a variety of texts according to organizational patterns and rhetorical techniques.

Introduction

Below you will find a student analysis of a painting by Charles Demuth. As you read it, pay careful attention to
the way in which the student author, Leo Davis, describes technical details of the painting, such as color, line,
and technique. Also notice the way he analyzes those details, moving beyond mere description into the realms
of context, analysis, and reflection.

Meet American Modernist and Precisionist Charles Demuth (1883-1935)

FIGURE 17.14 Self-Portrait, 1907 (credit: "Self portrait of Charles Demuth" by Charles Demuth/Wikimedia
Commons, CC0)
Charles Demuth was an American painter of the modernist and precisionist movements. Trained at the
Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, he traveled to Europe and worked as an illustrator before striking out on
his own, first as a watercolorist and then as an oil painter. His watercolors follow languid lines of vegetation,
reproducing plants and flowers in stronger geometric patterns than those of his friend and fellow artist
Georgia O'Keeffe (1887-1986). His work in the precisionist movement, like that of other similar artists, often
focuses on industrial subjects enhanced by exaggerated geometric techniques. Few human characters appear
   554 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

   in Demuth's paintings, which tend to erase any suggestion of his own personality or brushstroke on the
   artwork.

   Demuth was a keen wit with a vibrant social presence in New York, Paris, and London. He cultivated his

   friendships as avidly as he did his art, and his company was much prized. His homosexuality was likely well

s  known among his circle of friends, although his works depicting gay subculture in major metropolitan areas

   were only privately circulated. These works, including Dancing Sailors (https://openstax.org/r/Dancing-Sailors)

   seen in black and white in Figure 17.15, are today shedding light on the ways in which LGBTQ people engaged

   with one another and society more than 100 years ago.

                                                          end s

   FIGURE 17.15 Dancing Sailors, c. 1918, by Charles Demuth (credit: "Dancing sailors" by Charles Demuth/
   Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

           LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

   Analysis of Dancing Sailors by Charles Demuth

         Four male sailors dance on a checked floor with arched lines in the background. Two of the men dance with
         women, while two of them dance with each other. This painting is done in watercolor and graphite and focuses
         on the sailor on the far left. The other figures face him, and his posture draws the viewer's eye to his face. The
         man and woman on the far right seem completely involved with each other. The two couples in the middle are
         drawn sensually, with passion, but none of them focus on their own partners. Instead, the two sailors with their
         backs to the viewer stare at one another. The sailor on the left appears quite aggressive, with an arched back
         and bent knees suggesting a pelvic thrust. Although his dance partner is a woman, he holds her right hand at
         arm's length, away from his body, and stares past her toward the sailor next to him. Strong pencil strokes
         emphasize his eyes and eyebrows, pointing the viewer to the object of his stare. The central sailor is dancing
         with a man in a mutual embrace, but his attention is fixed on the sailor at left, his head tilted slightly and his
         expression receptive. The painting is signed and dated: "C Demuth - 1918 -."
   Danensoctraipt tion. The initial paragraph focuses extensively on the visual elements of the painting, with a few analytical
   passages. Leo Davis uses descriptive, artistic terminology such as "arched," "watercolor and graphite," and "[s]trong
   pencil strokes" to help readers visualize the painting.end annotat
   Lainnneoatantd Arrangement. Davis provides some details about the artistic techniques used, such as the strong pencil

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                17.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Hints of the Homoerotic" by Leo Davis 555

   strokes and the way the image "emphasize[s] his eyes and eyebrows."end annotat

   Aannnaolytastis. The author explains the effect of these elements and techniques to interpret the poses and intentions of
   the characters in the painting.end annotat

s  A Vibrant Subculture and a World in Crisis

   Dancing Sailors was painted by Charles Demuth (1883-1935), a key figure in early-20th-century modernism.

   Best known as a watercolorist, Demuth also painted the gay subculture in jazz clubs and underground bars in

   Neenwd  sYork  City  in  works  that  he  kept  secret.  As  a  gay  man,  he  frequently  visited  Manhattan during        the   Harlem
                                                                                                            endensednsd s

   Renaissance and          participated  in  this  culture,  savoring  the   artistic  and  erotic  intensity  of  the  Jazz  Age.
                 end s

   Although the art movement in the early 20th century was vibrant, its context was depressing. The United States

   entered World War I (1914-1918) in April 1917. A month later, the Selective Service Act was passed, and
   thousands of American men were drafted intoemndilitsary service. In March 1918, the United States was hit with

   the influenza pandemic. Twenty million people died in the war, and another 50 million died from the flu.

   Meanwhile, in 1916, the U.S. military began using so-called blue discharges to force gay people out of the
   armed forces. By 1919, sailors were arrested and court-martialed for homosexual activity. It seems seriously
   unfair that someone who fought in the war could come back home and be convicted as a criminal just for his
   sexual orientation.

   In this context, with death seemingly everywhere and gay men hated, Demuth created striking watercolors that
   say a lot about his times. Because he did not share these paintings publicly, he was probably afraid of revealing
   his own homosexuality. But that did not stop him from making art that reflected his own desires. Dancing
   Sailors, now in possession of the Cleveland Museum of Art in Ohio, was not intended for public exhibition.

   Canonnotetaxtt. In these four well-organized paragraphs, Davis outlines the painting's context: key details about the artist's
   personal life, the military and domestic situations in America, and Demuth's place in this world. Davis focuses on the
   aspects most relevant to the artwork, keeping the context short and pointed.end annotat

   Tension within a Painting

         The perspective, or point of view, of the painting is high, as shown by the angle of the black-and-white
         checkerboard floor and where it hits the wall. The figures are shown in a practical close-up, so that their feet
         and the tops of their heads are not included in the frame. This perspective is very intimate, but with the
         audience intruding on the scene. All of the couples hold each other closely and tightly, and the audience is
         almost uncomfortably close.

   Panoninottaotf View. Davis returns to technical description, indicating the artist's perspective and how it affects the                   end annotat
   viewer.

   Demuth uses watercolor to outline the dancers' bodies, making the clothing almost transparent. The silhouette
   of the pants emphasizes the bulge of thigh and calf muscles, and the arches in the background suggest
   erections. For both men, the buttocks are outlined and emphasized. The male dancers are clearly wearing
   uniforms, but Demuth chooses not to include insignias, medals, or other identifying marks. Perhaps he was
   simply not interested in military rank and regulation. Or maybe he wanted to direct the viewer's attention
   elsewhere. The two women in the painting are incidental, their bodies largely obscured by the men. Although
   the figures are outlined in graphite, the textured watercolor unites the dancers with the background, making
   them seem very much like they belong in this scene of intimacy.

   Aanrtniostaict Medium and Line. Davis discusses the medium--watercolor--and how Demuth's use of it creates the
   impression of tight clothing. Importantly, the author does not assume intent on Demuth's part, although he
   speculates. Instead, he limits his analysis to the details and artistic techniques of the painting.end annotat

   Taencnhontaict al Description. Again, the author keeps this paragraph focused on an element of artistic design: the
   watercolor. He backs his assertion with evidence from the painting. Instead of simply saying that the men are
   556 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

   wearing tight clothing, he describes the artist's use of watercolor to create the impression of tight clothing.end annotat

   The painting appears to tell a story, but only in part. The viewer is invited to fill in the blanks. The sailors in the

   foreground are blatantly flirting with one another. And the central sailor's direct stare at the viewer may be

   considered an invitation. His wide-eyed expression, slight smile, and hands curled to embrace his dance

s  partner's torso indicate pleasure. The viewer knows something this sailor does not: his part of this story is

   unlikely to have a happy ending. The female dance partners, while largely obscured, are still individuals with

   strong personalities. The woman on the left has a vacant stare from half-closed eyes, and her indifferent

   posture suggests that she may be bored, but the curve of her hip is still sexual. Is she offended by her partner's

   distraction?

                                                          end s  end s

   Aanrrnaontagtement. Davis invites viewers to "read" the painting, to see the story being told by the arrangement, whicehnd s

   also invites them to notice the two women.end annotat

   Ranhneototartical Question. This technique allows the student author to pose provocative questions that have no clear
   answers. In combination with the accompanying analysis, the rhetorical question helps establish the tone and
   theme of the painting that Leo Davis wishes to explore.end annotat

   Lasting Significance

         Demuth was a gay man during a difficult time in American history. This painting, one of many he kept private, is
         sympathetic and nonjudgmental. These private paintings may have been his attempt to find and show his
         acceptance of his own identity. During World War I, many military men came to port cities such as New York.
         Also during that time, Demuth enjoyed the Manhattan nightlife, and he painted a number of scenes of this
         changing environment. His personal involvement is interesting in and of itself. But even more so, these private
         paintings document the emergence of a sexual subculture and mark an important moment in American gay
         history.

   Canonnotetaxtt and Analysis. The author uses context and analysis to reach a conclusion about Demuth's intention in
   creating the painting and its significance in the history of American homoerotic art.end annotat

   Although Demuth died at the relatively early age of 52, his work remains influential in American art. The
   geometric background of Dancing Sailors shows his increased interest in architectural watercolors. Later in his
   career, these paintings were hailed as key to the development of the precisionist movement. His unique
   expressions of modernism are a precursor to the abstract expressionism that developed in the 1940s and later
   influenced pop art innovators such as Andy Warhol (1928-1987). Aside from its historical significance, the
   vibrant sensuousness of Dancing Sailors continues to have relevance and appeal for art lovers today.

   Canonnotetaxtt. Leo Davis concludes by extending his argument for Demuth's influence, tracing the effect of his work
   through later artists and movements and stating the reason Dancing Sailors continues to have value as a work of art.end annotat

   Discussion Questions

   1. In which of the three types of writing about art--reflecting, analyzing, persuading-- is the student author
       engaging? How do you know?

   2. Identify some of the descriptive language specific to visuals that Leo Davis uses when talking about the
       painting. How does this language enhance the paper and contribute to the discussion?

   3. From the essay, can you determine Davis's opinion regarding homosexuality? Why might this tone be or not
       be a significant part of the rhetorical situation?

   4. What details does the student author include about the painter? Is any information about the painter
       excluded that you think would be relevant?

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                         17.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images 557

17.5 Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About
Images

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop a writing project through multiple drafts.
  · Employ a variety of drafting strategies to complete an analysis of images.
  · Apply aspects of visual rhetoric to a writing project.
  · Participate in the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.
  · Give and act effectively on productive feedback.

In this section, you will combine what you learned earlier about reflecting on and analyzing images with
another way of writing about images: writing persuasively, or persuading. Like reflecting and analyzing,
writing persuasively requires clear, vivid descriptions of the technical aspects of an artwork, such as point of
view, arrangement, color, and symbolism, as explained in Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and
Rhetoric. Remember that reflecting on an image helps you make sense of both the image and your experience
from different perspectives. Reading other people's reflections expands your universe of experience. Analyzing
images improves your critical thinking skills by synthesizing description, reflection, and logical thinking to
determine what an image's design elements mean. You write persuasively about images when you determine
that an image's meaning has or does not have a value (that you define) for its viewers. For example, Leo Davis,
in his analysis of Dancing Sailors in Annotated Student Sample, determines the homoerotic message in the
image and the painter's tone or attitude toward his subject. You can also extend the scope of persuasion to
make a recommendation about the status or merit of the work, as you will do in this assignment.

Writing Persuasively about Images

Like reflection, persuasion starts with context and description and can include personal reflections. The
difference is primarily in the purpose and often the tone, or attitude toward the subject and audience. The
purpose generally falls into one of three categories:

  · What is the image's value? In the art world, these discussions are commonplace. Major publications such
     as the New Yorker or Harper's Magazine publish reviews of artists, galleries, and exhibitions. Critics and
      scholars argue that such discussions serve to establish a society's values and to benchmark the limits of
      what a society will and will not tolerate. Certainly, 2020 witnessed an explosion of such conversations.
      Protestors created images meant for display on public property, many of which were identified as graffiti
      or acts of vandalism; streets and other locations were renamed to reflect a growing awareness of the role
      that Black excellence has played in America's history; and monuments and memorials relating to injustice
      were reevaluated, vandalized, and removed.

  · What happened? Forensic arguments often relate to legal situations, in which lawyers, judges, and juries
      try to determine what happened and how to respond. In the case of images, these techniques are applied
      to assess the circumstances of an image's creation as well as its critical and modern reception.

  · What should happen? In the public sector, officials decide whether to fund artistic works. In the private
      sector, companies decide on images that faithfully represent their brands and values.

In persuasive writing, the purpose is usually revealed in a thesis statement, a single sentence, sometimes two,
that defines the author's position and gives one or more reasons for it. The thesis usually appears at the end of
the introduction, although it can occur at the start of either the introduction or the conclusion.

Look again at Figure 17.3, in which a woman wears a mask that reads, "I can't breathe." Table 17.1 below
outlines a thesis statement based on that image that might apply to each of the three persuasive writing
purposes.
558 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

Persuasion                                     Sample Thesis Statement
  Purpose

What is the  The image of the mask, its text, and the woman wearing it convey an important message that
image's      serves as a valuable artifact representing many of the complexities of 2020.
value?

What         The mask wearer is sending a valuable message that people need to hear in the context of the
happened?    controversies surrounding both the pandemic and the racial situation in America in 2020.

What should  The mask's message and context are inflammatory during a public health crisis; therefore, the use
happen?      of masks with potentially political commentary should be discouraged in public places.

TABLE 17.1 Sample thesis statements by persuasion purpose

Tone

The tone of a persuasive piece can range from educational to impassioned and is largely based on the audience
to which it is directed. Most writing about images is done in the neutral tone typically adopted in academic
writing, although you may find reviews or essays that are informal and others that are scholarly.

Taking a Side

In `Reading' Images, you read a description of and some reflections on Figure 17.3, an image of woman
wearing a mask reading, "I Can't Breathe." You also read a brief analysis of the figure, combining description,
historical context, and the visual design element of juxtaposition. Now, in Table 17.2, look at what two sides of
a persuasive discussion of Figure 17.3 might look like.

             Side A                                                     Side B

                                               Purpose / Thesis

Figure 17.3 represents an important moment in  Figure 17.3 depicts an ordinary occurrence and does not
American history and should be included in a   warrant inclusion in a yearbook recording historical events
yearbook recording historical events of 2020.  of 2020.

                                               Audience

             Committee commissioned by the National Endowment for the Humanities

                                               Context

   The committee has been commissioned to publish a yearbook of 2020, entitled The Year Democracy Roared.
They are looking for pictures that represent large movements in America in 2020 that tie into the country's history

                                        and depict individuals in interesting or unique settings.

                                               Evidence

TABLE 17.2 Elements of a persuasive argument about an image

Access for free at openstax.org.
17.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images 559

                            Side A                                                   Side B

· The image features a Black woman wearing a       · Many people wore masks in 2020 for reasons
   mask that reads, "I Can't Breathe."                unassociated with politics or controversy.

· The pandemic of 2020 caused many people to       · Many people decorated their masks with a variety of
   wear masks, either by choice or by mandate.        images and slogans.

· Some people did not support mask wearing         · The choice of whether to wear a mask was, in many
   because of their political beliefs regarding       cases, not a choice but a mandate.
   personal liberties.
                                                   · This woman is not in obvious distress or at a protest.
· During 2020, the Black Lives Matter              · The image includes another woman, reflected in the
   movement gained widespread support.
                                                      first woman's sunglasses, not wearing a mask, calling
· "I Can't Breathe" was one of several slogans        into question the seriousness of her mask message.
   adopted by the Black Lives Matter movement.     · The woman does not appear to be part of a larger
                                                      movement, engaged in a unique or interesting activity,
· The image juxtaposes the mask with the              or placed in an unusual setting.
   slogan in an ironic statement open to multiple
   interpretations.

TABLE 17.2 Elements of a persuasive argument about an image

Summary of Assignment: Writing Persuasively about an Image

Public works projects such as stadiums or convention centers, private developments such as condominiums
and shopping centers, and online spaces such as websites and social media platforms all commission artists to
create exclusive works for display. These works are intended to reflect the vision of the artist as well as to
promote the brand or mission of the space. Imagine that you have been asked to analyze an artist's work to
determine whether the artist should contribute to the development of a local space that you select. Select the
work of an artist, either Sara Ludy (https://openstax.org/r/Sara.Ludy) or another artist whose work is familiar to
you or whose work you would like to learn more about. See Further Resources at the end of this chapter for
suggested museums to visit in person or online. You can choose from historical figures or living artists. You
can even choose an artist who illustrated a graphic novel you have read. Once you have chosen an artist and an
image created by that artist, identify the aspects of the work you wish to assess, and support your analysis with
technical descriptions of the image. Then, explain why you reached your decision about the artist's
contribution to the selected space.

The parts in this section will take you through the development of a sample essay, using the example of
American sculptor James Earle Fraser's (1876-1953) Equestrian Statue of Theodore Roosevelt. As you follow
along in this process, consider how it applies to your topic. Think of the process as divided into these six steps:

1. Identify the rhetorical situation.
2. Outline the elements you intend to analyze.
3. Write an introduction in which you frame the image and the context in which you intend to discuss it.
4. As you draft, or before you draft the body of the essay, write topic sentences to identify the focus of each

      paragraph on a specific technical or contextual aspect of the image.
5. Build your paragraphs by describing the relevant elements.
6. Conclude by suggesting directions to consider in the future.

Another Lens 1. Visit Sara Ludy's website (https://openstax.org/r/Sara.Ludy) and select an image, a rendering,
or an animation that speaks to you in some way, and identify the technical aspects you wish to assess. Support
your analysis with descriptions of the image, using the vocabulary introduced in "Reading" Images and Glance
at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric. Then, as an option, consider whether or not you would
advise an individual to purchase the work or how you would advise an organization to use it (or not use it) as a
560 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       representative image--for example, as part of a logo or cover for a publication.
       Another Lens 2. Another option for assessing an artist's work is to compare and contrast this work with
       another piece, either by Sara Ludy or by a different artist. In doing so, you may consider ways in which the
       artist and their work have changed over time, or you may consider the influence one artist has on another.
       Finally, you may consider the images in different contexts through the lens of the artists' experiences, places
       in history, personal identities, and artistic practices.
       Another Lens 3. Consider a work from a multimodal perspective. If you are interested in the connections of art
       and culture, consider choosing a piece of historic or contemporary Native American art. You can find
       information and view images at the websites for the National Museum of the American Indian
       (https://openstax.org/r/National) and the Hearts of Our People: Native Women Artists (https://openstax.org/r/
       Hearts-of-Our) exhibition at the Smithsonian American Art Museum. Create an infographic or a short video
       assessing the chosen artwork. An infographic incorporates multiple images and texts into a single image that
       can be read and understood quickly. A short video could work in a similar way, but the images would be
       presented sequentially with narration, either spoken or written. Your multimodal work should consider the
       elements of visual rhetoric discussed throughout this chapter and combine reflection with analysis and
       persuasion. See Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image for more
       information on creating a multimodal work.

             Quick Launch: Identify Rhetorical Context

       FIGURE 17.16 Equestrian Statue of Theodore Roosevelt , 1940, by James Earle Fraser, New York City (credit:
       "Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Hall entrance" by edwardhblake/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
       In this writing example, the statue of former U.S. president Theodore Roosevelt (1858-1919) (Figure 17.16) is
       analyzed as part of the museum's decision to keep it or remove it. To begin, the author of this paper (a college
       student, U.S. citizen, and nursing major) defines the rhetorical situation: purpose, audience, genre, stance,
       context, and culture. Complete the first step in the assignment as this author has done by consulting the
       writer's triangle to sketch out these elements. The writer's triangle (Figure 17.17) includes audience, genre,

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                         17.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images 561

and stance and is surrounded by the circle of context/culture. The image allows you to "shorthand" your ideas
about these elements during the brainstorming phase, as the author has done beneath the figure.

      FIGURE 17.17 Writer's triangle (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

  · Purpose: To analyze the Equestrian Statue of Theodore Roosevelt
  · Audience: Instructor, fellow students, and U.S. residents
  · Genre: Print or digital newsletter or magazine article
  · Stance: To support the American Museum of Natural History's decision to remove the statue of Theodore

      Roosevelt
  · Context: Roosevelt's presidency and what he accomplished, the relationship between him and the

      American Museum of Natural History, and the elements of the statue warranting its inclusion or exclusion
  · Culture: Critics have said that the statue depicts Black people and Native Americans as conquered and

      culturally substandard.

Note: Do not confuse context with your rhetorical situation, which, in this case, is a writing assignment for a
college course, part of a portfolio and a learning technique in which you practice a type of civil discourse.
Meanwhile, context in this case refers to the image--the circumstances of its creation, its technical elements,
and how its meaning may change over time.

Sometimes the elements of your rhetorical situation are not made explicit. Signs that you need clarification
include the following:

  · Trouble getting started
  · Difficulty understanding how much background information to provide
  · Not knowing which terms are too technical or which need to be defined

For clarity about purpose, audience, genre, or culture, talk to your peers and instructor using the questions in
Table 17.3 as a guide.

         Questions to Consider                                                                     Your
                                                                                               Responses

Purpose  With regard to the image, are you writing to describe, to reflect, to analyze, or to
         evaluate (persuade)?

TABLE 17.3 Questions to determine the elements of your rhetorical situation
562 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

                                       Questions to Consider                                           Your
                                                                                                   Responses

                Who is the audience? What do they already know about the image? What do they need
Audience

                to know? Toward what cultural issues might you need to show sensitivity?

Genre    What are the characteristics of the genre in which you will compose your analysis of the
         image?

Stance What direction should your thesis statement take?

Context  Within what social, political, economic, or cultural context was the image created, and
         for what purpose?

Culture  What cultural issues are related to the image? From what cultural viewpoint are you
         writing? What is the cultural viewpoint of your audience?

TABLE 17.3 Questions to determine the elements of your rhetorical situation

Regarding context, you may need to do some research on the image:

  · Who is the image's author?
  · When was it created?
  · For what purpose was it created?
  · Has the image been featured in reviews or the news?
  · Does the image include important symbols or references?

After you have defined your rhetorical situation, write a working thesis for your paper. Consider using one or a
combination of these frames. You may change the phrasing as needed to make your point.

  · The artist's choice of ________ shapes the viewer's understanding of ________.
  · The artist incorporates ________ to symbolize ________.
  · The image's point of view reveals that ________.
  · The artist's style, including ________, suggests that ________.
  · The image evokes feelings of ________.

     Drafting: The Visual to the Textual

After you have a working thesis, move on to the next major step: outlining the visual elements you intend to
analyze. Review the material in "Reading" Images and Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and
Rhetoric. In the case of the Roosevelt statue, the author has thought about which technical elements of the
statue to analyze. The author also has considered the important aspects of the historical context shaping
Theodore Roosevelt's life, presidency, and legacy; the museum and the cultural events in the year the statue
was erected; and the cultural events in the year the decision is being made about whether to remove the statue.
Remember that you may need to do some additional research to supplement your understanding of the
context.

Analyze the Image

With a larger understanding of your subject's social, political, and cultural context, you can now begin to
analyze the image. Limit your descriptions to what you can see and what your observations imply. Consider the
following examples:

  · Pattern. Identify the repetition of the figures, but note the differences in the ways each is depicted.
      Identify any lines or other elements that are repeated with variation.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                  17.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images 563

   · Point of view. The statue is tall and on a pedestal, requiring viewers to look up or see it from a distance.

   · Arrangement. Three figures are arranged in a triangle, suggesting an apex with two supporting angles.

   Among the figures, the president is tallest, always visible, whereas the two accompanying figures can be

   seen fully only from either the front or the back. From the side, one or the other is always obscured.

s  · Symbolism. Each man is dressed in the clothing representative of his homeland. The two to the side are

   clearly allegorical, whereas the one on top is given individuality and freedom of expression.

   · Conclusion. Outline criteria that could be used in the future to determine how symbols of or memorials to

   historical figures should be assessed.

   Write an Introduction

   In your introduction, name the artist, the image, and the context in which you intend to discuss it. See the

   suggestions above for research you may need to do regarding context. If you do research, remember to cite the

   sources  you  use  because  this  information  did  not originate  with  you.  The  context  may  consist  of  one  or  two
                                                        end s

   paragraphs,   depending  on  how  much  information  your  audience      needs  to  understand    your  analysis.   (This  is
                     end s

   one reason to have a good understanding of your audience.) This type of introduction appears frequently in

   visual analyses and persuasive papers.

   The two keys to writing a strong context are (1) being selective about what you include and (2) framing your
   own analysis. For example, Theodore Roosevelt is an important historical figure, and many books have been
   written about him. Even two paragraphs are insufficient to summarize every relevant detail about him.
   Likewise, the American Museum of Natural History plays a significant role in documenting mammalian life
   and has a vital, if at times controversial, role in American scientific history. In the two paragraphs below, the
   author selects details about the president, the museum, and the statue that both highlight the reasons they are
   admired and touch on their potential failings. These details are not all-inclusive; they are carefully culled from
   all of the available information to lead up to the subsequent analysis, which focuses on the reasons to remove
   the statue. The last sentence in the second paragraph is the thesis, in which the author states her agreement
   with the museum's decision.

   Contextual Introduction

            Theodore Roosevelt cultivated a hearty outdoor lifestyle, exploring the Dakota Territory in the 1890s,
            serving as a Rough Rider during the Spanish-American War (1898), and advocating for the
            conservation of America's natural resources. Despite criticism for the way in which he acquired the
            land and rights to construct the Panama Canal, he was widely respected both at home and abroad,
            being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize (1906) for helping negotiate a peace treaty between Japan and
            Russia. After his presidency, he traveled extensively throughout Africa and South America, where he
            killed many animals and returned them to serve as specimens in America's natural history museums.
            He was himself shot while campaigning, but as the bullet did not penetrate his lung, he gave his
            speech regardless, earning him the reputation of a bull moose.

            A statue commemorating Roosevelt was presented to the public in 1940, two decades after his death,
            and placed in front of the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, where Roosevelt
            served as governor from 1899 to 1900. On one side of Roosevelt, depicted on horseback at the center
            of the sculpture, walks an African person, and on the other an Indigenous person. All three figures
            have a straight, proud posture and look directly ahead of them, toward the future. Given its placement,
            the statue is likely intended as an allegory, depicting the men of two continents--Africa and North
            America, including its Indigenous people--on a voyage of discovery and learning. Over time, however,
            and given the hierarchical framing of the image, with the White man clothed in a suit and atop a horse,
            central to the image, the statue's meaning has changed, leading to the praiseworthy and long-awaited
            decision to remove it in 2020.
   564 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

   Create Topic Sentences

   Use the models below to create your own topic sentences to focus each paragraph on a specific technical or
   contextual aspect of the image.

s  · Pattern. The sculpture unites the three figures--four, including the horse--primarily through the

   repetition of musculature, armor, weapons, and costumes.

   · Point of view. Because the sculpture is large, tall, and set on a pedestal, it requires viewers either to look

   up  at  it  or  to  regard  it  from   a  distance--both  postures  requiring  a  certain  degree  of  reverence.
                                                     end s

   · Arrangement. The sculpture's three human figures are arranged in a triangle, suggesting an apex with

   two supporting angles.

   · Symbolism. Each man is dressed in the clothing of his homeland, giving each allegorical significance as

   racial, rather than individual, representations.

   Build Body Paragraphs
                                  end s

   Support each topic sentence by describing in detail the elements you have chosen to assess. When describing
   the image, avoid overuse of adjectives and adverbs. Use concrete rather than abstract nouns. Abstract nouns
   name ideas, such as perspective or theme; concrete nouns refer to specific, tangible elements, such as triangle,
   line, or granite. Incorporate strong verbs as well as the necessary forms of to be (is, are, was, were). Think
   about what the features in the image are doing--the ways they interact with one another, the space around
   them, and the viewer's relationship to them. Finally, avoid speculation while going beyond description. Keep
   the discussion rooted in the evidence, and show readers what the evidence points to, what it means.

   Sample Body Paragraph: Arrangement

       The sculpture's three human figures are arranged in a triangle, suggesting an apex with two supporting
       angles. President Roosevelt is by far the tallest of the three and always visible from whichever angle
       the viewer faces the sculpture. Meanwhile, the two flanking figures can be seen fully only from the
       front or the back, suggesting that they lack nuance or subtlety because they can be seen and
       understood only directly. When seen from an angle, they are either overshadowed by the White man
       on horseback or disappear from view. Similarly, level with the Native American and the African is the
       horse, all three depicted with sharply defined muscles, highlighting their strength. Roosevelt is
       similarly well defined but fully clothed and towering over both the animal and the two men. Overall,
       the sculpture suggests, at the very least, a hierarchy among the three men and, at worst, a dominance
       of the White man over those of color.

   Formulate a Conclusion

   After you have developed the body paragraphs in which you analyze and reflect on the image, conclude by
   expanding on your thesis and suggesting directions to consider in the future. One important role of the
   conclusion is to further the discourse by showing how this rhetorical moment is merely one example of other
   such discourses and how they can be used productively in other contexts. In this case, an effective strategy
   would be to outline criteria for memorials of historical figures, even those with complicated legacies and flaws.

   Sample Conclusion

               The people concerned with public spaces--city planners, museum curators, and government and other
               leaders--must determine who is worthy of remembrance and how. In doing so, they need to consider
               historical, contextual, cultural, and artistic concerns, and they must seek and respond to public input.
               Now is the time to draft guidelines for these decisions.

        Peer Review: Separate the Personal from the Technical

   After you have drafted your paper, you are ready to review the work of your peers while they review your work.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                         17.5 · Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively About Images 565

Keep in mind that you and your peers are almost certainly going to respond to images differently. This is the
value of critical discourse about visual rhetoric: pooling shared responses and experiences helps develop a
greater understanding of the human condition. As you review your peers' writing, part of your task is to
separate your personal responses from the writer's analysis of the image's technical elements.

Here are some topics and questions to get you started on a peer analysis of someone else's work:

  · Consider the context, including culture. Indicate places where the writer has done well or can supply
      more information.
      In what ways has the author included enough information to prepare you for the analysis?
      What else would you like to know?
      Is any information superfluous or irrelevant?
      In what ways has the author addressed cultural issues--their own and those of the intended audience?
      What else should be considered?

  · Read the first sentence of each paragraph. Write your answers to these questions.
      Does a clear outline emerge?
      What, if any, changes can you suggest to improve the flow?

  · Examine each paragraph. Highlight places where descriptions or analyses are insufficient, and make
      suggestions for improvement.
      In what ways does the paragraph reflect a clear, vivid, and technical description of the image?
      In what ways does the paragraph move beyond description into analysis to explain the effect of the
          technical elements?

  · Read the conclusion. If the author has not outlined strategies for the future or contributed to ongoing
      discourse, provide your suggestions, or brainstorm some ideas with them.

     Revising: Hone Your Practice

Writing the first draft is hard work, and you are right to feel pride and a sense of accomplishment after
completing it. Thus, any critique can feel unjust and even personally wounding. Remember, though, that
writing is a process and that everyone is an apprentice, working toward expertise and, eventually, mastery. So
take every opportunity you can to learn from others and hone your skills.

First, reward yourself for completing the first draft. You may choose to take a long walk, prepare a favorite
meal, or enjoy some leisure time with friends. Savor the moment. Time away from the writing process is time
for your writing and thinking muscles to recover. Consider some light reading. Think about it this way--you'll
never build muscle if you go to the gym all day while you starve yourself. In the same way, you've expended a
lot of vocabulary and sentence- structure energy. Feed it to rebuild it.

Finally, return to your work with a goal in mind and a plan to put it into place. Look at the feedback you
received. Does your work require major revision or minor tweaks? If the latter, then your task is simple: make a
to-do list and get started! If the former, go back to the drawing board and diagnose your own process,
considering the following questions:

  · Is your current understanding of context, culture, audience, or purpose different from what it was at the
      outset? If so, what changes do you need to make?

  · Are your descriptions insufficient, unclear, or vague? Revisit "Reading" Images and Glance at Genre:
      Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric and consider the terminology and techniques introduced there
      in light of your image.

  · Is your analysis insufficient or missing? Review Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and
      Rhetoric and the example in Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively about Images.
      Reflect on your image and consider your assumptions.
566 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

         · Do you have a clear introduction, conclusion, and body paragraphs with topic sentences? Is each
             paragraph fleshed out with meaningful descriptions and analysis?

       After you think about these topics and take notes based on your thoughts, you can make a plan and revise your
       work with confidence.

     17.6 Editing Focus: Descriptive Diction

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Apply editing strategies to highlight the features of visual rhetoric.
         · Edit to include concrete nouns and descriptive language when writing about images.
         · Identify instances of wordiness and overused modifiers and edit to eliminate them.

       People reading about visual and digital images expect to encounter vivid, descriptive language that allows
       them to picture the image as they read. Particularly helpful is detailed language, such as precise names for
       colors (for example, aqua, teal, or navy for different shades of blue) or similes (for example, steel blue like the
       October sky seen through a heavy Los Angeles smog). This type of language helps readers visualize the image
       differently and broadens their range of experience. Such descriptive writing incorporates your personal
       experience with the elements of visual rhetoric discussed in this chapter.

       Consider the following suggestions to help you bridge the gap between your experience and that of your reader.

         · First, use concrete, rather than abstract, nouns. An abstract noun is a word such as concept or practice.
             It refers to an idea rather than a thing. A concrete noun refers to something visible or tangible: arc, circle,
             or line. Your reader can identify concrete nouns in the image and follow your description more
             meaningfully.

             Example 1

             Original: The artist used a lot of colors for the face instead of dividing it into lights and darks.

             Revision: The French painter Henri Matisse (1869-1954) used blues and greens, along with reds and
             yellows, to depict the woman's face instead of separating it into realistic color and shading.

             Example 2

             Original: By the placement of the figures, the sculptor depicts dominance.

             Revision: By placing the African and Indigenous figures behind and lower than the central figure mounted
             on horseback, the sculptor depicts the dominance of the White man, Theodore Roosevelt.

         · Second, use adjectives sparingly. Readers rely on subjects and verbs to draw meaning from sentences.
             Those are the words that light up the synapses and neurons in people's brains. They are the characters
             and actions in stories, while all other words act as "filler." Although they provide color, interest, and detail,
             they lack the power of subjects and verbs. So let your subjects and verbs pack the punch, and reserve
             adjectives and adverbs for special occasions.

             Consider the advice given by one of America's classic writers, Mark Twain (1835-1910): "When you catch
             an adjective, kill it. No, I don't mean utterly, but kill most of them--then the rest will be valuable. They
             weaken when they are close together. They give strength when they are wide apart. An adjective habit, or a
             wordy, diffuse, flowery habit, once fastened upon a person, is as hard to get rid of as any other vice."

             Example 1

             Original: Inside and outside, the big, shiny memorial building was covered with many very small, brightly
             colored tiles.

             Revision: Both the interior and exterior of the memorial were adorned with mosaics.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                       17.7 · Evaluation: Relationship Between Analysis and Image 567

      Example 2

      Original: The bleak meadow, which looked very dreary and not very serene, with bits of snow all around,
      was the perfect backdrop for the majestic eagle and its massive nest.

      Revision: The snow dotting the meadow made it look bleak rather than serene, highlighting the majesty of
      both the eagle and its nest.

  · Finally, strengthen verbs by removing weak, wordy structures. There are and it is are two such
      structures. If you look deeper into the sentence, you usually can find a verb masquerading as a noun.
      While you're at it, eliminate unnecessary or filler words, such as prepositions or repetitive conjunctions.

      Example 1

      Original: It is obvious that the artist intended that the painting should be something that projects clarity
      and insight.

      Revision: The artist obviously intended the painting to project clarity and insight.

      Example 2

      Original: Throughout the United States near the end of the landscape painting era, there was growing
      disillusionment among artists with the naturalness of nature.

      Revision: As the landscape painting era neared an end, U.S. artists became increasingly disillusioned with
      the naturalness of nature.

Practice Using Descriptive Diction

Revise the following descriptions to eliminate abstract nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and extra words. Be sure to
keep the same meaning.

1. The dirty, grimy, broken walls in the artist's painting of the building really show anyone looking at it that
      there is no one living there because of the condition or maybe some other reason.

2. The drawing is really very beautiful; the artist has done a great job of making the face look like the real
      person's face, especially the features.

3. In the picture, there are flowers in a vase and some food and other things on a table; in the background,
      there is a cat.

17.7 Evaluation: Relationship Between Analysis and Image

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply or challenge measurement outcomes for written discourse in the field of visual rhetoric.
  · Compare your written work with evaluation criteria.

Below are the criteria that your instructor will use to assess your written work for this chapter. As you read
them, consider how they align with the elements of visual rhetoric identified and analyzed throughout this
chapter. As you plan, write, and revise, consult the following rubric carefully to ensure that you are meeting the
critical cultural and rhetorical expectations for assessing images. Consider also ways you might usefully and
creatively challenge such expectations--for example, by adopting a unique voice in which to write that rejects
language such as "point of view" but still results in an effective piece of persuasive writing.
568 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

Rubric

Score         Critical Language               Clarity and Coherence              Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

5             The text always adheres to      The thesis and organization are    The author demonstrates
Skillful      the "Editing Focus" of this     clear. Paragraphs are evenly and   consistent skill in using the
              chapter: using descriptive      fully developed, with topic        technical language
              diction, as discussed in        sentences. Sentence structure is   associated with visual
              Section 17.6, and employing     balanced. The introduction offers  rhetoric--line, light, and point
              sensory detail. The text also   a clearly relevant context, and    of view, for example--and
              shows ample evidence of the     the conclusion is insightful. The  consistently speaks to the
              writer's intent to consciously  writer has used transitions to     reader in an engaging and
              meet or challenge               ensure coherence throughout.       professional tone.
              conventional expectations in
              rhetorically effective ways.

4             The text usually adheres to     The thesis and organization are    The author demonstrates
Accomplished  the "Editing Focus" of this     clear. Paragraphs are evenly and   some mastery of the
              chapter: using descriptive      fully developed, with topic        technical language
              diction, as discussed in        sentences. Sentence structure is   associated with visual
              Section 17.6, and employing     generally, if not consistently,    rhetoric--line, light, and point
              sensory detail. The text also   balanced. The introduction offers  of view, for example--and
              shows some evidence of the      a relevant context, and the        usually speaks to the reader
              writer's intent to meet or      conclusion is insightful. The      in an engaging and
              challenge conventional          writer has used transitions to     professional tone.
              expectations in rhetorically    ensure coherence in most
              effective ways.                 places.

3             The text generally adheres to   The thesis and organization are    The author demonstrates
Capable       the "Editing Focus" of this     fairly clear. Some paragraphs      familiarity with, if not
              chapter: using descriptive      may lack topic sentences, or       mastery of, the technical
              diction, as discussed in        topic sentences may be unclear.    language associated with
              Section 17.6, and employing     Some paragraphs may be             visual rhetoric--line, light,
              sensory detail. The text also   undeveloped. Sentence structure    and point of view, for
              shows limited evidence of       may be unbalanced. The             example--and usually speaks
              the writer's intent to meet or  introduction offers a relevant     to the reader in an engaging
              challenge conventional          context, and the conclusion is     and professional tone. There
              expectations in rhetorically    adequate, if not insightful.       may be occasional lapses in
              effective ways.                 Transitions may be missing in key  vocabulary, tone, or
                                              places.                            comprehension.

TABLE 17.4

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                  17.8 · Spotlight on ... Video and Film 569

      Score  Critical Language               Clarity and Coherence                Rhetorical Choices
2                Awareness
Developing
             The text occasionally           The thesis may be implied rather     The author demonstrates
1            adheres to the "Editing         than stated, and the organization    little, if any, familiarity with
Beginning    Focus" of this chapter: using   may be unclear. Paragraphs may       the technical language
             descriptive diction, as         lack topic sentences and may be      associated with visual
             discussed in Section 17.6,      undeveloped. Sentence structure      rhetoric--line, light, and point
             and employing sensory           is likely to be simplistic. The      of view, for example. The
             detail. The text also shows     introduction offers little context,  tone may be inconsistent and
             emerging evidence of the        and the conclusion is impractical    informal or unprofessional at
             writer's intent to meet or      or simplistic. Few transitions       times. There may be
             challenge conventional          provide minimal, if any,             occasional lapses in
             expectations in rhetorically    coherence.                           vocabulary and
             effective ways.                                                      comprehension as well.

             The text does not adhere to     The thesis is missing or irrelevant  The author demonstrates
             the "Editing Focus" of this     to the assignment. Paragraphs        little, if any, familiarity with
             chapter: using descriptive      are unevenly developed and           the technical language
             diction, as discussed in        poorly organized.                    associated with visual
             Section 17.6, and employing                                          rhetoric--line, light, and point
             sensory detail. The text also   Sentence structures and word         of view, for example. The
             shows little to no evidence of  choices may be simplistic or         tone is inconsistent and often
             the writer's intent to meet or  exhibit substantive errors that      informal or unprofessional.
             challenge conventional          impede comprehension. The            There may be lapses in
             expectations in rhetorically    introduction or conclusion may       vocabulary and
             effective ways.                 be missing. Alternatively, the       comprehension as well.
                                             introduction provides no context,
                                             or the conclusion merely
                                             summarizes the paper. Lack of
                                             transitions contributes to general
                                             incoherence.

TABLE 17.4

17.8 Spotlight on ... Video and Film

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Examine and apply key techniques used in film and movies to personal rhetorical and cultural contexts.
  · Implement a variety of technologies to address a range of audiences.
  · Create a multimodal work that incorporates visual rhetorical techniques.
570 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

       FIGURE 17.18 Ken Burns (https://openstax.org/r/Ken-Burns) (b. 1953), American historian and documentarian
       (Credit: "KenBurns" by Jim Wallace/Wikimedia Commons, CC-BY-2.0)

      Lights, Camera Angles, Actions

       This chapter focuses largely on still images, but many of the same principles apply to moving images, or film.
       Documentaries in particular combine a series of still or moving images with historical and narrative text. This
       section shows how the concepts of visual rhetoric apply to the documentary work of Ken Burns. It also
       encourages you to examine your experience through such techniques by creating a film autobiography.
       The field of movie and film artistry is vast, constituting an entire field of study in its own right. One notable
       figure in the field is the American history film documentarian Ken Burns (b. 1953), who is responsible for
       nearly 200 films as writer, director, producer, or all of the above. From The Civil War (1990) to The Vietnam
       War (2017), from Jackie Robinson (2016) to Country Music (2019), Ken Burns has documented the American
       experience in richer and more layered ways than can be achieved via print text alone.
       Burns's style is deceptively simple. His documentaries are narrated in an informative, objective manner,
       sometimes by a well-known figure in politics, sports, or entertainment whose work is related to the
       documentary topic. The images consist of archival footage, which differs depending on the topic, ranging from
       black-and-white photographs to grainy home videos. These are interspersed with interviews from
       eyewitnesses and experts.
       Of the many techniques that Burns employs, three are of particular interest: foreshadowing, the personal vs.
       the universal, and juxtaposition.
       Foreshadowing
       Documentaries are not known for being riveting, suspenseful, edge-of-your seat thrillers, but Ken Burns keeps
       audiences enthralled for hours on end. The Civil War, for example, consists of nine episodes totaling 11 hours
       and 30 minutes. One important way Burns keeps audiences engaged is by implying that things are not as they
       seem or that a major change is just on the horizon. Such warnings are delivered by his narrators often just
       after a peak emotional moment either of contentment and resolution or of fear and anxiety. The effect is to

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                         17.8 · Spotlight on ... Video and Film 571

make the audience question what could possibly happen next and to keep them tuned in for the next episode.

The Personal vs. the Universal

History may move in giant sweeps across times and places, but it happens day by day with the mundane
choices made by ordinary people. Burns excels at highlighting the small, personal tales of individuals who
changed the course of history and the ways massive historical movements affected individual people's lives.
The back-and-forth of these forces plays out in his work like a delicate ballet in which the lead dancers move
toward and away from one another on stage, amplifying the tension each time.

Juxtaposition

Like any serious historian, Burns is interested not merely in what happened but also in why. This investigation
requires that he go beyond appearances, a challenge for a filmmaker who relies on images to make his
meaning clear to viewers. Burns often demonstrates for viewers how people and events converge by showing
an ordinary American soldier, farmer, or sports figure, for example, alongside a powerful political figure.
Alternatively, he may pan out from a newspaper headline only to zoom in on a story printed deep within the
fold. In the viewer's mind, the placement of such figures plants an impression that is immediately upended or
replaced. The experience can be jarring, but the technique leads to deep learning and retention, which is one
reason Burns's documentaries leave a lasting impression on his audience.

Burns often works in conjunction with the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), which funds and airs much of
his work. To see these techniques in action, visit his page on the PBS website and watch a short clip of his
biography of Jack Johnson (https://openstax.org/r/short-clip) (1878-1946), the first Black American
heavyweight boxer to became world champion--in the height of the Jim Crow era.

Publish Your Work: Film Autobiography

Make a documentary of your own! Document the process of writing your essay or select a meaningful moment
in your life--an event, an anniversary, an accomplishment, a disappointment--and create a 3-5 minute
multimodal video about it, incorporating video, still images, and text that explore the significance of the
moment in your life. Post your finished product to YouTube. Table 17.5 lists resources you can use to produce
and publish your video, including ways to limit viewership and address privacy concerns.

Name                                     Video Creation Software  Location
                                  Notes

Lightworks Best for beginners. Includes stock images.             LWKS (https://openstax.org/r/LWKS)

VideoPad Open access and easy to use. Limited functionality.      VideoPad (https://openstax.org/r/
                                                                  VideoPad)

HitFilm  Somewhat advanced. Allows special effects. Must share
Express                                                                                 HitFilm (https://openstax.org/r/HitFilm)

         status update on social media to use.

OpenShot For intermediate users.                                  OpenShot (https://openstax.org/r/Open-
                                                                  Shot)

                                  YouTube Resources

         Description                                              Location

TABLE 17.5 Resources for making a film autobiography
572 17 · Image Analysis: What You See

Name                                          Video Creation Software  Location
                                       Notes

Upload videos to YouTube privately so that you control who sees        YouTube (https://openstax.org/r/YouTube)
them and when.

Set your YouTube audience to comply with the Children's Online         Channel Setting (https://openstax.org/r/
Privacy Protection Act.                                                Channel-Setting)

Set your YouTube video to be visible only to your professor and        Sharing With a Specific Audience
classmates.                                                            (https://openstax.org/r/Sharing-With)

TABLE 17.5 Resources for making a film autobiography

A film autobiography about your experiences with writing and images can help you consider the way you use
images in discourse. It also serves as good practice in thinking critically about your experiences and their
relation to both images and language. Finally, a film autobiography allows you to communicate your
experiences and reflections with others, expanding their worldview as well as your own.

17.9 Portfolio: Interplay Between Text and Image

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Articulate your use of images in light of their rhetorical context and elements.
  · Analyze images rhetorically both in and out of academic settings.

The consideration of visual rhetoric is not merely an academic exercise. Because visual and digital images are
ever-present, thinking critically about them is a meaningful way of interacting with the world, reflecting on
attitudes and behaviors, and communicating with others. You can apply what you learned in this chapter by
considering the images surrounding you: those you see on advertisements in public spaces, those you view on
television and other streaming services, and those you see and post on social media platforms.

Interacting with Images Online

As you add your essay to your portfolio, continue conscious and reflective practice in your own writing by
thinking about an image you recently posted on one of your social media platforms. Consider the following
questions, returning to "Reading" Images as needed.

  · Does it contain information open to interpretation?
  · What is its point of view?
  · How is it arranged?
  · What colors or symbols does it use, and what associations might these have for you or others?

Draft an analysis of your own image-posting behavior to include in your course portfolio. The purpose is both
to showcase and continue practicing the writing skills and techniques you learned from this chapter and to
assess and reflect upon the ways in which you interact with visual and digital images. Remember to include the
following elements in your analysis:

  · Introduction. Establish the context. Material here should include relevant information about you, your
      posting platforms and behaviors, and the image you posted. Should you choose to write a persuasive piece,
      your introduction should include a thesis statement identifying your position and one or more reasons for
      it.

  · Paragraphs with clear topic sentences. Focus each paragraph on a technical element of the image, and
      ensure that it contains a mixture of description and either reflection, analysis, or persuasion. Begin each

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                    17.9 · Portfolio: Interplay Between Text and Image 573

      paragraph with a topic sentence identifying the paragraph's focus.
  · Image(s). Because you are describing and assessing the image you posted, a copy of it will go a long way

      toward helping your audience understand it. If the image is in the public domain, embed it with a citation.
      If not, embed a link so viewers can see it on the Internet.
  · Citations. Understanding context often requires research. Furthermore, images have creators who
      deserve recognition for their work. Follow MLA guidelines to cite all of your sources, including the image.
  · Conclusion. Go beyond summarizing to identify future image-posting practices that you intend to
      consider and would encourage others to consider.

In conclusion, this chapter explains the concepts associated with both visual rhetoric and writing about visual
and digital images. Through the numerous examples, analyses, and procedures outlined here, you can connect
your personal and cultural experiences to the visual and digital images with which you interact. In doing so,
you can make meaningful connections with a variety of audiences, permitting a broader understanding of the
world and its many visual depictions.
574 17 · Further Reading

Further Reading

The following is a list of some texts and museums that can help deepen your understanding of visual rhetoric.
Creation Art Center. Miami, FL, www.creationartcenter.org/
El Museo del Barrio. New York, NY, www.elmuseo.org/
Helmers, Marguerite H. The Elements of Visual Analysis. Pearson Longman, 2006.
Honeywill, Paul. Visual Language for the World Wide Web. Intellect, 1999.
The Honolulu Museum of Art. Honolulu, HI, honolulumuseum.org/
Jenks, Chris, editor. Visual Culture. Routledge, 1995.
Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Los Angeles, CA, www.lacma.org/
McClean, Shilo T. Digital Storytelling: The Narrative Power of Visual Effects in Film. MIT P, 2007.
National Memorial for Peace and Justice. Montgomery, AL, museumandmemorial.eji.org/memorial
National Museum of Mexican Art. Chicago, IL, nationalmuseumofmexicanart.org/
O'Connell, Mark, and Raje Airey. The Illustrated Dictionary of Signs and Symbols. Anness, 2009.
Perelman, Chaïm, and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca. The New Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation. Translated by

    John Wilkinson and Purcell Weaver, U of Notre Dame P, 1969.
The Rubin Museum of Art. New York, NY, rubinmuseum.org/
The Smithsonian National Museum Network. Washington, DC (collections with special cultural interests

    detailed below)
Asian Pacific American Center, smithsonianapa.org/
Latino Center, latino.si.edu/latino-center
National Museum of African American History and Culture, nmaahc.si.edu/
National Museum of the American Indian, americanindian.si.edu/
Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, the Smithsonian's National Museum of Asian Art,

    asia.si.edu/
Stocchetti, Matteo, and Karin Kukkonen, editors. Images in Use: Towards the Critical Analysis of Visual

   Communication. John Benjamins, 2011.
Tuskegee Airmen National Historical Museum. Detroit, MI, www.tuskegeemuseum.org/
Whitney Plantation. Wallace, LA, www.whitneyplantation.org/

Works Cited

"Addressing the Statue." American Museum of Natural History, www.amnh.org/exhibitions/addressing-the-
    theodore-roosevelt-statue.

Avery, Dan. "Mississippi Voters Decide to Replace Confederate-Themed State Flag." NBC News, 3 Nov. 2020,
    www.nbcnews.com/news/nbcblk/mississippi-voters-decide-replace-confederate-themed-state-flag-
    n1246244.

"Charles Demuth--Biography and Legacy." The Art Story, www.theartstory.org/artist/demuth-charles/life-and-
    legacy/.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                            17 · Works Cited 575

"Charles Demuth." Encyclopædia Britannica, 4 Nov. 2020, www.britannica.com/biography/Charles-Demuth.
Freidel, Frank, and Hugh Sidey. "Theodore Roosevelt." The Presidents of the United States of America, White

   House Historical Association, 2006. The White House, www.whitehouse.gov/about-the-white-house/
    presidents/theodore-roosevelt/.
"Gaza Strip." Encyclopædia Britannica, 12 May 2021, www.britannica.com/place/Gaza-Strip.
"Gaza Strip." Mural Guide: The Worldwide Online Museum for Mural Art, Kultklecks, muralguide.org/murals/
    prague/gaza-strip.
Herbers, John. "Mississippi: A Profile of The Nation's Most Segregated State." New York Times, 28 June 1964,
    www.nytimes.com/1964/06/28/archives/mississippi-a-profile-of-the-nations-most-segregated-state-
    through.html.
Jewitt, Carey, editor. "Multimodality." Glossary of Multimodal Terms, MODE, 25 Feb. 2013,
    multimodalityglossary.wordpress.com/multimodality/.
"Ken Burns." Ken Burns, 2021, www.kenburns.com/principals/ken-burns/.

Ludy, Sara. "Artist Sara Ludy on Lucid Dreaming, VR and the Digital Sublime." Interview by Rosie Flanagan.
   Taupe, 23 Jan. 2020, www.taupemagazine.com/digitalsublime.

Ludy, Sara. "CV." Sara Ludy, 2021, www.saraludy.com/pagecv.
"The Meaning of Colors in Cultures around the World." The Shutterstock Blog, 30 Oct. 2020,

    www.shutterstock.com/blog/color-symbolism-and-meanings-around-the-world.
"Möbius Strip." Encyclopædia Britannica, 10 July 2019, www.britannica.com/science/Mobius-strip.

Murphy, Paul P. "The SEC Said They Would Consider Pulling Championship Events If Mississippi Doesn't
   Change Its Flag." CNN, 19 June 2020, www.cnn.com/2020/06/19/us/mississippi-flag-sec-trnd/index.html.

Pearce, Matt. "148 Years Later, Mississippi Ratifies Amendment Banning Slavery." Los Angeles Times, 18 Feb.
    2013, www.latimes.com/nation/la-xpm-2013-feb-18-la-na-nn-mississippi-ratifies-slavery-
    amendment-20130218-story.html.

"Precisionism." Encyclopædia Britannica, 1 June 2018, www.britannica.com/art/Precisionism.
"Theodore Roosevelt." History.com, A&E Television Networks, 28 Feb. 2020, www.history.com/topics/us-

    presidents/theodore-roosevelt.
576 17 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
Multimodal and Online Writing:                                                      18
Creative Interaction between Text
and Image

FIGURE 18.1 Multimodal text incorporates many different types of communication, making it visually and aurally
compelling as well as highly accessible for audiences. (credit: "Computer Internet Tools Gadgets Edited 2020" by
www.mechanicalcaveman.com/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

18.1  Mixing Genres and Modes
18.2  Multimodal Trailblazer: Torika Bolatagici
18.3  Glance at Genre: Genre, Audience, Purpose, Organization
18.4  Annotated Sample Reading: "Celebrating a Win-Win" by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn
18.5  Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project
18.6  Evaluation: Transitions
18.7  Spotlight on . . . Technology
18.8  Portfolio: Multimodalism

INTRODUCTION Chances are you already have a great deal of experience with multimodal composition--that
is, writing or creating content by combining different types of communication. Much of your experience may
come from digital spaces, perhaps even from platforms such as social media that you don't associate with
academics. According to literature examining adolescent and young adult literacy skills, young adults
incorporate a great deal of multimodal communication--which includes sound, images, movement, and
text--into their everyday lives to express themselves and connect with others. Social media has no doubt
hastened the spread of multimodal communication, and its prevalence in the world is unprecedented. Perhaps
578 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       you have never believed that your experience with digital and multimodal writing connects to academic
       composition, but indeed it does. Just as technology has changed how people interact with the world,
       multimodal composition has altered how they create content. In this chapter, you will learn how to combine
       your experience in creating and using multimodal composition with established writing practices, particularly
       those used in argumentative writing, to generate connected content that creates meaning.
       Multimodal composition begins where any other composition does: with the rhetorical situation, or the
       circumstance of communication in which one person (the composer) uses communication to influence the
       perspective of another (the audience). All multimodal compositions are created for a specific time and place
       and a particular audience who views the world in an explicit and culturally influenced way. As a writer, you
       make choices based on the rhetorical situation: context, audience, purpose, genre, and culture. You consider
       the strengths and weaknesses of all the possible means and tools available for reaching your rhetorical goals.
       By identifying the audience, determining what you need to tell the audience, and analyzing the best way to do
       that (including which types of media to use), you are empowered to create an effective and targeted
       composition.
       In many ways, multimodal composition opens a range of possibilities by offering you any number of tools to
       make meaning, rather than limiting you to text alone. For example, a sportswriter might rely heavily on visuals
       to engage readers and demonstrate a runner's prowess, or they might create infographics to relay statistics
       about the athlete or the meet itself.

       FIGURE 18.2 Composers often use images to engage readers and relate details that are difficult to express with
       words alone. (credit: "ISST 2014 Munich" by R. Boed/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Websites require a balance of text, images, and careful formatting to present information in ways that are easy
       to digest and not overwhelming for the reader. In fact, the most difficult part of this type of creation may be
       choosing among the available tools to create meaning effectively without doing too much or too little. In some
       ways, the flexibility of websites can make it hard to know where to get started--or where to end.
       This chapter presents a blog post by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn, formerly of the Environmental Protection
       Agency. Studying this article and the components of multimodal writing that Dunn chooses to use will help you
       understand how different platforms and rhetorical needs require different elements of text, media, and modes.
       Later in the chapter, you will learn how to address a range of audiences through your own textual and digital
       compositions.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                               18.1 · Mixing Genres and Modes 579

18.1 Mixing Genres and Modes

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Address a range of audiences using a variety of technologies.
  · Adapt composing processes for a variety of modalities, including textual and digital compositions.
  · Match the capacities of different print and electronic environments to varying rhetorical situations.
The writing genre for this chapter incorporates a variety of modalities. A genre is a type of composition that
encompasses defined features, follows a style or format, and reflects your purpose as a writer. For example,
given the composition types romantic comedy, poetry, or documentary, you probably can think easily of
features of each of these composition types. When considering the multimodal genres, you will discover that
genres create conventions (standard ways of doing things) for categorizing media according to the
expectations of the audience and the way the media will be consumed. Consider film media, for example; it
encompasses genres including drama, documentaries, and animated shorts, to name a few. Each genre has its
own conventions, or features. When you write or analyze multimodal texts, it is important to account for genre
conventions.
A note on text: typically, when referring to text, people mean written words. But in multimodal genres, the term
text can refer to a piece of communication as a whole, incorporating written words, images, sounds, and even
movement. The following images are examples of multimodal texts.

FIGURE 18.3 A website is a multimodal text that combines images and words. It may incorporate sound and
animation as well. (credit: "SimplePix - Responsive WordPress Blog Magazine Theme #2" by Serge Kij/flickr, CC BY
2.0)
580 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.4 A theatrical performance, as shown in this dance image, is a multimodal text combining drama, music,
       movement, and visual design. Other theatrical performances combine different elements. (credit: "Danses
       d'Okinawa (musée Guimet, Paris)" by Jean-Pierre Dalbéra/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

       FIGURE 18.5 An infographic is a multimodal text that combines words and different types of graphics to convey
       information succinctly. (credit: "ORCID Infographic 2019" by ORCID/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
       Multimodal genres are uniquely positioned to address audiences through a variety of modes, or types of
       communication. These can be identified in the following categories:

             Linguistic text: The most common mode for writing, the linguistic mode includes written or spoken text.
             Visuals: The visual mode includes anything the reader can see, including images, colors, lighting,
             typefaces, lines, shapes, and backgrounds.
             Audio: The audio mode includes all types of sound, such as narration, sound effects, music, silence, and
             ambient noise.
             Spatial: Especially important in digital media, the spatial mode includes spacing, image and text size and

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                               18.1 · Mixing Genres and Modes 581

      position, white space, visual organization, and alignment.
      Gestural: The gestural mode includes communication through all kinds of body language, including
      movement and facial expressions.
Multimodal composition provides an opportunity for you to develop and practice skills that will translate to
future coursework and career opportunities. Creating a multimodal text requires you to demonstrate aptitude
in various modes and reflects the requirements for communication skills beyond the academic world. In other
words, although multimodal creations may seem to be little more than pictures and captions at times, they
must be carefully constructed to be effective. Even the simplest compositions are meticulously planned and
executed. Multimodal compositions may include written text, such as blog post text, slideshow text, and
website content; image-based content, such as infographics and photo essays; or audiovisual content,
including podcasts, public service announcements, and videos.

FIGURE 18.6 Multimodal compositions aren't always complicated. Even a single photo can create a major impact
on readers. (credit: "3-187 Infantry soldier scanning ridge in Bak Defense" by Sgt. Jeffrey Alexander/Wikimedia
Commons, Defense.gov Photo Essays, Public Domain)
Multimodal composition is especially important in a 21st-century world where communication must
represent and transfer across cultural contexts. Because using multiple modes helps a writer make meaning
in different channels (media that communicate a message), the availability of different modes is especially
important to help you make yourself understood as an author. In academic settings, multimodal content
creation increases engagement, improves equity, and helps prepare you to be a global citizen. The same is true
for your readers. Multimodal composition is important in addressing and supporting cultural and linguistic
diversity. Modes are shaped by social, cultural, and historic factors, all of which influence their use and impact
in communication. And it isn't just readers who benefit from multimodal composition. Combining a variety of
modes allows you as a composer to connect to your own lived experiences--the representation of experiences
and choices that you have faced in your own life--and helps you develop a unique voice, thus leveraging your
knowledge and experiences.
582 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

     18.2 Trailblazer

     Multimodal Trailblazer: Torika Bolatagici

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify various rhetorical and culture contexts while reading for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and
             communication.

         · Demonstrate that genre conventions vary and are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.

FIGURE 18.7 Torika Bolatagici (https://openstax.org/r/4S3YIw-PFAs)         "I can never
works to bring attention to indigenous artists. Speculation exists as to     deny the
the origin of this wall- like stone structure; some believe it was             deeply
constructed by early peoples of Australia. (credit: "Man-made stone
wall" by Rupert Gerritsen/Wikimedia Commons, CC0).                        personal place
                                                                           that the work
                                                                          comes from."

Digital Representations of Embodiment and Cultural Identity

Torika Bolatagici is a creator, educator, and art historian who works with various modalities, including
photography (https://openstax.org/r/photography), video, fine art, and mixed media (https://openstax.org/r/
mixed_media). Bolatagici was born in Tasmania and, as a young person, spent time living in Hobart,
Tasmania; Sydney, Australia; and her father's village of Suvavou, Fiji. Her work has been featured across the
globe, including in exhibits in the United States, Taiwan, and Mexico as well as throughout New Zealand and
Australia. She has a PhD from the School of Art and Design, University of New South Wales, where she wrote
her dissertation on "Somatic Sotia: Commodity, Agency and the Fijian Military Body."

In 2013 and 2014, Bolatagici coordinated the Contemporary Pacific Arts Festival (https://openstax.org/r/
contemporary_specific), curating an experience that focused on Pacific arts practices in Australia. She invited
speakers to present on themes spanning activism and the arts, cultural appropriation, and contemporary
artistic practices. Bolatagici now works as an educator, lecturing on art and performance at Deakin University
in Australia, and has led youth arts workshops in the local Pacific community.

Reflecting on the beginnings of her career, she describes going through her undergraduate coursework and
feeling the responsibility of bringing "brown-ness" to the classroom. After finding that higher education
largely dismissed the lived experiences of marginalized communities and spending time at the Stuart Hall
Library at the Institute of International Visual Arts, Bolatagici was inspired to create the pop-up Community
Reading Room in Melbourne, Australia, in 2013.

Through the pop-up room, she hoped to engage the community in international visual arts and culture. She

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                  18.3 · Glance at Genre: Genre, Audience, Purpose, Organization 583

began her initiative by sharing her own personal collection, including texts and anthologies of BIPOC (Black,
Indigenous, and people of color) art. The Community Reading Room provides an emphasis on contemporary
art and theory from Africa, the Americas, and Oceania.

Bolatagici has incorporated a variety of media (https://openstax.org/r/variety) into her academic and
professional portfolios, describing how her work helps her not only represent diverse cultures
(https://openstax.org/r/represent) but also explore her own identity. From photo essays (https://openstax.org/r/
photo_essays) to academic papers, her compositions are anchored by the common thread of representing
marginalized people and experiences, particularly those related to communities of color. Her creative output
has focused on representation of mixed-race identity, Pacific arts practices, and militarism. Through mixed
media, she investigates relationships between visual culture and historiography (study of historical writings);
human ecology (study of relationships between humans and their natural, social, and created environments);
and the intersection of gender, knowledge, and globalization.

Bolatagici describes her work as interdisciplinary, creating components across a wide range of media. Instead
of limiting herself, she allows her work to flow naturally, staying focused in the moment. With these unique
components, she looks at the relationship between visual culture and human ecology. This interdisciplinary
approached emerged for Bolatagici even before she knew it as multimodalism. Because her interests in college
varied so greatly, she pursued a media arts degree so that she could explore visual arts as they related to
cultural studies. This pursuit grew into a career that now includes new modes and media sources, such as
photography, video, and mixed media.

Choosing a multimodal approach because it better communicates the complex subjects she conveys,
Bolatagici draws on her own experiences in order to represent the experiences of marginalized people at the
forefront of her compositions. For Bolatagici, creating in any form is bigger than the page, and she aims to
bring her reality to life through visual, textual, and multimedia creations that communicate in four
dimensions.

Read Bolatagici's weekly journal (https://openstax.org/r/freshmilk) during her residency in Barbados.

Discussion Questions

1. How does using a multimodal approach allow Bolatagici to communicate her lived experience?

2. Why does representation matter in multimodal composition? How has Bolatagici addressed this in her
    methods?

3. What role can multimodal compositions play in exploring experiences beyond your own?

4. How can multimodal works at times better communicate aspects of culture and history than literary text
    alone?

5. In what sense is bringing communities together an important aspect of Bolatagici's work?

18.3 Glance at Genre: Genre, Audience, Purpose, Organization

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify key genre conventions, including structure, tone, and mechanics.
  · Implement common formats and design features for different text types.
  · Demonstrate how genre conventions vary and are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.

The multimodal genres of writing are based on the idea that modes work in different ways, with different
outcomes, to create various vehicles for communication. By layering, or combining, modes, an author can
make meaning and communicate through mixed modes what a single mode cannot on its own. Essentially,
modes "cooperate" to communicate the author's intent as they interweave meanings captured by each.
584 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       For example, think of a public service announcement about environmental conservation. A composer can
       create a linguistic text about the dangers of plastic pollution in oceans and support the ideas with knowledge of
       or expertise in the subject. Yet words alone may not communicate the message forcefully, particularly if the
       audience consists of people who have never considered the impact of pollution on the oceans. That composer,
       then, might combine the text with images of massive amounts of human-generated plastic waste littering a
       shoreline, thus strengthening the argument and enhancing meaning by touching on audience emotions. By
       using images to convey some of the message, the composer layers modes. The picture alone does not tell the
       whole story, but when combined with informational text, it enhances the viewer's understanding of the issue.
       Modes, therefore, can be combined in various ways to communicate a rhetorical idea effectively.

       FIGURE 18.8 The addition of various types of media can enhance the impact of a composition and thus increase the
       reader's understanding of an issue. (credit: "Polluted Beach on the Red Sea in Sharm el-Naga, Port Safaga, Egypt"
       by Vberger/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      Audience Awareness

       As with any type of composition, knowing your audience (the readers and viewers for whom you are creating)
       will help you determine what information to include and what genre, mode(s), or media in which to present it.
       Consider your audience when choosing a composition's tone (composer's attitude toward the audience or
       subject), substance, and language. Considering the audience is critical not only in traditional academic writing
       but also in nearly any genre or mode you choose. Ask yourself these questions when analyzing your audience's
       awareness:

         · What (and how much) does the audience already know about the topic? The amount of background
             information needed can influence what genre, modes, and media types you include and how you use them.
             You don't want to bore an audience with information that is common knowledge or overwhelm an
             audience with information they know nothing about.

         · What is the audience's viewpoint on the subject? Are you creating for a skeptical audience or one that
             largely agrees with your rhetorical arguments?

         · How do you relate to your audience? Do you share cultural understanding, or are you presenting

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                  18.3 · Glance at Genre: Genre, Audience, Purpose, Organization 585

      information or beliefs that will be unfamiliar? This information will help you shape the message, tone, and
      structure of the composition.

Understanding your audience allows you to choose rhetorical devices that reflect ethos (appeals to ethics:
credibility), logos (appeals to logic: reason), and pathos (appeals to sympathy: emotion) to create contextually
responsive compositions through multiple modes.

It important to address audience diversity in all types of composition, but the unique aspects of multimodal
composition present particular opportunities and challenges. First, when you compose, you do so through
your own cultural filter, formed from your experiences, gender, education, and other factors. Multimodal
composition opens up the ability to develop your cultural filter through various methods. Think about images
of your lived experiences, videos capturing cultural events, or even gestures in live performances. Also
consider the diversity of your audience members and how that affects the content choices you make during
composition. Avoiding ethnocentrism--the assumption that the customs, values, and beliefs of your culture
are superior to others--is an important consideration when addressing your audience, as is using bias-free
language, especially regarding ethnicity, gender, and abilities.

Blogs, Vlogs, and Creative Compositions

Among the modes available to you as a composer, blogs (regularly updated websites, usually run by an
individual or a small group) have emerged as a significant genre in digital literature. The term blog, a
combination of web and log, was coined in 1999 and gained rapid popularity in the early 2000s. In general,
blogs have a relatively narrow focus on a topic or argument and present a distinctive structure that includes
these features:

  · A headline or title draws in potential readers. Headlines are meant to grab attention, be short, and
      accurately reflect the content of the blog post.

  · An introduction hooks the reader, briefly introducing the topic and establishing the author's credibility on
      the subject.

  · Short paragraphs often are broken up by images, videos, or other media to make meaning and supplement
      or support the text content.

  · The narrative is often composed in a style in which the author claims or demonstrates expertise.
  · Media such as images, video, and infographics depict information graphically and break up text.
  · Hyperlinks (links to other internet locations) to related content often serve as evidence supporting the

      author's claim.
  · A call to action provides clear and actionable instructions that engage the reader.
586 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.9 A blog post typically has these labeled parts. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
       CC BY 4.0 license)
       Blogs offer accessibility and an opportunity to make meaning in new ways. By integrating images and
       audiovisual media, you can develop a multimodal representation of arguments and ideas. Blogs also provide
       an outlet for conveying ideas through both personal and formal narratives and are used frequently in
       industries from entertainment to scientific research to government organizations.
       Newer in the family of multimodal composition is the video blog, or vlog, a blog for which the medium is video.
       Vlogs usually combine video embedded in a website with supporting text, images, or other modes of
       communication. Vlogging often takes on a narrative structure, similar to other types of storytelling, with the
       added element of supplementary audio and video, including digital transitions that connect one idea or scene
       to another. Vlogs offer ample opportunities to mix modalities.
       Vlogs give a literal voice to a composer, who typically narrates or speaks directly to the camera. Like a blogger,
       a vlog creator acts as an expert, telling a narrative story or using rhetoric to argue a point. Vlogs often strive to
       create an authentic and informal tone, similar to published blogs, inviting a stream-of-consciousness or
       interview-like style. Therefore, they often work well when targeted toward audiences for whom a casual mood
       is valuable and easily understood.

       FIGURE 18.10 Vlogs are video blogs that offer the opportunity for composers to voice their thoughts in a stream-of-

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                  18.3 · Glance at Genre: Genre, Audience, Purpose, Organization 587

consciousness style or interview-like style. (credit: "BloggerCon IV Day 2 24Jun06 - 13" by Roland Tanglao/flickr,
CC0 1.0)
Other creative compositions include websites, digital or print newsletters, podcasts, and a wide variety of other
content. Each composition type has its own best practices regarding structure and organization, often
depending on the chosen modalities, the way they are used, and the intended audience. Whatever the mode,
however, all multimodal writing has several characteristics in common, beginning with effective, intentional
composition.

Effective Writing

Experimenting with modes and media is not an excuse for poorly developed writing that lacks focus,
organization, thought, purpose, or attention to mechanics. Although multimodal compositions offer flexibility
of expression, the content still must be presented in well-crafted, organized, and purposeful ways that reflect
the author's purpose and the audience's needs.

  · To be well-crafted, a composition should reflect the author's use of literary devices to convey meaning, use
      of relevant connections, and acknowledgment of grammar and writing conventions.

  · To be organized, a composition should reflect the author's use of effective transitions and a logical
      structure appropriate to the chosen mode.

  · To be purposeful, a composition should show that the author addresses the needs of the audience, uses
      rhetorical devices that advance the argument, and offers insightful understanding of the topic.

Organization of multimodal compositions refers to the sequence of message elements. You must decide which
ideas require attention, how much and in what order, and which modalities create maximum impact on
readers. While many types of formal and academic writing follow a prescribed format, or at least the general
outline of one, the exciting and sometimes overwhelming features of multimodal possibilities open the door to
any number of acceptable formats. Some of these are prescribed, and others more open ended; your job will
inevitably be to determine when to follow a template and when to create something new. As the composer, you
seek to structure media in ways that will enable the reader, or audience, to derive meaning. Even small
changes in media, rhetorical appeal, and organization can alter the ways in which the audience participates in
the construction of meaning.
Within a medium--for example, a video--you might include images, audio, and text. By shifting the
organization, placement, and interaction among the modes, you change the structure of the video and
therefore create varieties of meaning. Now, imagine you use that same structure of images, audio, and text, but
change the medium to a slideshow. The impact on the audience will likely change with the change in medium.
Consider the infamous opening scene of the horror movie The Shining (1980). The primary medium, video,
shows a car driving through a mountainous region. After audio is added, however, the meaning of the
multimodal composition changes, creating an emphasis on pace--management of dead air--and tone--attitude
toward the subject--that communicates something new to the audience.

FIGURE 18.11 The opening scenes of The Shining feature the serene-looking Saint Mary Lake with its Wild Goose
588 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       Island. The addition of the audio mode, music featuring ominous-sounding horns (https://openstax.org/r/ominous),
       not only communicates new information to viewers but also shapes an emphasis on drama and danger. (credit: "The
       upper end of St. Mary Lake and Wild Goose Island, Glacier National Park, Montana. Photo taken from Going-to-the-
       Sun Road" by Ken Thomas/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

      Exploring the Genre

       These are the key terms and characteristics of multimodal texts.

         · Alignment: the way in which elements such as text features, images, and particularly text are placed on a
             page. Text can be aligned at the left, center, or right. Alignment contributes to organization and how media
             transitions within a text.

         · Audience: readers or viewers of the composition.
         · Channel: a medium used to communicate a message. Often-used channels include websites, blogs, social

             media, print, audio, and video-hosting sites.
         · Complementary: describes content that is different across two or more modes, both of which are

             necessary for understanding. Often audio and visual modes are complementary, with one making the
             other more meaningful.
         · Emphasis: the elements in media that are most significant or pronounced. The emphasis choices have a
             major impact on the overall meaning of the text.
         · Focus: a clear purpose for composition, also called the central idea, main point, or guiding principle.
             Focus should include the specific audience the composer is trying to influence.
         · Layering: combining modes in a single composition.
         · Layout: the organization of elements on a page, including text, images, shapes, and overall composition.
             Layout applies primarily to the visual mode.
         · Media: the means and channels of reaching an audience (for example, image, website, song). A medium
             (singular form of media) can contain multiple modes.
         · Mode: the method of communication (linguistic, visual, audio, or spatial means of creating meaning).
             Media can incorporate more than one mode.
         · Organization: the pattern of arrangement that allows a reader to understand text or images in a
             composition. Organization may be textual, visual, or spatial.
         · Proximity: the relationship between objects in space, specifically how close to or far from one another
             they are. Proximity can show a relationship between elements and is often important in layout.
         · Purpose: an author's reason for writing a text, including the reasoning that accounts for which modes of
             presentation to use. Composers of multimodal texts may seek to persuade, inform, or entertain the
             audience.
         · Repetition: a unifying feature, such as a pattern used more than once, in the way in which elements (text
             features, typeface, color, etc.) are used on a page. Repetition often indicates emphasis or a particular
             theme. Repetitions and patterns can help focus a composition, explore a theme, and emphasize important
             points.
         · Supplementary: describes content that is different in two or more modes, where a composer uses one
             mode to convey primary understanding and the other(s) to support or extend understanding.
             Supplementary content should not be thought of as "extra," for its purpose is to expand on the primary
             media.
         · Text: written words. In multimodal composition, text can refer to a piece of communication as a whole,
             incorporating written words, images, sounds, and movement.
         · Tone: the composer's attitude toward the subject and/or the audience.
         · Transitions: words, phrases, or audiovisual elements that help readers make connections between ideas
             in a multimodal text, including connections from sentence to sentence, paragraph to paragraph, and
             mode to mode. Transitions show relationships between ideas and help effectively organize a composition.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                               18.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Celebrating a Win-Win" by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn 589

18.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Celebrating a Win-Win" by Alexandra
Dapolito Dunn

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Read a diverse range of texts in different genres to identify how conventions are shaped by purpose, language,
      culture, and audience expectation.

  · Read effectively for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communication in various rhetorical and cultural
      contexts.

  · Demonstrate the relationships between ideas, patterns of organization, and verbal and nonverbal elements.

Introduction

FIGURE 18.12 Alexandra Dapolito Dunn (credit: "Alex Dunn, assistant administrator at US EPA" by Eric Vance/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
As a multimodal composer, you may choose to employ ethos, a rhetorical method of persuasion. In this
context, ethos is an appeal to readers in order to establish the author's credibility and character. In a rhetorical
appeal, you can use ethos through fair, neutral language to show trustworthiness. In multimodal composition,
ethos aims to convince readers that you are a reliable and an ethical expert on the subject. When using ethos,
authors present sources that support their argument in balanced and honest ways, revealing their writing to be
reliable. Authors also seek to understand their audience, establishing commonalities between those who
support the issue, those who are undecided or indifferent, and those who dissent. Often, authors invoke the
words or ideas of respected figures, authorities, or even religious texts when using ethos to convince readers.
Analyzing multimodal compositions can help you learn how to use rhetorical frames in the multimodal
composing process. In the blog post you are about to read, the author uses ethos, along with structural aspects
of multimodal texts, to establish herself as a trustworthy expert on the subject of pollution prevention.
Studying the components of multimodal writing in this blog will help you understand how multimedia
platforms utilize elements of text, media, and modes.
            590 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

                       LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

              "Celebrating a Win-Win: 30 Years of Progress under the Pollution Prevention Act" by Alexandra
public domainDtapolito Dunn (b. 1967)

                        On this day in 1990, a new era was ushered in for Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the nation when
                        the Pollution Prevention (P2) Act was signed into law. Theeancdt gpauvbelicthdeoamgaeinncty new tools to join with states,
                       tribes, and communities to prevent pollution before it happens. It also marked a shift in the paradiegnmd opfublic domain t
                        enveirnodnmpuebnlticaldpormotaeicnttion, which had been mostly focused on end-of-pipe pollution control and clean-up
                        strategies.

                 Hanenaodtlaint e and Tone. The linguistic headline immediately allows readers to know the author's position on the
                 subject, and its visual component of boldfaced text allows readers to understand that it's important. Not only does it

                                                                       end public domain t
                 clearly preface the article by informing the reader of its topic (the Pollution Prevention Act), but it also presents the
                 author's positive attitude toward the subject through the words celebrating and win-win.end annotat

                 Canonnotetaxtt. Dunn contextualizes the Pollution Prevention Act, showing it as a positive national achievement that
                 partnered the government with the people to prevent pollution.end annotat

                        Equally important, the P2 Act strengthened EPA's role as an ally of American businesses, helping them save
                        billions of dollars and improve operations. As EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler has said, "It's far better to
                        prevent pollution from occurring than to go in after the fact and clean it up."

                 Qanunoottaattion from an Authority. This quotation from the EPA administrator supports Dunn's assertion that the P2 Act
                 is good for America. The quotation helps lend credibility to the author's claim that the P2 Act has been a success
                 over the past 30 years.end annotat

                 Panunrpotoaste. Dunn's purpose is to show how the P2 Act has been successful over time. Thus far, she has supported the
                 claims that it has improved the environment and helped local governments and private businesses.end annotat

                        The P2 Act greatly expanded the opportunities for "source reduction" to reduce or prevent pollution at the
                        source through cost-effective changes in production, operation, and raw materials use. These changes can
                        reduce the amount of pollution entering a waste stream or the environment prior to recycling, treatment or
                        disposal, and can offer industry substantial savings in reduced raw material, pollution control, pollution clean-
                        up and liability costs.

                 SanhnoortaPtaragraphs. Dunn uses short, easily digestible paragraphs in her blog post. Short paragraphs are visually
                 effective on a screen and ensure that the reader is not overwhelmed by text while helping the writer organize ideas.end annotat

                 Eanthnosta. tDunn uses neutral, measured language to convince the reader that she is a reliable and ethical expert.end annotat

                        One of EPA's first pollution prevention successes was with its 33/50 Program, a voluntary program under which
                        companies committed to reduce their releases of 17 top priority chemicals 33 percent by 1992 and by 50
                        percent by 1995. Subsequent EPA programs built on the 33/50 and P2 model and are still working to reduce
                        pollution across the country today including EPA's WaterSense (https://openstax.org/r/watersense), Safer
                        Choice (https://openstax.org/r/safer_choice), Environmentally Preferable Purchasing (https://openstax.org/r/
                        environmentally), Green Chemistry (https://openstax.org/r/green), and our SmartWay Transport Partnership
                        Program (https://openstax.org/r/smartway). President Trump acknowledged the effectiveness of these and
                        other EPA programs in a 2018 Executive Order that directed federal agencies to use EPA's P2 resources to meet
                        their statutory sustainable purchasing requirements.

                 Hanynpoetraltinks. Hyperlinks are a functional tool and employ the visual mode to command the reader's attention. Dunn
                 uses hyperlinks to the EPA programs she names, establishing the agency as a source of pollution prevention efforts
                 and, as a result, an expert on the issues covered in the blog post. In addition, she links to the presidential executive

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                  18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 591

order, which establishes credibility.end annotat

public domain t  The P2 Act also serves as an authority for collecting information from reporting facilities through the Toxics
                 Release Inventory (https://openstax.org/r/toxics) (TRI) about their management of certain toxic chemicals,
                 including source reduction approaches. Since this reporting began in 1991, we have learned that over 24,000
                 unique facilities have taken more than 450,000 actions to prevent pollution and reduce the amount of toxic
                 chemicals entering the environment, such as spill and leak prevention measures, using safer chemicals,
                 modifying indusetnridalppurbolcicesdsoems,aainndt updating operating procedures.

Tanrannostaittion between Paragraphs. Byenudsipnugbtlhicedwoomrdaianlsto, Dunn signals that she is shifting to another success the
EPA has achieved in preventing pollution.end annotat end public domain t

Santantoitsatitcs as Supporting Evidence. To support the impact of the P2 Act, Dunn uses statistics as evidence to show
that the act has facilitated the prevention of pollution and toxic chemicals.end annotat

                 Perhaps the most impactful and collaborative program to grow out of the P2 Act is EPA's P2 Grants Program.
                 Since 1990, EPA has awarded more than 1,200 grants to state, tribal, non-profit, and university partners to
                 work directly with U.S. businesses to develop and implement source reduction techniques. With the assistance
                 from P2 grants, businesses have been able to save over $1.5 billion since 2011 while also reducing the use of
                 hazardous materials by over 570 million pounds.

Sanunpoptoartting Evidence. Dunn provides evidence of the success of the P2 Act by showing how one program has
helped local governments and private businesses save money.end annotat

                 As we celebrate the 30th anniversary of the Pollution Prevention Act today, I would like to thank all our state
                 and local pollution prevention partners, as well as all the businesses that have joined with us to score a true
                 win-win for the American people.

Aanundoietantce. Although this blog is written on a public government website, Dunn shifts focus at the end to directly
address businesses and local governments that have partnered with her or her organization.end annotat

You can access this post on the EPA blog (https://openstax.org/r/win-win).

Discussion Questions

1. Why does Dunn choose to use neutral language rather than emotional appeals in this blog post?

2. Why does Dunn focus on the impact of the P2 Act on businesses, particularly on how the act is financially
    beneficial to those organizations?

3. How might this blog post differ if the intended audience were different?

4. What is the effect of Dunn's shift to addressing specific partners at the end of the post?

5. In your opinion, does Dunn effectively establish herself as a trusted source? Why or why not?

18.5 Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Craft textual and digital compositions using various genres of modes and technologies.
  · Match different modes of communication to various rhetorical situations.
  · Identify various genres of multimodal and online writing.

Now you will experiment with using multiple modes to create an advocacy project. An advocacy project tells
the story of an overarching problem--for example, world hunger--and uses multiple modalities to inform
readers about that issue and to propose change. You may be familiar with similar advocacy projects; perhaps
you have been involved with them in your everyday life. Think carefully about advocacy initiatives you know of
592 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       or have encountered, and find out whether you can pinpoint the answers to these three questions: What
       problem is being addressed? Who is the intended audience? What mode or modes are being used, including
       what media? Then think about what works. How do the chosen media speak to the specific audience? Why
       might the initiative's creators have made those choices?
       After you have chosen a cause and begun working through the composition, you might want to tweak the
       modes you are working with, including how they relate to one another. You may find, for example, that your
       primary communication to readers would be better achieved with a different mode or that you need stronger
       transitions to move your reader through your rhetorical appeal. Don't be afraid to experiment, revise, and
       examine your project from different angles. Just like a literary text, a multimodal composition is a living
       document, one that can be improved over time with peer review and revision. As you work, focus your project
       by concentrating on addressing your audience, purpose, and organization.

      Summary of Assignment

       Create a multimodal advocacy project for a cause or an issue that you choose or that your instructor chooses
       for you. If you are free to choose your own topic, here is a short list from which you may draw inspiration:

         · Providing clean and safe water
         · Ending gun violence
         · Addressing nutritional needs of children locally or around the world
         · Anti-bullying
         · Reducing your carbon footprint
         · Access to health care
         · Anti-racism
         · Vaccination policies
         · Social media and free speech
         · Climate change
         · Immigration
       You may also use these brainstorming questions to narrow down your topic:
         · What are you passionate about?
         · Where do you notice a need in your community / the world?
         · What ideas do you have for addressing the issue?
         · What existing campaigns do you find compelling, and why?
         · What existing projects can you build on, and how?
         · What goals do you hope to achieve?
       Choose a need or an issue that is important to you, because you will develop a rhetorical appeal to inform and
       convince your audience. Although world hunger is an important issue and may not be a bad example, consider
       choosing problems that you encounter locally, even in your everyday life. The closer you are to the issue, the
       more easily you will be able to develop rhetorical appeals. As you compose your project, consider the best
       modes and methods to communicate your ideas. Consider how to add and combine different modalities to
       increase audience impact without overdoing it.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 593

FIGURE 18.13 As you brainstorm potential topics for your advocacy project, consider issues that directly impact
your community as a starting point. (credit: "Blog Camp 2017" by gdsteam/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Another Lens 1. To broaden your perspective on advocacy, find ways to connect directly to those whom the
issue most closely affects. Ensure that your proposed advocacy provides pragmatic and helpful solutions to the
problem for the targeted audience. For example, if you choose to create a project based on the need for
education opportunities for young mothers who have survived domestic abuse, advocating for full-time
schooling options with no consideration for childcare would be neither pragmatic nor helpful. In other words,
don't assume you know best. Open yourself to information gleaned from research, interviews, or informal
conversation. If possible, try to speak with someone whom your project will affect.
Determine what others are already doing to address the need you have identified, and decide whether to build
on that work or take a different route. Identify the most effective means of translating the vision you decide on
for your audience, which may differ from the audience targeted by other advocacy groups.
Another Lens 2. Another option for approaching this project is to identify and analyze multimodal advocacy
initiatives already occurring on a large scale today. Some well-known ones include Charity: Water
(https://openstax.org/r/water), Free Rice (https://openstax.org/r/rice), It Gets Better (https://openstax.org/r/
it_gets), and Upworthy (https://openstax.org/r/upworthy). After choosing an advocacy campaign to research,
consider the following:

  · What is the purpose of the advocacy initiative? What do the organizers want to achieve?
  · Whom does the initiative address? (Knowing the target audience will help you analyze how effectively the

      organizers use a multimodal approach to reach them.)
  · How does the initiative persuade its audience? Are rhetorical appeals used, and if so, how? Why do you

      think these choices are made?
  · What modes of communication are being used? (These may include social media platforms and streams.)

      Does the campaign rely more on textual or non-textual media to convey its message? How are modes
      combined, and how effective are these choices?
After thinking about these questions, create an addition to this advocacy initiative. Introduce your composition
by explaining what you have included and why.
594 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.14 Look to successful advocacy projects, such as the It Gets Better Campaign (https://openstax.org/r/
       ItGetsBetter) supported by former President Barack Obama, as a model of the potential for incorporating
       multimodal elements into your project. (credit: "President Barack Obama" by Official White House Photo by Pete
       Souza/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

             Quick Launch: Defining a Primary Purpose and Goal

       After you have decided on your topic, the first step is to identify the primary purpose, or reason, for your
       advocacy project. Your goal is what you want to accomplish with it. Do you intend to inform people about an
       issue they are likely to know little about, or do you want to inspire people around you to take action in creating
       a sustainable solution that addresses the issue at hand? Goals are broad statements and can be general and
       abstract, as in the case of this goal: Improve access to clean water for students in Flint, Michigan.
       Part of identifying your goal is to articulate your claim, or assertion, about the issue you have chosen. Your
       claim is equivalent to a thesis in a traditional written essay. Identifying your purpose and goal will help you
       decide how to structure your project and, ultimately, which media and modes to employ.
       Consider also your audience. You already have learned and discussed the importance of understanding your
       audience's perspective, including social, cultural, or linguistic factors that could affect your communication.
       Understanding what your audience knows, their lived experiences, and what is important to them will help you
       shape your narrative. Complete these sentence starters to organize your ideas and begin the planning stages of
       your project.
       Define the situation.
       My project focuses on ________, which is a problem because ________.
       Define your purpose.
       The purpose of my project is to ________, which will be accomplished by ________.
       Write a thesis, hypothesis, or line of inquiry.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                               18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 595

The issue I'm addressing is ________.

My position on the issue is ________.

Write your thesis as a declarative sentence. See Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument for help writing
a thesis. ___________________________________________________________.

Define your goals and objectives.

I will try to ________ by ________.

Define your audience.

The intended audience for my project is ________. They are ________ (familiar/unfamiliar) with the issue. I
will reach them by ________.

After you define the situation, it is time to choose the mode or modes to communicate your ideas to your
audience. For example, will you write an op-ed, or opinion piece, in which you formally discuss the issue and
advocate for change? Will you write and deliver a speech that relies on rhetorical devices to convey your
passion for the issue? You might also consider advertisements and public service announcements (PSAs),
including audio and video versions, as other effective ways to "sell" a concept, often combining modes for
added impact. For examples, peruse The Op-Ed Project (https://openstax.org/r/op-edproject) or the Ad Council
(https://openstax.org/r/adcouncil).

Just as your choice of topic must be rhetorically sound and specific, your choice of mode should be based on
the circumstances under which your audience will best meet and respond to your advocacy project. This
decision may feel daunting, because composing within the multimodal genres means that you have many
options. You might choose a video advertisement, a visual flyer, a performance, a photo essay, or something
completely different. Consider the modes you might use to accomplish your goals, responding to the needs of
your audience.

                       Linguistic Mode         Visual Mode Audio Mode        Spatial       Gestural
                                                                              Mode           Mode

Uses in Composition    written text            color          sound          arrangement   body
                       word choice             style          narration      proximity     language
                       organization            size           music/effects  organization
                       tone                    perspective    silence                      facial
                                                                                           expressions

Primary Types of       print or digital media  infographic    speech         infographic   speech
Media (media may       (newspaper, blog,       photo essay    advertisement  photo essay   presentation
cross multiple modes)  professional            advertisement  radio          website/      vlog
                       publication)            PSA            podcast        blog/vlog
                                               website/blog/  vlog
                                               vlog

TABLE 18.1

     Drafting: Varying Purposes for Integration of Media or Other Genres

Once you have determined your purpose and audience and have considered the impact of including multiple
596 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

modes and media, it is time to begin drafting your project.

Gathering Information

The first step in any project is to collect and analyze sources. You will likely need to explore relevant research,
data, and literature that already address your topic. The following questions are a good place to start: What do
you already know about the issue you have chosen to address? What do you need to learn, and where can you
find that information?

When considering the data and research you read and collect, it is important to address multiple perspectives,
particularly regarding culture, language, and social issues. It is essential to have a clear understanding of the
needs of the community you seek to advocate for, as defined by that community.

Now plan for the ways in which your project will create and support the argument, the modes and media you
will use, and how these will reach your audience. Start by completing a graphic organizer like Table 18.2. Begin
with what you already know, including the sources of that information, formal research you have done, and
informal or anecdotal data you have. After looking carefully at what you have, ask yourself what you still need
to learn about the topic to understand and communicate the issue to your audience. Finally, brainstorm for
strategies to learn that information. These may include research, interviews, or other methods of data
collection. Then carry out that information collection until you have what you need.

What I already  Source(s) of that  Information and data that I need to               Where I can find
      know         information                         collect                          information

TABLE 18.2 Planning Chart

Determine Modes and Media

Once your research is complete (or, at least, once you have a good enough foundation to get started), determine
which modes and media you will employ to address your audience. Research, like composition as a whole, is
largely an open-ended process, one in which you may need to experiment to determine whether the modes,
media, and genres you choose accurately and effectively communicate your purpose to the audience. A good
way to make this decision is to create a mockup or storyboard. A mockup is a visual representation of
compositions that are basically static. You can use a mockup for media such as websites, posters, or photo
essays. A storyboard is a sequence of drawings that represents the progression of a piece that moves through
time. You can use a storyboard for media such as videos or podcasts.

Use graphic organizers like Figure 18.15 and Figure 18.16 for your mockup or storyboard. Remember to
consider all modes, including linguistic, visual, audio, spatial, and gestural, and what impact they will make on
your audience.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                       18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 597

FIGURE 18.15 Mockup (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
598 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

                 FIGURE 18.16 Storyboard (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
       When you finish, look over your mockup or storyboard. Then consider whether your choices effectively
       address the needs of your audience. For example, a student composing a project calling for humanitarian
       efforts to improve the living conditions of citizens in war-torn Syria might choose the genre of a photo essay,
       with visual media and captions used as a powerful way to tell the story. This choice will be more effective than
       relying mainly on text or other means alone.

       FIGURE 18.17 Destruction from the Syrian War (credit: "A destroyed part of Raqqa" by Mahmoud Bali/Wikimedia
       Commons, Public Domain)
       That student might ask and answer questions such as the following:

         · What do I want to convey? The desperate situation in Syria because of the war
         · Who is my audience? Online readers interested in current events

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 599

  · How do the media I've chosen speak to the audience? They tell a story more powerfully than text can by
      itself.

As you brainstorm, don't feel obligated to include every piece of information or media you collect. You'll want
to choose carefully, ensuring that the information and media you use serve your audience and rhetorical goals.
Introduce Other Genres
After establishing the primary genre, it's time to define the purpose for introducing other genres, including
how you will introduce them smoothly with seamless transitions. In the example above, the student chooses a
photo essay as the primary genre. A photo essay usually includes multiple pictures, laid out on a blog or
website with or without text. If there is an opportunity to directly address the audience, the student might
consider writing a script to incorporate the genre of presentation. Or they might choose to create a slideshow
or video, incorporating a voice-over or textual quotations. All of these choices depend on their purpose as the
composer, the rhetorical methods they believe will work best, and a knowledge of their audience, including
how best to respond to social and cultural needs. It's important not to incorporate more modes simply for the
sake of having more. Each choice you make will either enhance or detract from your purpose.
Compose
Countless tools are available for creating multimodal texts. At first, this project may seem daunting as you
ponder which tool to choose and possibly learn to use new technology. However, you will likely find you can
use tools that are not only familiar but also readily available. Software and apps that you already have on your
phone, tablet, or laptop, such as PowerPoint, Google Slides, and Keynote, not only are useful for slideshows but
also allow you to create graphics and videos that you can upload to YouTube with a single click. You can record
podcasts by using the memo feature on your phone or a free online recording tool and then upload them to
SoundCloud.

FIGURE 18.18 Finding tools to create a multimodal composition doesn't have to be difficult or complicated. Often,
you are able to use familiar and readily available tools. (credit: "powerpoint-presentation in format video" by
downloadsource.fr/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
After you have created your mockup or storyboard, it is time to create the first draft of your project. Sometimes
called a first cut, particularly in audiovisual presentations, this is the next step in drafting the composition's
basic elements. It is also your chance to experiment with the modes and media you have considered to
determine what works and what doesn't. This first cut creates a prototype, a preliminary model or draft, that
you will revise according to feedback from peer review. Consider this prototype as a starting point. Keep in
600 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       mind that the composition process, like the writing process, is recursive, not linear. You can move from
       drafting to research to revising and organizing at any point.

       FIGURE 18.19 Like written composition, multimodal composition is a recursive process. (attribution: Copyright Rice
       University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
       Though your options for your project may seem endless, this is how the student drafted the photo essay about
       the war in Syria. Because the composition primarily uses the visual mode, the student created a mockup,
       which includes the photo from Figure 18.17 as well as other photos and shared information.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 601

FIGURE 18.20 Sample mockup (credit: "SDF fighters in Raqqa downtown" by (top left), (top right) & (center right)
Mahmoud Bali/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; (center left) Voice of America Kurdish/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain; (bottom) United States Marine Corps/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
As shown here, this mockup is basic; it contains only the photographs the author has chosen and a short
textual excerpt that provides context and more information to support the image. Although there were other
options for this photo essay, the student considered them and decided to use only images with some
supporting text, basing this choice on purpose, audience, and organizational principles. As you consider your
options, begin by focusing on one mode, then build a mockup according to your audience and purpose. The
mockup may be as simple as an outline of a speech or a PowerPoint template to which you add text and
images. The idea is to create a concrete piece to use for your prototype.
Creating the prototype is the next step. Remember that this is the stage at which you consider which elements
of mode and media to use and put them "on the page." Keeping in mind the purpose, organization, and
audience, design a prototype that meets those guiding principles.
602 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.21 Sample prototype (credit: "SDF, YPG, and YPJ flags in Raqqa centre" by (top left) United States
       Marine Corps/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain, (top right), (bottom left) & (bottom center) Mahmoud Bali/
       Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; (center right) Voice of America Kurdish/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
       For the prototype, the student made several choices related to the visual mode, incorporating both textual and
       graphic images. Remember that the composer stated an intent to convey the desperate situation in Syria
       resulting from war and is speaking to an audience of online readers interested in current events.
       The first element added is a headline, "The Syrian War." It allows the reader to know immediately what the
       topic is and get a general idea of the context of the photo essay. The student has taken the text from the
       mockup and for each picture created a caption--a short statement that provides context for each event
       depicted and helps readers progress through the narrative of the photo essay. In addition, the composer has
       chosen to stage the captions against a black backdrop with white space between each photograph and caption,
       a visually appealing layout that is effective in its use of transitions. The images set against the black
       background stand out. Viewers can easily understand that they are supposed to read each row from left to
       right and understand the relationship between each picture and the one following it.
       With these adjustments, the student has completed the prototype. It is now ready for peer review.

           Peer Review: Asking Specific Questions of the Writer

       Peer review is an important step in helping you determine the ways in which your multimodal composition
       works well and how it can be improved. Peer review allows you to gain an outside perspective on your writing
       and composing processes and thus makes it easier to clear up any questions related to organization, purpose,
       audience, and genre.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                     18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 603

For your review, provide your peer reviewer with your mockup or storyboard and your prototype. Seeing your
process may help your reviewer offer feedback and suggestions. Your peer reviewer can use the following
questions to think critically about your project, focusing on both its strengths and its areas for improvement,
and to guide their feedback. Your response to these questions will guide your revision process.

Questions about Topic

  · How did you choose the focus of the composition?
  · How did you narrow down the scope of your topic? Should it be broadened or narrowed further?

Questions about Purpose

  · My reaction after reading or viewing the composition is ________ because ________. Does this reaction
      match your intent for the composition?

  · In my opinion, the thesis of this composition is ________. If this is your thesis, how can you strengthen
      your rhetorical arguments to better support it? If you intended to have a different thesis, how can you
      restate your claims to clarify the composition's purpose?

  · The project uses sufficient evidence to support your claim that ________. How can you better support the
      claim that ________?

Questions about Audience and Culture

  · What audience are you trying to reach? What are the characteristics of this audience?
  · What do you want your audience's reaction to this composition to be?
  · How have you accounted for the similarities and differences between you and your audience?
  · Are the elements of the composition accessible and meaningful to the audience?

Questions about Genre and Media

  · The genre of this text is ________, including conventions common to this genre such as ________.
      Optional: You might consider including other conventions such as ________ in order to strengthen the
      content by ________. How does this genre best capture the message you want to convey?

  · The media chosen within the project's genre (do/do not) effectively communicate the author's intent by
      ________. How could using other media such as ________ increase the impact of the communication?

  · A transition that works well in this composition is ________. How can you create a more effective
      transition here: ________?

     Revising: Responding to Questions

You will next revise your project, using your discretion to incorporate your peer reviewer's feedback. After
considering reviewer comments, actively engage with that feedback to plan your revisions. As with textual
compositions, revisions to multimodal compositions often involve rewording, shifting ideas, and rewriting to
better address your audience and purpose.
604 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.22 As you consider revisions, keep in mind your audience and purpose. In this brochure, notice how the
       author creates a balance between textual information and visual elements such as color, size, and space. (credit:
       "Brochure Design" by Evan Courtney/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Answering Questions
       To begin the revision process, answer the questions your peer reviewer has posed. Focus first on the rhetorical
       situation, including your composition's topic, purpose, and audience as well as questions surrounding culture.
       Reflect on improvements you might make to represent and communicate the rhetorical situation within the
       scope of a multimodal composition. Consider using these sentence frames to answer your reviewer's
       questions.

         · The reason I chose this genre is ________ (relate to purpose/audience/organization). I could better
             communicate by ________.

         · I used rhetorical appeal through ________. This is effective in this way: ________ but can be strengthened
             further by ________.

         · I considered the culture of (myself/viewers or readers/subject of composition) by ________. Other cultural
             components I would like to consider or address are ________. My plan to do that is ________.

       Next, answer questions about genre and media. How might the tools available serve you more effectively? Is
       your choice of media the most effective to communicate with your audience? What aspects of the primary
       genre are key to helping you convey your issue? How can you introduce other genres, or aspects of other
       genres, to strengthen the impact? In responding, be mindful of creating smooth transitions and content that is
       uncluttered and clear in meaning. Consider using these sentence frames to answer your reviewer's questions.

         · The genre ________ captures the message I am trying to convey by ________. I could strengthen this
             communication by ________.

         · Using new media such as ________ or ________ could increase the impact of the communication by
             ________.

         · My plan for ________ (media/mode) and ________ (media/mode) to work together is ________. I will
             revise my composition to achieve that by ________.

         · I will strengthen my transitions by ________.
       The student composer of the prototype above might answer a reviewer's questions in the following way:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
   18.5 · Writing Process: Create a Multimodal Advocacy Project 605

   I chose the photo essay genre to show the effects of war in Syria in an expressive, meaningful way. I designed a

   simple layout contrasting the colors black and white to organize the narrative. I primarily called on pathos to

   invoke the emotions and values of viewers, drawing them in with powerful images, but I think I could

   strengthen the emotional appeal by rearranging the pictures and more clearly addressing the most powerful

s  statement: that 80 percent of the city was left uninhabitable. I also think my headline could be more attention

   grabbing, and I plan to revise it to draw viewers in and more accurately reflect the subject matter. I will revise

   my composition to achieve a more effective presentation by editing my text to make it more direct and by

   reordering my photos to leave viewers with a more forceful statement.

   Revising

   In creating multimodal compositions, revising can refer to taking multiple pieces of content and arranging,
   rearranging, deleting, and adding to the greater whole.eCnodnssider the project on the war in Syria. If choosing to
   create a video of the photo essay with a voice-over, the student might rearrange the order of photographs or
   choose which photos to show during particular audio clips, depending on the student's reflection on the peer
   reviewer's questions.

   Alternatively, the student might choose to keep the same format, thinking that it best expresses what they hope
   to communicate. However, the student might make revisions based on the peer reviewer's feedback and their
   own reflection, in which the student mentions revising the text, reordering photos, and changing the headline.
   Consider this revision of the sample photo essay, in Figure 18.23.

   FIGURE 18.23 Sample revision (credit: "SDF fighters in Raqqa downtown" by (top left) United States Marine Corps/
   Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain, (top right), (bottom left) & (bottom right) Mahmoud Bali/Wikimedia Commons,
606 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

Public Domain; (bottom center) Voice of America Kurdish/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

The author makes revisions according to peer reviewer feedback and reflection of that feedback, particularly

as it relates to purpose, organization, and audience. To get a better sense of the revision process, carefully

examine the student's thought process.

spublic domain t

                  I  revised  the  headline   from "The Syrian War"      to  "Remnants  of  War--Syria."  This  headline  is  more  eenngdasging  for
                                                end public domain t

                  readers  and  veienwd esrs  and  better  reflects the  purpose of my project:  to  convey  the  desperate   situation  in  Syria
                                                                endensd  puebnldicsdomain t

                  resulting from the war that has ravaged citizens' lives.

                  I changed the aesthetic by using a black-and-white filter on the photos. Not only does this contrast with the
                  white space and white text, creating a more organized and cleaner look, it more effectively appeals to readers'
                  emotions by emphasizing the destitution left by the Syrian War.

                  I rewrote the captions of the final three pictures to make them closer to one another in word count, which is
                  visually more pleasing. But even more important, they create a more powerful narrative, building upon one
                  another.

                  I reordered the final two pictures, ending on what I consider the most powerful image and most powerful
                  statement: that 80 percent of the city was uninhabitable after the war. I intend to increase viewers' emotional
                  responses with these changes.

Remember that you do not have to accept every suggestion a peer reviewer makes, but do give each question
and suggestion careful thought. Pay close attention to your reviewer's questions and their perception of your
purpose and audience in particular, ensuring that they match yours. And again, don't be afraid to experiment.
One benefit of multimodal composition, particularly when created with digital media, is that it is relatively
quick and easy to manipulate. One valuable tip is to duplicate your work in different workspaces as you make
changes, thus saving the major elements of your project should something go wrong.

18.6 Evaluation: Transitions

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Implement conventions from a variety of modes and media to address a range of audiences.
  · Match the capacities of different genres to various rhetorical situations.

Ask a peer to use the rubric below to read through your draft. Pay special attention to transitions in your
composition. Remember that although transitions in various genres may differ, logical transitions are an
important element in helping your audience "read" your text.

Linguistic text uses transitions to create relationships between sentences, between paragraphs, and between
sections of text. Consider this sentence-to-sentence transition from "Celebrating a Win-Win: 30 Years of
Progress under the Pollution Prevention Act" by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn.

                  The act gave the agency new tools to join with states, tribes, and communities to prevent pollution before it
                  happens. It also marked a shift in the paradigm of environmental protection, which had been mostly focused
                  on end-of-pipe pollution control and clean-up strategies.

The phrase it also helps readers connect the ideas from each sentence: that the Prevention Pollution Act
provides new tools and that it focuses on preventing pollution instead of the former strategy of addressing
pollution after it occurs. The next sentence from the article begins a new paragraph.

                  Equally important, the P2 Act strengthened EPA's role as an ally of American businesses, helping them save
                  billions of dollars and improve operations.

Here, the author uses the transition phrase equally important, signaling a new idea related to the Prevention
Pollution Act (that it saved American businesses money) and providing context for how it ranks in importance

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                   18.6 · Evaluation: Transitions 607

(it is equally important). You can refer to Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions for more information on
textual transitions.
In multimodal compositions, you will have to think about transitions differently. First, consider how images
and blank space work together when modes are mixed. Often, a margin of space around images helps organize
a composition. Colors and other visual features can also serve as transitions, as seen in the following graphic.
An important part of multimodal compositions is readability, particularly related to density of text. How might
you revise this graphic to increase readability?

FIGURE 18.24 United Nation poster (credit: "UNSR FOAA natural resources poster 2015 A1 (A/HRC/29/25)" by
Maina Kiai/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Further, a composer must make decisions about how different media interact with one another when more
than one genre is introduced. Think about multimodal compositions you encounter in your everyday life, such
as websites or flyers. Those that are effective may have a host of different features, modes, and media, but they
likely have elements in common: they are visually appealing, organized, and provide the information you need
without overwhelming. Consider Figure 18.25, a photo essay located at the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter plant in
Fort Worth, Texas.
608 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

           FIGURE 18.25 (credit: "Defense.gov photo" by Cherie Cullen/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

The composer uses different modes to communicate clearly and help readers transition between ideas. While
photographs of varying sizes are the primary media used to emphasize the evolution of aircraft design, the
composer includes text boxes that overlay photographs and aid in providing context and transition between
ideas. In addition, some of the photographs have been cut out and placed so as to rise above the flat surface of
the background. In this case, the composer has chosen not to employ white space but to layer the text boxes
and photographs on top of a large background photograph. Also missing are long textual blocks. The composer
presents the necessary information in short excerpts and quotations.

Rubric

As you know, how you present content within your compositions is as important as what content you choose to
include. Moving smoothly among elements, genres, and incorporations of various media has a powerful
impact on how your audience experiences your composition. Refer to the following rubric throughout the
process to help you evaluate your transitions and other conventions.

     Score  Critical Language Awareness             Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices
5 Skillful
            The composition effectively             The composer's position or       The project makes
            communicates a position through a       claim is stated clearly, well    clear, substantive, and
            variety of genres, introducing media    supported, and directly          focused claims
            successfully. The composition also      related to the advocacy issue.   advocating for an issue.
            shows ample evidence of the             The composer's ideas and         The composition
            composer's intent to meet or            the media chosen are always      effectively
            challenge conventional expectations in  clearly presented. Concepts      demonstrates the
            rhetorically effective ways.            are consistently linked with     composer's
                                                    linguistic, visual, or           understanding of
                                                    multimedia transitions that      purpose, organization,
                                                    effectively connect ideas.       audience, and culture.

TABLE 18.3

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                       18.6 · Evaluation: Transitions 609

Score         Critical Language Awareness             Clarity and Coherence            Rhetorical Choices

4             The composition communicates a          The composer's position or       The project makes
Accomplished  position adequately through a variety   claim is stated and              mostly clear,
              of genres, introducing media            adequately supported. The        substantive, and
              moderately successfully. The            ideas and media chosen are       focused claim
              composition also shows some             connected. Most concepts         advocating for an issue.
              evidence of the composer's intent to    are linked with linguistic,      The composition
              meet or challenge conventional          visual, or multimedia            usually demonstrates
              expectations in rhetorically effective  transitions that connect ideas   the composer's
              ways.                                   well.                            understanding of
                                                                                       purpose, organization,
                                                                                       audience, and culture.

3 Capable     The composition's communication is      The composer's position or       The project makes
              sometimes unclear. Introduction of      claim is stated and              claims that are
              genres and media may be unfocused       reasonably well supported        sometimes unclear,
              and ineffectual occasionally. The       but may show lapses of           lacking substance, or
              composition also shows limited          convincing support at times.     unfocused while
              evidence of the composer's intent to    The ideas and media used         advocating for an issue.
              meet or challenge conventional          are not always clearly           The composition is
              expectations in rhetorically effective  connected. Some concepts         missing some elements
              ways.                                   are linked with linguistic,      that demonstrate the
                                                      visual, or multimedia            composer's
                                                      transitions, but the             understanding of
                                                      transitions may not smooth       purpose, organization,
                                                      or appropriate.                  audience, and culture.

2 Developing  The composition's communication is      The composer's position or       The project makes
              often unclear. Introduction of genres   claim is weakly supported.       claims that are unclear
              and media is more unfocused than        Evidence is either insufficient  and shows little
              focused. The composition also shows     or irrelevant. The ideas and     substance or focus. The
              emerging evidence of the composer's     media used are not effective     composition does not
              intent to meet or challenge             for the purpose. If linguistic,  demonstrate the
              conventional expectations in            visual, or multimedia            composer's
              rhetorically effective ways. The text   transitions are present, they    understanding of
              also shows limited evidence of the      are usually ineffective or       purpose, organization,
              writer's intent to meet or challenge    unrelated.                       audience, and culture.
              conventional expectations in
              rhetorically effective ways.

TABLE 18.3
610 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       Score  Critical Language Awareness             Clarity and Coherence             Rhetorical Choices

 1 Beginning  The composition does not                The composer's position or     The project's claims are
              communicate a position and the use of   claim is not supported. The    extremely weak. The
 Comments:    genres and media is ineffective. The    ideas and media used are       composition has no
TABLE 18.3    composition shows little to no          disconnected. The              discernible purpose,
              evidence of the composer's intent to    composition is missing         organization, audience,
              meet or challenge conventional          linguistic, visual, or         and culture.
              expectations in rhetorically effective  multimedia transitions, or
              ways.                                   those used are incorrect,
                                                      ineffective, or insufficient.

18.7 Spotlight on . . . Technology

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Implement a variety of technologies while matching them to environments used to address rhetorical
      situations.

  · Match the capacities of different modes and media to various rhetorical situations.

Technology is a crucial element in multimodal composition. In fact, the emergence of digital technology has
vastly changed the landscape of multimodal composition in recent years. The rise of technology has resulted
in new communication and composition practices in people's social, academic, and professional lives.
Technology also plays a role in the rhetorical approach to writing and composition, increasing the complexity
of expression, communication, and persuasion. Indeed, technology has both challenged and transformed
long-held ideas about what it means to write.

Within the genre of multimodal composition, there is a growing call for design advocacy, part of which means
redefining and recontextualizing the rhetoric of design to make multimodal compositions more inclusive not
only for those with differing abilities but also for those marginalized according to social, technological, and
cultural equity.

Digital Deserts

One challenge posed by the incorporation of technology in multimodal composition is the presence of digital
deserts, or places affected by a digital divide, where residents have no access to the high-speed internet
connections required to consume and create digital media. The Federal Communications Commission
produced data indicating that in 2017, 21.3 million Americans lacked access to high-speed internet service,
and of those people, 2.2 million households had no internet access at all. Studies show that this data may be
understated, with even more people living in digital deserts. Rural parts of the country are disproportionately
affected, but people living in low-income urban areas make up a significant portion of these numbers.

To participate in the consumption or creation of most multimodal composition, students need access to high-
speed internet, defined by the FCC as a download speed of 25 Mbps and an upload speed of 3 Mbps. When no
such access exists, cultural, social, and educational disparities arise within the genre of multimodal literature.
Students who have less access to the technology required to read, view, or create multimodal works are
excluded from this relatively new form of literature, leading to cultural underrepresentation and placing them
at academic and social disadvantages.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                  18.7 · Spotlight on . . . Technology 611

              Enhancing Usability and Accessibility

                  Other considerations affecting multimodal compositions are usability and accessibility for readers of differing
                  abilities. These may be associated with speech, hearing, vision, and/or motor impairments, among others.
                  Universal accessibility aims to produce content that all people, regardless of abilities, can use, often with
public domainastsistive technologies, solutions, and tools. Although new fields within the education landscape, such as
                  universal design, have made great strides in usability and accessibility, multimodal content can enheanndceputhbeliscedomain t
                  strides in unique ways for students and for all consumers of multimodal compositions.

                 Multimodal compositions often include interaction constraints. These can be thought of as filters that limit a
                 user's ability to access consumer content effectively. For example, a person who has vision impairment may
                 experience interaction constraints when attempting to consume a photo essay. This constraint can be eased
                 through technologies that help make the media more meaningful, such as text and audio alternatives that help
                 the user experience the composition in a way similar to its original form.

                 Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) are intended to make web content more accessible to people
                 with disabilities. However, creators of multimodal compositions can adapt and apply WCAG rules and
                 principles, such as those discussed below, even to compositions that are not web based.

                 Provide Informative Titles and Headings

                 Content titles and headlines that accurately describe and distinguish the composition from others are helpful
                 for contextualizing the composition. A headline usually refers to a composition within something larger, such
                 as an article in a magazine, whereas a title encompasses an entire entity in itself, such as a novel or story that
                 stands on its own. Consider the headline of the blog post you read earlier, "Celebrating a Win-Win: 30 Years of
                 Progress under the Pollution Prevention Act." This headline is informative, telling the audience that the post is
                 about the progress of the Pollution Prevention Act. It also informs readers of the author's perspective on this
                 topic, clearly indicating her belief in the success of the act. For the photo essay about the war in Syria, the
                 student writer revised the original headline to the more specific and meaningful Remnants of War--Syria.

                 Use Headings and Subheads to Convey Meaning and Structure

                 Headings and short subheads group related information, clearly describe sections of text or media, and
                 provide an outline of the content. Although they are a standard feature of informational texts, headings and
                 subheads can be explored within multimodal compositions as organizational and accessibility features, as
                 they are used in the poster shown in Figure 18.24, United Nations poster. The subheads clarify the structure of
                 the composition, indicating features such as the introduction and author's objectives, and provide transitions
                 between sections.

                 Make Link Text Meaningful

                 When using hyperlinks within a multimodal composition, write text that describes the content of the link
                 target. Instead of using vague text such as "click here" or simply using the URL as the hyperlink, use the
                 opportunity to include relevant information about the content of the link. This added content serves as a
                 transition and emphasizes the relationship between the media. Alexandra Dapolito Dunn does this in the blog
                 post in Annotated Sample Reading, specifying in her text the content of the link used:

                        President Trump acknowledged the effectiveness of these and other EPA programs in a 2018 Executive Order
                        that directed federal agencies to use EPA's P2 resources to meet their statutory sustainable purchasing
                        requirements.

                 Write Meaningful Text Alternatives for Graphics

                 All images and other graphic representations should have meaningful alternative text that helps readers
                 understand the information portrayed in the image and its significance to the function of the composition.
                 Consider Figure 18.26:
612 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.26 Masses waving flags excitedly cheer for their national soccer teams. (credit: "Long Street party, Final
       Draw, FIFA 2010 World Cup Cape Town, South Africa "by flowcomm/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Briefly, the caption provides context and any other important information that cannot be gathered simply by
       looking at the image. Alternative (Alt) text, in contrast, describes only the information that can be gathered by
       simply looking at the image (the "what the image shows" part of the caption sentence). Alt text for this image
       might read "Large crowd of soccer fans waves national flags." Alternative text is imperative for those who have
       vision impairments because it enables them fuller comprehension of the media.
       Create Transcripts and Captions for Media
       Audiovisual content, such as videos and podcasts, can be especially challenging for users with visual or
       auditory disabilities. Therefore, include clear and specific transcripts and captions to guide users through
       content in your multimodal compositions. In video transcripts, describe visual content (for example, "Joey
       enters the room" whenever that action occurs). For audio content, include text that indicates spoken
       information and other sound that is important for understanding the content (for example, "Trumpets softly
       play the national anthem in the background"). Again, these small additions make your multimodal media
       accessible to consumers of all abilities.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                            18.7 · Spotlight on . . . Technology 613

FIGURE 18.27 Closed captions and other forms of accessible text help those with different abilities consume
multimodal text. The captioning in this image indicates that one figure offers help and the other figure shows
appreciation. (credit: "Closed-Caption-Example" by Palmtree3000/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Publishing Your Work

One of the most exciting parts of composing is publishing your work. Technology affords multimodal
composers numerous options for publishing. Whether or not you create your composition through digital
means, you can use technology in the publishing process. First, know that you want your published product to
be a finished work that incorporates the revisions and edits you made during the peer review process. This
step is occasionally skipped in the multimodal composition process, mostly because digital publishing can be
more accessible than other traditional publishing methods. Nevertheless, as a composer, you want your
published product to be your best work.
Depending on which modes and media you include, consider the following options for publishing your
multimodal advocacy project.

  · Blogs, which usually include text, images, and videos, can be self-published on free or inexpensive web-
      based platforms such as WordPress, Adobe Experience Manager, and others. Any author or group can start
      a blog and create posts that incorporate multimodal content.

  · As an alternative to blogs, consider the digital flipbook format, the equivalent of a digital magazine.
      Platforms such as Issuu allow content creators to organize content in a format in which the viewer scrolls
      left and right by "flipping" pages. Flipbooks offer more options for layout, organization, and transitions.

  · You may instead choose to publish your completed composition on a video hosting site such as YouTube
      or Vimeo.

  · You can also use technology to publish non-digital multimodal compositions, such as performances,
      presentations, or hard-copy posters and the like. This kind of publication typically involves another layer
      of mode mixing, such as recording a live performance or uploading a picture of an artwork to a digital
      platform.
614 18 · Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and Image

       FIGURE 18.28 Publishing a multimedia composition will allow you to present your best work to spread your
       message. (credit: "Recording Lectures ... Considerations" by Giulia Forsythe/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
       No matter what technology you choose, you will want to follow an organized writing process and ensure that
       your choices honor your purpose, your audience, and the organization you have chosen for your work.
       Thinking specifically about your advocacy project, consider what you want to accomplish and to whom you are
       speaking. What digital publishing options can accomplish your goals? How does your intended audience
       consume digital media? Choosing your publication method is as important as choosing the modes and media.

     18.8 Portfolio: Multimodalism

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Write about the development of multimodal composition.
         · Compose a reflection on how the processes affect your work.
       After creating your multimodal advocacy project, think critically about the development process, including
       how you chose genres, modes, and specific media to include; your process for creating transitions; and ways in
       which you incorporated usability and accessibility into your finished project.

      Reflective Writing: Letter to Your Instructor

       As you reflect on your multimodal composition and the process you used to create it, answer these questions,
       supporting your answers with evidence from your project. Then compose a letter to your instructor that
       incorporates your answers and addresses any other parts of the composition process that come to mind.

         · How would you articulate your role as a composer? (Hint: Who are you as the author--what is your identity
             in this role? To whom are you speaking, and for what purpose?)

         · Why did you choose the advocacy topic that you did? Do you have a personal connection?
         · On which parts of the composition process (planning, research, drafting, revising) did you spend the most

             time? Why did these parts occupy you the longest? What, if anything, would you change if you could do it
             again?
         · How did considering your audience change your development process? What opportunities did you have
             to think critically about social and cultural issues?
         · Why did you choose the rhetorical devices that you did? What factors helped you decide on them? How did
             the situation influence your rhetorical appeals?
         · What factors helped you determine the primary genre, mode(s), and media you chose? Did you change

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                              18.8 · Portfolio: Multimodalism 615

   those elements at any point in the composition process? If so, why?
· How did peer review and revision help clarify your ideas, organization, or composition?
· How did you show relationships between the ideas and media? What changes did you make to improve

   your transitions?
· What did you learn about your topic and the composition process through the revision process?
· How did you address considerations for usability and accessibility, using technology or otherwise?
· Which parts of the composition came more easily than others?
· How did thinking about publishing affect your final product?
616 18 · Further Reading

Further Reading

These titles are examples of multimodal compositions that will help you view and analyze the variety of
    possibilities present in the multimodal genres.

The following is an example of the podcast genre, which uses the aural mode. However, the accompanying
    website incorporates multiple supporting modes, with images, hyperlinks, and other information that bring
    in other genres to increase understanding.

Ridgen, David, host. "The Family." Someone Knows Something, season 1, episode 1, CBC, 26 Feb. 2016.
The following is an example of the photo essay genre, though the author has turned his photo essay into a

    video, incorporating a different supporting mode.
Kalina, Noah. Noah Takes a Photo of Himself Every Day for 20 Years. YouTube, uploaded by Noah Kalina, 13

    Jan. 2020.
The following is an example of a public service announcement, delivered as a video. Note the use of multiple

    modes and the rhetorical devices present in convincing viewers to pursue careers in STEM (science,
    technology, engineering, and math).
Wishes. CA Technologies, 6 Jan. 2017.
The following is an example similar to the photo essay genre, although it incorporates elements of a blog with a
    text introduction.
The Picture Show: Photo Stories from NPR. NPR, 2021.
The following is an example of the documentary genre, a primarily visual genre that uses various rhetorical
    devices to persuade the audience.
Food, Inc. Directed by Robert Kenner, Magnolia Pictures / Participant / River Road Entertainment, 2008.

Works Cited

Arola, Kristin L., Jennifer Sheppard, and Cheryl E. Ball. Writer/Designer: A Guide to Making Multimodal
   Projects. Bedford/St Martin's, 2014.

Dunn, Alexandra Dapolito. "Celebrating a Win-Win: 30 Years of Progress under the Pollution Prevention Act."
   The EPA Blog, EPA, 5 Nov. 2020, blog.epa.gov/2020/11/05/celebrating-a-win-win-30-years-of-progress-
    under-the-pollution-prevention-act/.

Ferdig, Richard E., and Kristine E. Pytash, editors. Exploring Multimodal Composition and Digital Writing.
    Information Science Reference, 2014.

"How to Meet WCAG (Quick Reference)." W3C, 4 Oct. 2019, www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/.
Serafini, Frank. Reading the Visual: An Introduction to Teaching Multimodal Literacy. Teachers College P,

    2014.
2019 Broadband Deployment Report. Report no. FCC-19-44, Federal Communications Commission, 29 May

    2019, www.fcc.gov/reports-research/reports/broadband-progress-reports/2019-broadband-deployment-
    report.

Access for free at openstax.org.
Writing to Speak Scripting for the Public Forum: 19

FIGURE 19.1 American crisis manager, lawyer, author, and television producer Judy Smith (b. 1958) speaks at the
Roanoke College Regional Forum. Smith and her company, Smith & Company, served as the inspiration for the ABC
television series Scandal , which ran from 2012 to 2018. (credit: "Judy Smith" by roanokecollege/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

19.1  Writing, Speaking, and Activism
19.2  Podcast Trailblazer: Alice Wong
19.3  Glance at Genre: Language Performance and Visuals
19.4  Annotated Student Sample: "Are New DOT Regulations Discriminatory?" by Zain A. Kumar
19.5  Writing Process: Writing to Speak
19.6  Evaluation: Bridging Writing and Speaking
19.7  Spotlight on ... Delivery/Public Speaking
19.8  Portfolio: Everyday Rhetoric, Rhetoric Every Day

INTRODUCTION While writing academic text may take up the bulk of your time as a student, other aspects of
life involve writing as well, especially as you move toward an engaged social life and a career. One personal or
professional task in particular is writing to speak. Whether speaking as part of a classroom assignment, a
planned address, a professional presentation, or recording a video to post to a video-sharing social media
platform, script writing shares much more with traditional academic writing than you might first believe. A
successful speaking event is not achieved by a perfectly planned outline or even extensive research and
knowledge on a topic--although these are important aspects. No, the key to memorable speech is the speaker's
618 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       connection with an audience, or group of listeners.
       Greek philosophers and educators wrote the first texts for public speaking over 2,000 years ago. In fact, Greek
       philosopher Aristotle (384-322 BCE) wrote the treatise On Rhetoric, which covers many of the same concepts
       and topics you will encounter in this chapter, including rhetorical appeals, awareness of audience, and
       organization. As it turns out, effectively engaging an audience through speech is a time-honored endeavor. But
       new technologies, channels, and avenues of communication have expanded the opportunities for more and
       more voices to be heard.
       In this chapter, you will read about podcast trailblazer Alice Wong, read a student script, and write your own
       script or outline advocating for a cause of your choice. Speaking of activism, you will discover how script
       writing and activism go hand in hand, opening new possibilities for communicating with your audience.

     19.1 Writing, Speaking, and Activism

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Articulate how genre conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and writers' practices and purposes.
         · Identify and apply rhetorical concepts such as shifts in voice, diction, tone, formality, design, medium, and

             structure appropriate to a speech.
         · Match the capacities of different environments to varying rhetorical situations.
       The genre of this chapter is script writing. A genre is a type of composition that uses specific features, follows
       a particular style or format, and is shaped by the author's purpose, or what the author wants to accomplish. In
       a script, the purpose is what the author wants to communicate to the audience and wants the audience to think
       about or do after the speech. Speech is often used as a vehicle to persuade audiences or move them to action.

      Writing for and beyond the Academy

       By now, you are likely familiar with the concept of rhetoric, which, in academic terms, describes how writers
       and speakers use language to persuade. Rhetoric has its roots in ancient Greece, dating back to Homer's epic
       poems (mid-8th century BCE), and was developed by the philosophers Socrates (c. 470-399 BCE) and Aristotle
       into a system for understanding and teaching persuasion. If you have ever analyzed a speech or story to
       determine how the author develops or supports claims, chances are you have studied rhetoric. Refer to
       Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric and Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric for
       more about rhetoric.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      19.1 · Writing, Speaking, and Activism 619

FIGURE 19.2 Ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle was a leading thinker who proposed concepts of rhetoric that you
continue to use today. (credit: "Aristotle transparent" by Alvaro Marques Hijazo/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
However, rhetoric is not simply an academic exercise designed to be used in formal writing or literature.
Rhetoric is the basis of the spoken language people use every day, and it has a purpose. As an example, think of
a commercial or advertisement. Advertisers use rhetoric to try to convince an audience that their beauty
product is superior to other companies' products, or that it's cooler to drive their car than another car. Indeed,
effective speech uses some form of rhetoric, combined with purpose, to make an impact on an audience.

FIGURE 19.3 Writers and speakers often use rhetorical appeals to persuade their audiences. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Figure 19.3 illustrates how three types of appeal form the elements of a strong argument. In brief, these are the
rhetorical appeals available to writers:

  · Ethos is an appeal to ethics, which, in rhetorical terms, helps establish the writer's or speaker's credibility.
      You must establish credibility with your audience so that they feel they can trust what you say. Ethos often
      invokes the speaker's character and qualifications on the subject. Speakers may strengthen their ethical
620 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

             appeal by using or referring to patriotic or religious documents in their speeches.
         · Logos is an appeal to logic and intelligence. Logos appeals rely on strong and sound reasoning, often

             supported by facts and statistics. Support your position with critical thinking and clear, credible
             evidence. To give yourself credibility, use respected, reliable sources that are properly attributed.
         · Pathos is an appeal to emotion. Supporting your position by using pathos involves evoking in your
             audience emotions, such as fear, anger, sympathy, guilt, or sorrow. This appeal often involves dramatic or
             vivid language, anecdotes or illustrations, and a more personal tone. For more information on ethos, logos,
             and pathos, see Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric and Position Argument: Practicing the
             Art of Rhetoric.

      Identifying General Purpose

       The purpose of speech, like any type of writing, is directly related to the rhetorical situation, which defines
       how a speaker will use communication to influence an audience's perspective. Speech is created for a specific
       time, place, and audience, by a speaker who makes choices on the basis of the rhetorical and cultural context.

       Speech typically falls into one of three categories. Some speak to teach the audience something or to explain
       something. The purpose of this speech is to inform. Some speak to influence an audience's beliefs, behaviors,
       or attitudes. The purpose of this speech is to persuade. Some speak to amuse the audience. The purpose of
       this speech is to entertain. In some instances, the purposes will overlap; a speaker may want both to persuade
       and to evoke emotion, for example. Consider President Franklin D. Roosevelt's (1882-1945) Pearl Harbor
       speech (https://openstax.org/r/Pearl_Harbor). It was delivered as an informational speech on December 8,
       1941, at a joint session of Congress to address Japan's bombing of Pearl Harbor, which occurred a day earlier.
       However, Roosevelt crafted the speech to stir emotions and convince Congress to formally declare war against
       Japan, officially bringing the United States into World War II (1939-1945).

       When writing to speak, consider whether you want to inform, entertain, or persuade your audience. These
       purposes are often combined, as in the Pearl Harbor speech, and the medium through which you present
       speech may use different formats and channels (podcast, YouTube, Facebook Live, Periscope, Vimeo,
       presentation to a live audience, and so on). However, your ultimate goal will always be to connect meaningfully
       with your audience to achieve your general purpose.

       The formula for establishing your purpose is fairly straightforward. Identify your audience, determine what
       you want to tell them, then analyze the best way to reach them. By following these steps, you will have defined
       your purpose, and you can create effective and meaningful speech.

       Informative Speech

       Informative speech explains, describes, or demonstrates. The speaker's aim is to provide information that will
       be comprehensible to audience members. Informative speech may cover topics such as describing a location,
       an object, or a person; explaining an idea or how to operate something, a thermostat, for example; or
       demonstrating how to change a tire. The speech will be organized according to the specific purpose and
       audience. Informative speech usually incorporates media--for example, visuals, three-dimensional objects, or
       video--to illustrate the content of the speech.

       Entertaining Speech

       Entertaining speech features the use of humor to connect with an audience. This speech may comment on the
       humor present in everyday situations or use humor for social commentary. When you speak to entertain, you
       will call upon elements of humor such as self-deprecation, physical comedy, absurdity, wordplay, topical
       observation, or dark comedy.

       Persuasive Speech

       Persuasive speech seeks to convince audience members of something or influence their beliefs, values, or
       behavior. This type of speech either reinforces an audience's existing beliefs on a topic, changes their beliefs,

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                      19.1 · Writing, Speaking, and Activism 621

or inspires them to act on something. When you speak persuasively, you will use many of the same principles
you used when you wrote the position argument in Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric.
You likely will present your thesis, or statement of your position, at the beginning of your script and then
devote most of the script to supporting that position. On the other hand, you might consider presenting the
thesis later in the script, after you have provided compelling evidence to support it. In this case, the delayed
thesis creates a dramatic effect. You might also save it for the end if you know your audience is likely to
disagree with it. You can structure a script written to persuade as a five-part argument with the following
features:

  · An introduction that hooks, or engages, the audience sets the tone, or writer's attitude toward the
      audience or subject, and states the thesis if is presented early.

  · Background information provides context and details for the situation being discussed. These are closely
      linked to purpose and explain why the audience should care about the topic.

  · The body of the script explains the argument (if persuasive) and provides compelling reasons and
      evidence.

  · Refutation of counterclaims disproves or rules out objections.
  · A conclusion presents a closing argument, stating or restating the thesis and summarizing the main

      points of the script.
  · Transitions within the script guide the listener smoothly from one idea to the next.

Audience Awareness

When you are writing to speak, audience awareness is particularly important. After all, the audience is often
right there in front of you! Your goal is to speak directly to them, to evoke emotion or make them react, even if
silently. Consider your audience when choosing your tone, language, and approach to a topic. Knowing your
audience and crafting your writing for them will help you connect and thus fulfill your purpose. Among the
most famous speeches of all time, Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech (https://openstax.org/r/
I_Have_a) is known for inspiring civil rights progress in the United States.

FIGURE 19.4 Considering your audience is an important part of writing for speech. Here, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
(1929-1968) connects to an enthusiastic audience. The photograph was taken on August 28, 1963, at the Lincoln
Memorial in Washington, D.C., when Dr. King delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech during the March on Washington
for Jobs and Freedom. (credit: "USMC-09611" by Slick-o-bot/U.S. Marine Corps/Wikimedia Commons, Public
Domain)
622 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       All speech is designed for a particular audience at a particular time. Because effective speakers seek to know
       their audience, they consider demography, the statistical study of human populations, focusing on categories
       such as age, gender, education, religion, race, and so forth. Demographics are the statistical data gathered
       from studies in these and other areas relating to populations. Although your audience may be quite specific
       and you may know some of its demographics, it is important to design your script outline to include examples,
       ideas, and appeals that are broadly understood. The circumstances that lead your audience to you will also
       influence their interest and reaction to your presentation. A presentation to a captive audience--those who
       attend because of some outside force rather than their own choice--will require you to spend more time
       building common ground than you would with an audience you know to be more receptive. Contrast this
       situation with a speech at a political rally, where voluntary attendees are likely to share political beliefs. As is
       evident, understanding your audience is imperative to knowing how to speak to them. Considering their
       attitudes, beliefs, cultures, and values, including those they share with one another and with you as the
       speaker, will allow you to understand how much attention you need to devote to convincing the audience of
       your viewpoint.
       When analyzing your audience in this way, you also will want to consider their prior knowledge and
       relationship with the topic. Do they already have a solid understanding of the topic? If they do, there is no need
       to spend much time on background information. Are they largely opposed to the premise of your thesis? If so,
       you will need to provide effective reasoning and strong evidence to convince them. The amount of background
       knowledge required will influence how you shape your script or outline and thus your speech.
       Audience awareness also can help you decide which rhetorical appeals and devices to use within your script.
       You need to consider how you relate to the audience. Are you an expert on a topic? Are you a peer in their
       community? Do you (or they) have cultural intricacies that influence your understanding of the topic? These
       questions, combined with cultural awareness, can guide your composition.

      Cultural Context

       Culture--the shared values, customs, arts, and other traits of a group of people--is an important consideration
       when developing a relationship with your audience. Speech--particularly formal, persuasive speech--is a part
       of the American social and political systems. Candidates for political office commonly use speech during
       campaigns. Consider former president Barack Obama's (b. 1961) introductory speech at the 2004 Democratic
       National Convention (https://openstax.org/r/introductory_speech), which political scholars credit with his rise
       to the presidency. Lawyers regularly use speech to argue their cases before judges and juries. Religious leaders
       have long used speech from the pulpit to challenge and influence congregants. Moreover, as American culture
       morphs and grows, speech has become an important part of everyday life in ways not witnessed in earlier
       times.
       Radio and television have existed as vehicles for delivering speech for many years. But in the past two decades,
       speech has found new outlets, including podcasts (streamed spoken-word audio), YouTube videos, and social
       media videos. This influx of new formats has created a cultural shift, making speech, and by extension its
       influences on a large audience, more accessible and representative. This shift has also increased the level of
       social, political, and economic activism. Understanding the cultural context of your audience and the subject
       of your speech is as important as any other part of it, for this context will dictate whether your words are
       effectively received.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                    19.2 · Trailblazer 623

19.2 Trailblazer
Podcast Trailblazer: Alice Wong

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Articulate how genre conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and writers' practices and purposes.
  · Match the capacities of different environments (e.g., print, electronic) to varying rhetorical situations.

                                       "Stories are the closest
                                       we can come to shared

                                              experience."

    FIGURE 19.5 Alice Wong, 2017 (credit: "Alice Wong"
    by Andrew Scheer/Wikimedia Commons, CC 1.0)

The Disability Visibility Project

Alice Wong (b. 1974) is an activist, writer, and media creator from San Francisco, California. After graduating
from Indiana University in 1997 with majors in English and sociology, Wong went on to earn a master's degree
in sociology from the University of California, San Francisco, where she later worked. Wong has been widely
published, including feature pieces appearing in publications ranging from the New York Times to Teen Vogue,
and her activism work has been featured in CNN's series United Shades of America (https://openstax.org/r/
Unitedshades). In addition to writing, Wong regularly creates multimedia content, including podcasts. From
2013 to 2015, she was a member of the National Council on Disability, appointed by then president Barack
Obama.
624 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       FIGURE 19.6 In this photo taken in 1990, Alice Wong participates via robot in the 25th anniversary celebration of
       the Americans with Disabilities Act. (credit: "Alice Wong participated at the 25th anniversary of the Americans With
       Disabilities Act via robot" by Pete Souza/The White House/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
       Wong founded and serves as the director of the Disability Visibility Project (DVP), an online community that
       aims to create a space where disability media and culture are recognized, created, and shared. The project is
       personal for Wong, who has been unable to walk since childhood. The DVP also provides an online place for
       people to share and connect about disability culture. The organization encourages those living with disabilities
       to share their stories through the website or the app StoryCorps (https://openstax.org/r/storycorps), which
       collects and shares oral history. The DVP curates "disabled media" from these collected oral histories in the
       form of tweets, audio clips, podcasts, blog posts, images, and so on. The project also publishes original written
       and multimedia content created from the perspectives of people who are disabled. Topics include issues
       related to ableism (discrimination against people with disabilities), culture, and politics.
       Wong is also the host and a coproducer of the Disability Visibility Project podcast (https://openstax.org/r/
       Disability_Visibility), launched in 2017. She uses the podcast to give a voice and platform to issues concerning
       politics and culture as they relate to disability rights and social justice. Through conversations with diverse
       guests, Wong amplifies disability media and culture on topics ranging from health care to climate change to
       the arts, and everything in between.
       Wong has also partnered with #CripTheVote (https://openstax.org/r/CriptheVote), a nonpartisan campaign to
       bring awareness of disability issues into the public and political arenas, and Access Is Love
       (https://openstax.org/r/accessislove), an initiative to build accessibility into everyday life. She is the editor of
       Disability Visibility: First-Person Stories from the Twenty-First Century, an anthology of personal stories from
       members of the disability community. The book contains curated text such as blog posts, manifestos, eulogies,
       and testimonies to Congress in order to bring to light the diverse experiences of people in this community. The
       aim of the anthology is intersectional, meaning it emphasizes the crossroads of living with disabilities and
       other issues, including race, class, gender, culture, and religion.

      Discussion Questions

       1. Why might Alice Wong look to speech and other media to communicate activist ideas surrounding the
            disability community?

       2. How is the impact of writing for speech different from writing for print? What comes across when an
            activist speaks rather than represents their ideas in print?

       3. How does social media both enhance and limit accessibility within the disabled community? How is this
            true for other cultural communities?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                         19.3 · Glance at Genre: Language Performance and Visuals 625

4. Wong says that storytelling can be more than written words. How can other forms of media--she lists
    emojis, memes, selfies, and tweets--communicate rhetorical ideas as effectively as, or more effectively
    than, traditional written storytelling?

19.3 Glance at Genre: Language Performance and Visuals

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply appropriate genre conventions for structure, tone, mechanics, format, and design in writing speech.
  · Demonstrate relationships between ideas, patterns of organization, and interplay of verbal and nonverbal

      elements.
  · Articulate how genre conventions are shaped and vary by purpose, culture, and expectation.

Oral communication skills are integral to personal and professional success. While many aspects of script
writing are similar to those used in writing for print or electronic formats, speech incorporates another
domain with its own considerations.

Writing for Listeners and Readers

The script for a speech may begin as a traditional text, but it must be written and delivered in a way that makes
it available and accessible to readers and listeners alike. Think of your favorite radio show or podcast. If the
author wrote as if composing a written text with no consideration for listeners, the effect for listeners would
likely be compromised.

When writing for listeners, think about not only what you want to express but also how you can best support
your ideas and claims. Because speech relies heavily on audience members' auditory skills, listeners with little
practice in these skills or who learn better through visual or experiential text may be at a disadvantage.
Therefore, the speaker-writer must make a concerted effort to support listeners in other ways.

Writing for Delivery

Text for speech will be only as good as its delivery. If you write for speech in the exact way you write an
academic paper, the result is likely to be lackluster, for speech is immediate--that is, it makes an impact as
soon as it is heard. A powerful written argument, if orally delivered without voice modulation or emphasis, is
unlikely to move listeners and likely to have fluency glitches, as written sentences tend to be longer and more
complex. Although topical outlines for a paper and a script might look similar, the way you translate ideas into
writing for speech will vary to increase effectiveness. One strategy for making this "conversion" is to read your
script aloud during or after writing. Hearing the script will allow you to make revisons and edits to ensure oral
fluency, or smooth delivery, including pronunciation, phrasing, stress, and tone.

You can write effectively for delivery by doing the following:

  · Support information by including visual and audio aids to help the audience remember and understand
      information.

  · Demonstrate information through action, such as dynamic movement or demonstrations.
  · Engage your audience with vocal techniques such as gestures, inflection, changes in speed and pitch, and

      strategically placed pauses.

Writing with Media

Script writing and presentations often take a multimedia approach. Multimedia can include a variety of
channels, media types, and visual aids, including videos, images, infographics, and animations that enhance
understanding and bring a new level of engagement among media consumers. The use of media can reinforce
the content of a script or presentation, provide a vehicle for delivery, and generally enhance the speaker's
purpose and message.
626 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       While formal speeches are still featured at contemporary political, religious, and academic events, other forms
       of media have become alternatives to traditional public addresses. Free and readily available video platforms
       such as YouTube mean that more people than ever before are able to share their experiences. Also free and
       readily accessible for the most part, podcasts are increasingly used as a vehicle to share ideas through an oral
       medium. Plus, podcasts such as Serial (https://openstax.org/r/Serial) have led to changes within the criminal
       justice system. Social media platforms now are filled with multimedia, including video, audio, and images, that
       play a more prominent role than at the time these platforms first were launched. As you develop your
       presentation in the next section of this chapter, consider which methods of presentation you might explore in
       order to harness the power of media to your benefit.

      Key Terms

       Below are key terms and characteristics of scripts and other oral media.

         · audience: the people for and to whom a script is written.
         · Body: the middle and main portion of a script, in which key ideas, evidence, and reasons are presented

             and elaborated.
         · Citation: credit given to a source used in a writer's research.
         · Conclusion: the final portion of a script, in which the thesis and key ideas are reiterated and/or expanded

             to include action or additional consideration.
         · ethos: appeal to readers'/listeners' ethics, establishing authority and credibility.
         · Evidence: information, such as facts, statistics, and examples, that proves or disproves the validity of a key

             idea.
         · Introduction: the first portion of a script, in which the author engages the audience and usually states the

             thesis.
         · Logos: appeal to readers'/listeners' logic, or reasoning.
         · Parallelism: a rhetorical technique of using similar words, phrases, or other grammatical constructions to

             connect related ideas, emphasize a point, or add rhythm.
         · Pathos: appeal to readers'/listeners' emotions.
         · purpose: a writer's reason for creating a script, often to persuade readers/listeners to agree with a

             viewpoint or take action.
         · reasoning: logical and sensible explanation of a concept.
         · Repetition: a rhetorical technique of repeating a key word or phrase for emphasis.
         · Rhetorical appeals: methods of persuasion, including ethos, logos, and pathos.
         · Rhetorical devices: ways that writers use language to convey meaning, create emphasis, and draw

             attention to their words and ideas. Repetition and parallelism are rhetorical devices.
         · Signpost language: statements that help the audience know where your presentation is going. Transitions

             are examples of signpost language.
         · Topic: the subject of a script.
         · Thesis: a statement indicating a writer's/speaker's position on the topic.

     19.4 Annotated Student Sample: "Are New DOT Regulations Discriminatory?"
     by Zain A. Kumar

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Explain how conventions of writing, including rhetorical devices, reflect purpose, culture, or audience
             expectations.

         · Analyze the relationships between ideas and patterns of organization in a speech.

      Introduction

       A script may take many forms, but effective speakers connect with their audience, clearly state a main idea or

         Access for free at openstax.org.
   19.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Are New DOT Regulations Discriminatory?" by Zain A. Kumar 627

   thesis, and support that thesis by backing up key ideas with evidence and reasoning. In this feature, you will

   read a speech that examines whether U.S. Department of Transportation regulations discriminate against

   people who depend on service animals. The full transcript of the speech, rather than the outline, is provided

   here to allow you to study aspects of delivery as well as preparation. Notice not only the disapproving tone and

s  conversational style but also the way in which the author builds and supports the thesis. end s

                                  end s

   endLsIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS         end s

   It's a Dog Fight

                                                                                                          end s
         Several years ago, I sat in the waiting area of a major airport, trying to ignore the constant yapping of a small,
         clearly agitated dog being restrained with difficulty on the lap of a fellow passenger. An airline rep approached
         the passenger and asked the only two questions allowed by law: "Is that a service animal? What service does it
         provide for you?"

   "Yes. It keeps me from having panic attacks," the woman said defiantly, and the airline employee retreated.

   Shortly after that, another passenger arrived at the gate. She gripped the high, stiff handle on the harness of a
   Labrador retriever that wore a vest emblazoned with the words "The Seeing Eye." Without warning, the smaller
   dog launched itself from its owner's lap, snarling and snapping at the guide dog. The owner of the small dog
   jumped up and retrieved her animal from the Labrador's vest and stomped back to her seat. That neither she
   nor the still-yapping dog had an obvious panic attack amazed me, as I questioned, to myself of course, what
   service was being provided--other than a moment of exercise for the woman and her dog.

   Ianntnrootdaut ction. The opening anecdote grabs the listener's attention with a relatable story about an interaction at an
   airport. It provides an illustration of the point that Zain A. Kumar will make next in the introduction.end annotat

   Pananthootast. Using strong words such as snarling and snapping, Kumar connects his argument to emotions.end annotat

   Taonnoe.taKtumar clearly expresses disapproval of the small dog and its owner, implying that the woman is lying and the
   dog is untrained.end annotat

   The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has recently established new regulations regarding service
   animals on domestic and international flights. This regulation has provoked a flurry of protests by people who
   are accustomed to taking their pets for free in airplane cabins by claiming they are emotional support animals.
   Are these new regulations discriminating against persons with disabilities? Let's look at some details.

   Sanignnoptaotst Language. Kumar uses a rhetorical question, or a question used for effect and not meant to be answered,
   to establish the central discussion in the script: whether restrictions put in place for service animals infringe on the
   rights of people with disabilities. This signpost language tells listeners that this is important information.end annotat

   Ianntnrootdaut ction. Following the anecdote, this introductory paragraph establishes the problem and provides
   background information.end annotat

   Taonnoe.taKtumar's use of rhetorical questions and phrases such as Let's look at creates an informal, conversational tone
   that is well suited to script.end annotat

   The new rule has 12 provisions. The first is the definition: a service animal is a dog that is individually trained to
   do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability.

   Danenfiontiattion. The definition of a service animal provides context for the focus of the script.end annotat
   628 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

   Okay, how was the service dog trained? Well, as a puppy it lived with a foster family that taught it basic behavior

   and socialization. When it was between 13 and 19 months old, it came to the Seeing Eye campus to work with

   an individual instructor for four months of intensive training. At the end of the four months, the dog took a final

   exam: leading the instructor successfully on a field trip to New York City. About 75 percent of the dogs pass this

s  training and are matched with a person who is blind or visually impaired. The new owner works with the dog

   and its instructor for an additional 25 days on campus before the owner and the dog go home. But the training

   doesn't end there. The new owner continually reinforces the dog with praise and correction, and The Seeing Eye

   staff memebnedrss are always aveaniladbsle for telepheonndesconsultations and even home visits if needed.

   Taonnoe.taTthe question opening the paragraph contributes to the conversational tone of the script.end annotat

   Eanvnidoetantce. This paragraph firmly establishes the "credibility" of the guide dog, detailing its training. This rigorous  end ann

   process will be contrasted with the background of the emotional support dog frometnhde ospening anecdote to draw a
   comparison.

   Now, what about that emotional support dog in the airport? The law requires no specific training for emotional
   support animals. The rationale is that their presence is enough to support people who have anxiety, depression,
   or stress. The only requirement is that the animal be manageable in public and not create a nuisance. In light of
   this requirement, the little dog did not do well.

   Eanvnidoetantce. This paragraph contrasts the guide dog with the emotional support dog and shows that the latter cannot
   meet even the minimum standard set by the airlines.end annotat

   The second provision of the new DOT regulation is that emotional support animals are no longer considered
   service animals. However, the third provision grants psychiatric service animals the same status as other
   service animals. In other words, a person with an emotional or psychiatric disability can still obtain and travel
   with a service companion that has appropriate documentation.

   Tanrannostaittion. This signpost language allows the listener to know that the author is moving from one key idea to          end annotat
   another.

   Three other regulations deal with this documentation. The DOT has developed forms attesting to the animal's
   health, behavior, and training. Airlines may require these to be submitted 48 hours before travel or may require
   them at the departure gate. Providing these forms is no problem for a passenger with a Seeing Eye-certified or
   other officially trained dog.

   FIGURE 19.7 Certified Seeing Eye dogs provide accessibility to those with vision impairments. (credit: "Kaye Kay-
   Smith and Patsy Reddy" by New Zealand Government, Office of the Governor-General/Wikimedia Creative
   Commons, CC BY 4.0)

   Access for free at openstax.org.
   19.4 · Annotated Student Sample: "Are New DOT Regulations Discriminatory?" by Zain A. Kumar 629

   But what about the certification for an emotional support animal? Until the new regulations were passed, this

   wasn't a problem. A person wishing to claim a pet as an emotional support animal could simply go online and

   purchase certification from a for-profit agency. On one such site, for $54, a basic kit offers lifetime registration

   in a national database maintained by the company, plus a framed certificate, ID card with leash clip, and two

s  official-looking vest patches. "Deluxe" and "premium" packaegnedssadded more goodies for $114 and $154,

   respectively. The applicant could also obtain a certification letter from a licensed mental health professional for

   an additional fee. Just out of curiosity, I took the free online assessment--10 multiple-choice questions like

   these: "In the past two weeks, how often have you had little interest or pleasure in doing things that you usually

   enldikse to do?" "How often have you felt sad or depressed?" "How often have you felt worried, anxious, or on
     edge?" The multiple choice options were never, sometimes, or often; I replied with 5 often, 4 sometimes, and 1

   never response. My results weenrde simmediate: "Congratulations! Based on your responses, you are a good
   candidate to qualify for an ESA." All that was left for me to do was fill in my credit card info and upload a photo

   of my pet to have a certified emotional support animal. This certification, by the way, must be renewed

   annually--for a fee. Big surprise!

   Sanunpoptoartting Evidence. Though it has not yet been expressly stated, audience members should have a sense of the           end annotat

   thesis. This anecdote serves as evidence that Kumar will use to support the claim that regulations are not

   discriminatory.
                            end s

   Taonnoe.taTthe sarcastic words "Big surprise!" reflect Kumar's disapproval of the for-profit agency issuing certification for

   service animals.end annotat

   Additional DOT regulations allow airlines to require that service animals be harnessed, leashed, or tethered at
   all times in the airport and on the aircraft and to limit a single passenger to two service animals. The regulations
   also allow airlines to require a service animal to fit within its handler's foot space on the aircraft. This is not a
   hardship; I have personally seen a full-grown Labrador tuck herself comfortably into the space for carry-ons
   and go to sleep.

   Panenrsootantal Anecdote. Kumar frequently uses personal anecdotes to support his points and establish credibility on the      end annot
   subject.

   The bottom line? I don't believe the DOT's new regulations are discriminatory.

   Tanhneostisa.t Although the structure is unusual, Kumar finally states the thesis: the new regulations do not discriminate
   against persons with disabilities.end annotat

   Developed after receiving over 15,000 comments from individuals with disabilities; airline and airport
   personnel, including flight attendants; and other members of the public, these restrictions close loopholes that
   have been exploited by pet owners who want to take their pets along in airplane cabins without using a pet
   carrier or paying the pet fee. Individuals with a genuine need can still be accompanied by their documented and
   trained service animals--including psychiatric service animals--when they travel. In fact, travel just became
   less challenging in one major respect: people no longer have to abide fake emotional support animals having
   fuzzy four-footed panic attacks during the trip.

   Laongnosta. tKumar uses logical appeals to support the thesis, talking through points in an organized and rational manner.end annotat

   Ranenaostoanting. Drawing on previous anecdotes, evidence, and explanations, Kumar explains why the new regulations
   do not discriminate against people with real disabilities.end annotat

   Pananraoltlaetl Conclusion. Kumar concludes the speech in the same casual manner and tone as the rest of the script. In
   addition, the ending is meaningful, once again drawing in the reader's/listener's attention by circling back to the
   opening anecdote.end annotat
630 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

      Discussion Questions

       1. What is the impact of opening the introduction with an anecdote?

       2. Which parts of the script show that the author has a good understanding of the audience and is trying to
            connect with them? Explain your response.

       3. Why has the author used rhetorical questions within the script?

       4. Why might the author have chosen to save the thesis for near the end of the script? What effect does this
            placement have on the overall text?

       5. How does the author support the thesis with reasoning? In your opinion, is it sufficiently supported? Why
            or why not?

     19.5 Writing Process: Writing to Speak

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Develop a writing project through multiple drafts.
         · Compose texts that use rhetorical concepts appropriately in a speech.
         · Apply effective shifts in voice, diction, tone, formality, design, medium, and structure.
         · Demonstrate orality as an aspect of culture.
         · Provide and act on productive feedback to works in progress through the collaborative and social aspects of the

             writing process.
         · Adapt composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

       Now it's time to try your hand at writing a script or speaking outline for a public audience. Decide on a topic,
       and take that topic through the planning, drafting, and revision processes. Remember that even the informal
       writing you do when planning a script or speaking outline is recursive, meaning it is not linear. You will
       probably go back and forth between sections and processes.

       You may question of the wisdom of preparation before speaking to the public. After all, you may post regularly
       to social media, for example, without following the processes of drafting and revising. However, "winging it"
       when it comes to speech is not a wise strategy. As a genre, social media in particular lends itself to short and
       simple messaging. Viewers allow producers very little time and attention before clicking to view the next item.
       Some sources say that you have 10 seconds to get the attention of a viewer; by the one-minute mark, you may
       have lost up to 45 percent of your viewers. Live adult audiences will pay attention for about 20 minute
       increments before their minds begin to wander; for young audiences, the time is even less. Given that
       knowledge, you must craft your message accordingly.

      Summary of Assignment: Writing to Speak, Speaking to Act

       You may have heard that merely believing in a cause is not enough; you must take action to create change. As
       you keep the idea of social, political, or economic change in mind, your task is to develop an outline as the
       basis for a speech to a live audience or on a social media platform of your choice. The topic is an issue you care
       about. Speaking from an outline rather than from a written script helps ensure that your speech is natural and
       smooth. Your audience should not feel as though you are reading aloud to them. If you are free to choose your
       own topic, consider a cause meaningful to you, or consider using one of the following suggestions as your topic
       or as inspiration for it:

         · Police and mental health services reform
         · Standards-based reform in education
         · Global human rights
         · Liberty and justice for all
         · Reduction of carbon emissions

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                    19.5 · Writing Process: Writing to Speak 631

Your speech may incorporate multimedia components as you see fit. You'll also need to plan how to access the
audience or platform you have in mind.

As you craft your outline, keep in mind your audience, your purpose for addressing them, and your support for
that purpose by using key ideas, reasons, and evidence. When planning your script, use an organizer to collect
information so that you can support your ideas credibly with a well-developed argument.

Using Your Authentic Voice

Unlike most formal academic papers, oral presentations give you an opportunity to consider how you might
challenge formal writing conventions by delivering your script in your authentic voice. Oral compositions offer
an opportunity to bring through conventions of your own culture, perhaps including discursive patterns of
language and grammar and challenges to standard language ideologies. As always, keep your audience and
purpose in mind as you make choices about your use of language.

Researching and Narrowing the Topic

After choosing the overall subject of your script, research the general topic to learn about context, background
information, and related issues. Then narrow the topic and focus your research, as guided by your working
thesis and purpose. You can return to Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence,
Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information, and Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating,
and Documenting Sources to review research processes, including how to allow research to shape your thesis
and organization.

After choosing a topic, you will probably need to narrow it further. One way to achieve this task is by
brainstorming, which involves generating possible ideas and thoughts quickly and informally. A basic, fast-
paced brainstorming technique is simply to list all your possible ideas on paper and combine those that are
related. Then you can eliminate some ideas to narrow the range. For example, for this assignment, you might
list all of the causes toward which you feel sympathetic. Beginning with an idea that already interests you will
help you remain enthusiastic about the idea and generate a positive tone that will come across to the audience
and maximize the effectiveness of the presentation.

For example, if you're interested in the environment, your brainstorm might include the following:

  · Animal endangerment
  Deforestation

  · Ocean pollution
  Plastic waste

  · Rising carbon levels
  · Global warming

If you think you still need new ideas at this point, spend some time researching advocacy organizations. Next,
expand each idea by creating subtopics. This activity will help you eliminate topics that are difficult to
elaborate on--or at least you will know that you need to conduct more research. In summary, follow this
process as you choose and narrow your topic:

1. Brainstorm ideas that already interest you or with which you have experience.
2. Circle topics appropriate for the assignment.
3. Cross out topics that you think you cannot make relevant to the audience. Remember, you are developing a

      presentation for a public forum.
4. For remaining topics, flesh out subtopics with ideas you might cover in your script. You should have

      between two and five key ideas; three is fairly typical.
5. Eliminate topics for which you lack sufficient material, or do the necessary research to obtain more.
6. Finally, decide on a topic that you have the resources to research.
632 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       Another Lens. Because this chapter focuses on activism and you have read the Trailblazer feature about Alice
       Wong's work in the disability activism space, think about content consumers (readers, listeners) who
       experience the world through the lens of disability. Challenge yourself to create content that meets the needs
       of diverse consumers. Because the assignment is an activist script outline for a presentation, it naturally lends
       itself to those who are abled in the areas of sight and hearing. Consider people who are visually impaired or
       hard of hearing. How might you adapt your script and its delivery to make it accessible to all?

       One option to consider is visual representation of your presentation through an infographic that depicts the
       thesis, main reasoning, and evidence to reach those who cannot hear a speech. Or consider how you might
       adapt the delivery of a script to reach those who experience visual limitations. By making considerations for
       accessibility, you will strengthen your message for all who interact with it.

             Quick Launch: Outlining

       Before your presentation, create an outline of the main ideas you plan to discuss. An outline is a framework
       that helps you organize your major claims, reasoning, supporting details, and evidence. Creating an outline is
       also a way to create a natural flow for your ideas and provide a foundation for engaging your audience. Doing
       this basic organizational work at the beginning will help you present your ideas so that they will have the
       greatest impact on your audience.

       The first step in creating your outline is to develop a purpose statement. This one-sentence statement reveals
       what you hope to accomplish in the presentation--that is, your objective. The purpose statement isn't
       something that you will include in your actual presentation; the purpose statement is for you. It will help you
       keep your audience at the center of your script, create a central idea, and, most of all, give you a realistic goal.
       One example of a purpose statement for an informational speech might read, "By the end of this presentation,
       my audience will better understand the impact of plastic waste on the ocean and the world." Or, for a
       persuasive speech, a purpose statement on a similar topic might read, "By the end of this presentation, my
       audience will feel compelled to reduce their use of disposable plastic."

       Although a speaking outline resembles an outline for an academic paper, with special considerations for the
       genre, it does not need to be as detailed as an outline for a research paper. Rather, a speaking outline will form
       the framework for speech. Feel free to write your outline as complete thoughts, sentence fragments, or even
       bullet points.

       A presentation's basic format is relatively similar to most other writing: an introduction, three to five major
       supporting points, and a conclusion. The major differences will be the genre-specific choices you make about
       presenting this information.

       Introduction

       Like most persuasive writing, your presentation needs an introduction that establishes its purpose. The
       introduction should engage the audience, present the topic and main ideas, and validate the speaker's
       credibility. Engaging your audience is important. You can capture an audience's attention by relating an
       anecdote or a quotation, posing a question, using humor, relating surprising facts or statistics, or any other
       method you think will do the job.

       The introduction will usually lead seamlessly into a definitive statement of the main theme or claim. As you
       would include a thesis in the introduction of a piece of persuasive writing, your introduction here also should
       include a statement that previews the main idea and briefly touches on key points. Though you are outlining
       your presentation rather than writing a full script, it is a good idea to write your thesis so that you clearly
       identify your aim. When presenting, you won't have to read your script word for word, but recording the thesis
       clearly will enable you to summarize the central idea of your presentation easily.

       Finally, the introduction is your opportunity to establish credibility with your audience and to tell them why

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                          19.5 · Writing Process: Writing to Speak 633

   they should listen to what you have to say. Include a brief statement of your credentials, experience, and
   knowledge that demonstrates your credibility or authority on the topic.

   Body

s  The main section of the outline, the body is the longest part of the script and the one in which you present key

   points to support the main idea. Each key point should stem organically from the script's goal andenyodusr thesis.

   Although  standard  practice  is to present  three  key  ideas,  you  may  choose  to  have  between  two  and  five.  Any
                                   end s

   fewer, and you won't support your thesis sufficiently; any more, and your audience will lose track of them. Back

   each key idea with several points, including reasoning, evidence, and audiovisual support.

   You can organize your key ideas in several ways. Determining an organizational pattern helps you narrow the
   central ideas generated from research and allows you to plan material for your script. Topical patterns break
   main ideas into smaller ideas or subcategories. After dividing the topics into subtopics, consider the most
   logical order of points. There is often no right answer to this order, so feel free to move your ideas around to
   create the greatest impact. For example, a topic discussing World War II battles might best be presented in
   chronological order (listed or arranged according to time sequence), but a topic broken down to address the
   causes of World War II (diplomatic factors, nationalism, World War I peace treaty) may not fit into an obvious
   pattern. In a persuasive script, problem-and-solution or cause-and-effect patterns of reasoning may be the
   best way to organize ideas. These and other organizational patterns are discussed in Reasoning Strategies:
   Improving Critical Thinking.

   Conclusion

   This portion of the script provides a summary and is your final opportunity to make an impression on your
   audience. Typically, in this section, you restate the thesis convincingly and, if applicable in a persuasive script,
   tell your audience what you believe they should do. Also, you briefly revisit each key idea in the context of how
   it supports your thesis. Strong conclusions are especially important in scripts.

   One strategy for writing conclusions is the "mirrored" conclusion that ties back to the introduction. For
   example, if you use a statistic to engage your audience's attention, you return to that statistic in the conclusion.
   Consider the following example.

   Introduction: It takes 450 years for one plastic bottle to decompose in a landfill. Now consider the fact that,
   according to the U.S. government, at least 50 million plastic bottles are thrown away each day in the United
   States.

   Mirrored Conclusion: Each time you're tempted to reach for a plastic bottle, contemplate the 50 million that
   end up in landfills each year. Consider other options that spare our environment from the centuries of
   decomposition that each one contributes to.

   For writers who have difficulty beginning, one idea is to reverse-engineer the structure of the script. Beginning
   with the conclusion will help you know where you need to end up, thus making it easier to create a roadmap for
   getting there. This strategy can provide consistency and add emphasis to the key ideas in the script.

   Outline

   Keeping in mind the basic parts of a script outline, you can now begin to craft a skeletal version your own. Use
   a graphic organizer like Table 19.1 to gather and organize your initial thoughts.

                                 Topic:         General             Purpose Statement:
                                                Purpose:

                       TABLE 19.1 Presentation outline
634 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

                                                                    Hook:

                                               Introduction
                                                                    Thesis:

                                  Body        Key Idea 1:
                                                · Reason(s):
                                                · Evidence:

                                              Key Idea 2:
                                                · Reason(s):
                                                · Evidence:

                                              Key Idea 3:
                                                · Reason(s):
                                                · Evidence:

                                              Restatement of Thesis:

                                  Conclusion

                                              Closing Statement:

                                  TABLE 19.1 Presentation outline

A sample skeletal outline might include the following information.

Topic:        General Purpose:                                               Purpose Statement:

Plastic waste To convince people not to use plastic water bottles.           By the end of this speech,
                                                                             my audience will feel
                                                                             compelled to reduce their
                                                                             use of disposable plastic.

              Hook:

Introduction  It takes 450 years for one plastic bottle to decompose in a landfill. Now consider the fact that,
              according to the U.S. government, at least 50 million plastic bottles are thrown away each day in
              the United States.

TABLE 19.2 Sample outline

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                       19.5 · Writing Process: Writing to Speak 635

            Thesis:
            We should reduce our use of disposable plastic.

            Key Idea 1: Plastic production increases carbon emissions and contributes to global warming.

              · Reason(s): Plastic production requires a lot of energy and resources.
              · Evidence: 1.5 million barrels of oil are used each year to make plastic bottles.

Body        Key Idea 2: Most plastic is never recycled.

              · Reason(s): Recycling plastic is not efficient.
              · Evidence: Only 9% of plastic ever produced has been recycled.

            Key Idea 3: Plastic waste is filling our landfills.

              · Reason(s): Plastic manufacturing is increasing, and there is nowhere to put all the used
                  plastic.

              · Evidence: 40% of plastic is single-use then thrown away.

            Restatement of Thesis:
            All people should reduce their use of disposable plastic.

Conclusion  Closing Statement:

            Each time you're tempted to reach for a plastic bottle, contemplate
            the 50 million that end up in landfills each year. Consider other
            options that spare our environment from the centuries of
            decomposition that each one contributes to.

TABLE 19.2 Sample outline

     Drafting: Signpost Language; Tone, Repetition and Parallelism; Media and Other Visuals;
and Cultural Cues

After you have analyzed your audience, selected and narrowed the topic, researched supporting ideas, and
created a skeletal outline, you can begin adding flesh to the outline. Gather all supporting material for your
topic, and consider the various ways to include notes about effective language and delivery.

Signpost Language

The function of signs is to direct people to the places they are going. Think of a road sign that points to an exit
off the highway. Signs also can warn people of places they should not go. Similarly, in presentations, signposts
are statements that help the audience know where your presentation is going. These may include

  · a preview statement that offers an overview of the path and topics your script will take on;
  · transition statements between the introduction and body, between key points and ideas, and between the

      body and the conclusion; and
  · a conclusion statement that ends the script.

Table 19.3 shows examples of signpost language. Notice the boldfaced words, called transitions, which help
readers and listeners navigate between ideas and concepts. Signposts should clearly connect ideas, are often
parallel (repeated words or grammatical forms), and mark the most important parts of an argument or
   636 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

   explanation.

            Signpost                                          Example

s  Preview                           "Today, I'd like to introduce you to the organization ReStart, a community outreach
                                     that makes a difference for those experiencing homelessness in our community."

   Transition (introduction to       "First, let's look at how ReStart was formed."  end s
   body)

   Transition (key idea to key       "Let's begin by examining the reasons some people experience homelessness,
   idea)                             which can help you understand the need for an organization like ReStart."

   Transition (key idea to key       "Now that you understand something about homelessness, let's look at how
   idea)                             ReStart addresses the problem."

   Transition (key idea to key       "It's not just the staff at ReStart that can help. You can play a role in helping those
   idea)                             experiencing homelessness too."

   Conclusion (restatement           "Thus, as you can see, ReStart is an organization with a long history in the Kansas
   of thesis)                        City area, one that not only provides services to those experiencing homelessness
                                     but also offers an opportunity for volunteers to play a role."

   TABLE 19.3 Signpost language

   Tone

   Tone is a writer or speaker's attitude as it is conveyed in a composition or script. A writers or speaker's
   language choices as well as other elements specific to speech, such as gestures and body language, help create
   tone. The tone of a presentation depends largely on its purpose, audience, and message.

   Consider this text from Annotated Student Sample.

         Without warning, the smaller dog launched itself from its owner's lap, snarling and snapping at the guide dog.
         The owner of the small dog jumped up and retrieved her animal from the Labrador's vest and stomped back to
         her seat. That neither she nor the still-yapping dog had an obvious panic attack amazed me, as I questioned, to
         myself of course, what possible service was being provided--other than a moment of exercise.

   The author's tone of disapproval is evident when he relates the actions of the untrained, unrestrained dog
   causing trouble for others. The attitude is emphasized by words with negative connotations such as snarling
   and stomped.

   The tone you choose for your script will help you relate to your audience. It can help your audience feel
   connected to you and promote your credibility as well as that of the message you wish to impart.

   Notice, too, the use of the first person in script writing. While you may have been taught not to use first-person
   pronouns in most formal or academic writing, speech is completely different. Even in formal scripts, the use of
   I helps connect listeners to the speaker. In general, effective speakers also use simple, declarative statements
   in the active voice (subject + verb + object) to emphasize their key ideas and to keep audiences focused on
   them. Longer, complex sentences may cause audience members to lose focus. Thoughts and sentences should
   flow conversationally. See Clear and Effective Sentences for more about effective sentences, including use of
   the active voice.

   Repetition and Parallelism

   Repetition and parallelism are literary devices that authors and speakers use for emphasis, persuasion,

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                19.5 · Writing Process: Writing to Speak 637

                 contrast, and rhythm. In repetition, a word, phrase, or sound is repeated for effect. Repetition is also employed
                 in a variety of figurative language. The following example is an excerpt from the surrender speech of Chief
                 Joseph (1840-1904), the Nez Percé leader who surrendered to the U.S. Army in 1877 after the U.S. government
                 had appropriated Nez Percé land. Rather than be forced to live on reservations, Chief Joseph and his followers
public domainunt successfully attempted to flee to Canada, a journey of about 1,500 miles, during which they were pursued
                 and vastly outnumbered by the U.S. Army. Notice the use of repetition to emphasize theencdolpduabnlidc dthoemdaeinatth toll.

                        I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed; Looking Glass is dead, Too-hul-hul-sote is dead. The old men are all
                        dead. . . . He who led on the young men is dead. It is cold, and we have no blankets; the little children are
                        freezing teonddepautbhl.icMdyopmeaoipnlet, some of them, have run away to the hills and have no blankets, no food. No one
                        knows where they are--perhaps freezing to death. I want to have time to look for my children. . . . Maybe I shall
                        find them among the dead.

                 Parallelism is the use of similar or equivalent constructions of phrases or clauses to emphasize an idea.
                 Parallelism is especially helpful for organizational and structural concerns in a script or composition.
                 Consider this excerpt from President John F. Kennedy's (1917-1963) inaugural address:

                        Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any
                        hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty.

                 Kennedy uses parallelism for impact as well as to organize his support for the idea that the United States works
                 collaboratively for "the success of liberty." Parallelism and repetition can work hand in hand as organizational
                 strategies and to emphasize ideas in your script.

                 Anaphora and epistrophe are two related forms of parallelism.

Anaphora: repetition of the first word   "We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds,
or phrase across phrases or sentences    we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills."

                                         --Winston Churchill's "We Shall Fight on the Beaches"

                                         "And that the government of the people, by the people, for the people,
                                         shall not perish from the Earth."

Epistrophe: repetition of the last word  --Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address
or phrase across phrases or sentences
                                         "For man holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish all forms of
                                         human poverty and all forms of human life."

                                         --John F. Kennedy's inaugural address

TABLE 19.4

You can hear examples of parallelism and repetition in audio excerpts on the website American Rhetoric
(https://openstax.org/r/American_Rhetoric).

In Chapter 19, you have learned about rhetorical techniques used in speech, including parallelism, repetition,
and signpost language.

Media and Other Visuals

Because speeches are auditory by nature, you can enhance their effectiveness by using media and other visual
aids. These elements can add emphasis, help the audience understand a complex idea, or otherwise support
your message. But be careful not to detract from your speech with the media you choose. A common error
638 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       speakers make is to include too much or irrelevant media.

       FIGURE 19.8 Visual aids and other media can enhance an audience's understanding during a public address.
       (credit: "James Webb Space Telescope Night at the NASA Goddard Visitor Center" by NASA/GSFC/Bill Hrybyk/flickr,
       CC BY 2.0)
       When considering media and visual aids, remember to keep in mind your audience, purpose, and message.
       Note these considerations about media and visual aids:

         · Use media in a way that doesn't clutter or overwhelm your presentation. The media you choose should
             enhance, not detract from, your message.

         · Ensure that visuals are large enough for the audience to see. Create or obtain media that is clear, concise,
             and of high quality. Tiny, hard-to-read graphs or muffled audio clips will only frustrate your audience.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                    19.5 · Writing Process: Writing to Speak 639

FIGURE 19.9 Infographics are one example of how a speech can be enhanced by multimedia content. (credit: "Stop
the Spread of Germs (COVID-19)" by United States Health and Human Services/Wikimedia Commons, Public
Domain)

  · Keep a consistent visual style, including font, colors, backgrounds, and so on.
  · Provide space and time for your audience to listen to, read, and/or view media and other visuals in your

      presentation.
  · Consider accessibility; think about an audience member who relies on an interpreter or who is visually

     impaired. How can you make your presentation accessible to that person?
  · Ensure that your media engages the audience, thus making your speech delivery more dynamic.
  · If using technology, make every effort to test it before your presentation.
Read Aloud
As you finish drafting your script, consider all the potential aspects of language and organization you might
use to create meaning for your audience. Remember that you will give your presentation orally. Therefore,
during drafting, take a few minutes at key points--after completing a section, for example--to practice your
presentation by reading it aloud. Listen to how it sounds and make adjustments as you go along, considering
the oral elements of speech that lend themselves to fluency.

     Peer Review: Using Symbols

After you have completed the first draft of your outline, peer review can help you refine your ideas, improve
your organization, and strengthen your language. One aspect of effective peer review is marking the text for
revision. You and your peers can do this kind of marking by using symbols, which allow reviewers to give
feedback quickly and thoughtfully without overwhelming the writer with notes.
Figure 19.10 below provides some of the editing marks to use for proofreading and review. Peer reviewers may
also write in the margin to indicate issues with organization, tone, or flow of ideas.
640 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

              FIGURE 19.10 Editing symbols (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

           Revising: Interpreting and Responding to Symbols and Context Cues

       After a peer has reviewed and provided feedback on your first draft, you will begin the revision process.
       Remember that writing is recursive, meaning it is not linear. Although revision won't go on forever, it's
       important to revise your work at each point in the writing process. In fact, even though you are officially
       working with the first draft, it is likely your writing has already undergone some process of revision. You will
       want to continue this process to strengthen your writing, respond to peer review, and ensure that your script
       fulfills your intent. Consider the items in the following checklist.

      Checklist for Revision

        Read the draft aloud.
    Is it organized logically?
    Is the topic immediately clear?

        Ensure that the script has a clear purpose.
        Think about your audience.
    Does the script respond to what the audience already knows about the subject?
    Does it support new knowledge?
    Have you taken culture into consideration?
        Review the introduction to determine whether it hooks the audience and establishes a thesis.
        Review the sentences in each paragraph and the order of the paragraphs to ensure that the organization
       supports the thesis.
        Review the conclusion to ensure that it supports the thesis and provides a strong ending.
        Read the script again after making revisions to find ways to improve transitions and connections. Consider

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                             19.6 · Evaluation: Bridging Writing and Speaking 641

tone, signpost language, parallelism, and repetition.
 Review the draft for conventions, including grammar, spelling, and punctuation.

19.6 Evaluation: Bridging Writing and Speaking

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Produce effective written and oral content based on genre conventions, including common formats and design
      features.

  · Demonstrate understanding and use of genre conventions for structure, coherence, tone, and mechanics.

Ask a peer to use the following rubric to evaluate your final presentation draft. The rubric covers oral fluency,
rhetorical choices, and organizational principles necessary for creating a strong presentation. After going
through the rubric, your peer reviewer may leave comments or other feedback to help you understand their
reasoning. Although you may not agree with all of their ideas, peer reviewers offer an opportunity for you to get
an outsider's perspective on your writing. Be sure to ask questions about parts you do not understand, and
listen closely to your peer reviewer's reasoning. Then review your script again according to the feedback you
think you can address.

Rubric

Score         Critical Language              Clarity and Coherence                  Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

5             The outline and its delivery   The topic or claim is stated clearly   The language is
Skillful      have a clear focus and         and is expertly supported with         consistently clear and
              thesis, exemplify strong oral  abundant credible evidence. The        appropriate and
              fluency, and appeal to         writer's ideas are always clearly      accurately reflects the
              readers' intelligence and      presented and linked with              overall tone. The writer
              sympathies. The outline        appropriate transitions. The           consistently
              also shows ample evidence      conclusion ties back to the thesis.    demonstrates awareness
              of the writer's intent to      Media and visual aids are skillfully   of the audience and highly
              consciously meet or            used as support.                       skilled use of rhetorical
              challenge conventional                                                strategies and devices,
              expectations in rhetorically                                          such as parallelism and
              effective ways.                                                       repetition.

4             The outline and its delivery   The topic or claim is stated clearly   The language is usually
Accomplished  have a generally clear focus   and is supported with sufficient       clear and appropriate and
              and thesis, exemplify          credible evidence. The writer's ideas  accurately reflects the
              moderate oral fluency, and     are usually presented clearly and      overall tone. The writer
              generally appeal to readers'   linked with appropriate transitions.   usually demonstrates
              intelligence and               The conclusion ties back to the        awareness of the
              sympathies. The text also      thesis. Media and visual aids are      audience and skilled use
              shows some evidence of the     used appropriately as support.         of rhetorical strategies
              writer's intent to meet or                                            and devices, such as
              challenge conventional                                                parallelism and repetition.
              expectations in rhetorically
              effective ways.

TABLE 19.5
642 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

       Score  Critical Language                            Clarity and Coherence                   Rhetorical Choices
 3                Awareness
 Capable
              The outline and its delivery                 The topic or claim is stated fairly     The language is usually
 2            have a somewhat clear                        clearly and is supported with           clear but may be
 Developing   focus and thesis, exemplify                  sufficient, if not abundant, credible   inappropriate at times
              some oral fluency, and                       evidence. The writer's ideas are        and may not always
 1            appeal somewhat to                           presented fairly clearly, but the       reflect the overall tone.
 Beginning    readers' intelligence and                    writing may be choppy because of        The writer demonstrates
TABLE 19.5    sympathies. The text also                    insufficient or inappropriate           some awareness of the
              shows limited evidence of                    transitions. The conclusion may be      audience and use of
              the writer's intent to meet                  missing or may not tie back to the      rhetorical strategies and
              or challenge conventional                    thesis. Media and visual aids may not   devices, such as
              expectations in rhetorically                 be used appropriately as                parallelism and repetition,
              effective ways.                              support--too many, too few, too         but more are needed for a
                                                           small, or inaudible.                    strong presentation.

              The outline and its delivery                 The topic or claim is unclear and       The language may be
              have evidence of an                          insufficiently supported with credible  unclear or inappropriate
              emerging focus and thesis,                   evidence. The writer's ideas are        and may not reflect the
              exemplify emerging oral                      unclear and disconnected, a result of   overall tone. The writer
              fluency, and provide limited                 insufficient or inappropriate           demonstrates little, if any,
              appeal to readers'                           transitions. The conclusion may be      awareness of the
              intelligence and                             missing or may not tie back to the      audience and little use of
              sympathies. The text also                    thesis. Media and visual aids           rhetorical strategies and
              shows emerging evidence of                   contribute little to the presentation.  devices, such as
              the writer's intent to meet                                                          parallelism and repetition.
              or challenge conventional
              expectations in rhetorically
              effective ways.

              The outline and its delivery                 The topic or claim is not supported     The language is unclear
              have little to no focus or                   with credible evidence. The writer's    and inappropriate and
              thesis, show little evidence                 ideas are unclear and disconnected,     does not reflect the
              of oral fluency, and provide                 a result of insufficient or             overall tone. The writer
              little to no appeal to                       inappropriate transitions. There is no  demonstrates little or no
              readers' intelligence or                     clear conclusion. Media and visual      awareness of their
              sympathies. The text also                    aids either are missing or contribute   audience and little to no
              shows little to no evidence                  little to the presentation.             use of rhetorical
              of the writer's intent to                                                            strategies or devices,
              meet or challenge                                                                    such as parallelism and
              conventional expectations                                                            repetition.
              in rhetorically effective
              ways.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                          19.7 · Spotlight on ... Delivery/Public Speaking 643

19.7 Spotlight on ... Delivery/Public Speaking

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Implement various technologies effectively to address an audience, matching the capacities of each to the
      rhetorical situation.

  · Apply conventions of speech delivery, such as voice control, gestures, and posture.
  · Identify and show awareness of cultural considerations.

Think of a speech you have seen or heard, either in person, on television, or online. Was the speech delivered
well, or was it poorly executed? What aspects of the performance make you say that? Both good and poor
delivery of a speech can affect the audience's opinion of the speaker and the topic. Poor delivery may be so
distracting that even the message of a well-organized script with strong information is lost to the audience.

Speaking Genres: Spoken Word, Pulpit, YouTube, Podcast, Social Media

The world today offers many new (and old) delivery methods for script writing. While the traditional
presidential address or commencement speech on a stage in front of a crowd of people is unlikely to disappear,
newer script delivery methods are now available, including many that involve technology. From YouTube,
which allows anyone to upload videos, to podcasts, which provide a platform for anyone, celebrities and
noncelebrities alike, to produce a radio-like program, it seems that people are finding new ways to use
technology to enhance communication. Free resources such as YouTube Studio (https://openstax.org/r/
YouTube_Studio) and the extension TubeBuddy (https://openstax.org/r/TubeBuddy) can be a good starting
place to learn to create these types of media.

Voice Control

Whether the method is old or new, delivering communication in the speaking genre relies not only on words
but also on the way those words are delivered. Remember that voice and tone are important in establishing a
bond with your audience, helping them feel connected to your message, creating engagement, and facilitating
comprehension. Vocal delivery includes these aspects of speech:

  · Rate of speech refers to how fast or slow you speak. You must speak slowly enough to be understood but
      not so slowly that you sound unnatural and bore your audience. In addition, you can vary your rate,
      speeding up or slowing down to increase tension, emphasize a point, or create a dramatic effect.

  · Volume refers to how loudly or softly you speak. As with rate, you do not want to be too loud or too soft.
      Too soft, and your speech will be difficult or impossible to hear, even with amplification; too loud, and it
      will be distracting or even painful for the audience. Ideally, you should project your voice, speaking from
      the diaphragm, according to the size and location of the audience and the acoustics of the room. You can
      also use volume for effect; you might use a softer voice to describe a tender moment between mother and
      child or a louder voice to emphatically discuss an injustice.

  · Pitch refers to how high or low a speaker's voice is to listeners. A person's vocal pitch is unique to that
      person, and unlike the control a speaker has over rate and volume, some physical limitations exist on the
      extent to which individuals can vary pitch. Although men generally have lower-pitched voices than
      women, speakers can vary their pitch for emphasis. For example, you probably raise your pitch naturally
      at the end of a question. Changing pitch can also communicate enthusiasm or indicate transition or
      closure.

  · Articulation refers to how clearly a person produces sounds. Clarity of voice is important in speech; it
      determines how well your audience understands what you are saying. Poor articulation can hamper the
      effect of your script and even cause your audience to feel disconnected from both you and your message.
      In general, articulation during a presentation before an audience tends to be more pronounced and
      dramatic than everyday communication with individuals or small groups. When presenting a script, avoid
      slurring and mumbling. While these may be acceptable in informal communication, in presented speech
644 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

             they can obscure your message.
         · Fluency refers to the flow of speech. Speaking with fluency is similar to reading with fluency. It's not about

             how fast you can speak, but how fluid and meaningful your speech is. While inserting pauses for dramatic
             effect is perfectly acceptable, these are noticeably different from awkward pauses that result from
             forgetting a point, losing your place, or becoming distracted. Practicing your speech can greatly reduce
             fluency issues. A word on verbal fillers, those pesky words or sounds used to fill a gap or fluency glitch:
             utterances such as um, ah, and like detract from the fluency of your speech, distract the audience from
             your point, and can even reduce your credibility. Again, practice can help reduce their occurrence, and
             self-awareness can help you speak with more fluency.
       Gestures and Expressions
       Beyond vocal delivery, consider also physical delivery variables such as gestures and facial expressions.
       While not all speech affords audiences the ability to see the speaker, in-person, online, and other forms of
       speech do. Gestures and facial expressions can both add to and detract from effective script delivery, as they
       can help demonstrate emotion and enthusiasm for the topic. Both have the ability to emphasize points,
       enhance tone, and engage audiences.
       Eye contact is another form of nonverbal, physical communication that builds community, communicates
       comfort, and establishes credibility. Eye contact also can help hold an audience's attention during a speech. It
       is advisable to begin your speech by establishing eye contact with the audience. One idea is to memorize your
       opening and closing statements to allow you to maintain consistent eye contact during these important
       sections of the script and strengthen your connection with the audience.
       Although natural engagement through gestures, facial expressions, and eye contact can help an audience
       relate to a presenter and even help establish community and trust, these actions also can distract audiences
       from the content of the script if not used purposefully. In general, as with most delivery elements, variation
       and a happy medium between "too much" and "too little" are key to an effective presentation. Some presenters
       naturally have more expressive faces, but all people can learn to control and use facial expressions and
       gestures consciously to become more effective speakers. Practicing your speech in front of a mirror will allow
       you to monitor, plan, and practice these aspects of physical delivery.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                          19.7 · Spotlight on ... Delivery/Public Speaking 645

FIGURE 19.11 Body language such as facial expressions and gestures can help your audience interpret another
level of meaning when you address them publicly. (credit: "Mamallapuram, Indian Dance Festival, Bharatanatyam
dancer" by Arian Zwegers/flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Posture and Movement
Other physical delivery considerations include posture and movement. Posture is the position of the body. If
you have ever been pestered to "stand up straight," you were being instructed on your posture. The most
important consideration for posture during a speech is that you look relaxed and natural. You don't want to be
slumped over and leaning on the podium or lectern, but you also don't want a stiff, unnatural posture that
makes you look stilted or uncomfortable. In many speeches, the speaker's posture is upright as they stand
behind a podium or at a microphone, but this is not always the case. Less formal occasions and audiences may
call for movement of the whole body. If this informality fits your speech, you will need to balance movement
with the other delivery variables. This kind of balance can be challenging. You won't want to wander aimlessly
around the stage or pace back and forth on the same path. Nor will you want to shuffle your feet, rock, or shift
your weight back and forth. Instead, as with every other aspect of delivery, you will want your movements to be
purposeful, with the intention of connecting with or influencing your audience. Time your movements to occur
at key points or transitions in the script.
Cultural Considerations
Don't forget to reflect on cultural considerations that relate to your topic and/or audience. Cultural awareness
is important in any aspect of writing, but it can have an immediate impact on a speech, as the audience will
react to your words, gestures, vocal techniques, and topic in real time. Elements that speakers don't always
think about--including gestures, glances, and changes in tone and inflection--can vary in effectiveness and
even politeness in many cultures. Consideration for cultural cues may include the following:

  · Paralanguage: voiced cultural considerations, including tone, language, and even accent.
  · Kinesics: body movements and gestures that may include facial expressions. Often part of a person's

      subconscious, kinesics can be interpreted in various ways by members of different cultures. Body
      language can include posture, facial expressions (smiling or frowning), and even displays of affection.
   646 19 · Scripting for the Public Forum: Writing to Speak

   · Proxemics: interpersonal space that regulates intimacy. Proxemics might indicate how close to an

   audience a speaker is located, whether the speaker moves around, and even how the speaker greets the

   audience.

   · Chronemics: use of time. Chronemics refers to the duration of a script.

s  · Appearance: clothing and physical appearance. The presentation of appearance is a subtle form of

   communication that can indicate the speaker's identity anedncdasn be specific to cultures.

   Stage Directions

                     end s                                                    end s

   You can think proactively about ways to enhance the delivery of your script, including vocal techniques, body

   awareness, and cultural considerations. Within the draft of your script, create stage directions. An integral

   part of performances such as plays and films, stage directions can be as simple as writing in a pause for

   dramatic effect or as complicated as describing where and how to walk, what facial expressions to make, or

   how to react to audience feedback.

   Look at this example from the beginning of the student sample. Stage directions are enclosed in parentheses
   and bolded.

   Several years ago, I sat in the waiting area of a major airport, trying to ignore the constant yapping of a small
   dog cuddled on the lap of a fellow passenger. An airline rep approached the woman and asked the only two
   questions allowed by law. (high-pitched voice with a formal tone) "Is that a service animal? (pause) What
   service does it provide for you?"

   (bold, defiant, self-righteous tone) "Yes. It keeps me from having panic attacks," the woman said defiantly,
   and the airline employee retreated. (move two steps to the left for emphasis)

   Shortly after that, another passenger arrived at the gate. (spoken with authority) She gripped the high, stiff
   handle on the harness of a Labrador retriever that wore a vest emblazoned with the words "The Seeing Eye."
   (speed up speech and dynamic of voice for dramatic effect) Without warning, the smaller dog launched itself
   from its owner's lap, snarling and snapping at the guide dog. (move two steps back to indicate transition)

   Your Turn

   Now it's your turn. Using the principle illustrated above, create stage directions for your script. Then, practice
   using them by presenting your script to a peer reviewer, such as a friend, family member, or classmate. Also
   consider recording yourself practicing your script. Listen to the recording to evaluate it for delivery, fluency,
   and vocal fillers. Remember that writing is recursive: you can make changes based on what works and what
   doesn't after you implement your stage directions. You can even ask your audience for feedback to improve
   your delivery.

   Podcast Publication

   If possible, work with your instructor and classmates to put together a single podcast (https://openstax.org/r/
   podcast) or a series of podcasts (https://openstax.org/r/podcasts) according to the subject areas of the
   presentations. The purpose of these podcasts should be to invite and encourage other students to get involved
   in important causes. Work with relevant student organizations on campus to produce and publicize the
   podcasts for maximum impact. There are many free resources for creating podcasts, including Apple's
   GarageBand (https://openstax.org/r/GarageBand) and Audacity (https://openstax.org/r/Audacity).

   19.8 Portfolio: Everyday Rhetoric, Rhetoric Every Day

   LEARNING OUTCOMES
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:

     · Write reflectively about the process of creating a script for a presentation.
     · Demonstrate how the composing process affects the final product.

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                               19.8 · Portfolio: Everyday Rhetoric, Rhetoric Every Day 647

Reflecting on your writing enhances the writing process by allowing you to deepen your understanding of the
process of drafting, revising, and evaluating. Now that you have finished another writing project, it's time to
add another section to your portfolio. Think critically about the process you followed for this assignment,
reflecting on how your writing developed over time, specifically as it relates to writing for an audience.

Reflective Task

As you reflect on writing for your presentation, ask yourself the following questions:

  · How did you decide on the topic and subject of your script?
  · How did the research process inform the development of your thesis?
  · How did you organize your outline? Why did you choose this method of organization?
  · What sources did you use to develop key points?
  · How did you engage the audience in the introduction of your script? What methods of engagement did you

      use?
  · How did you build credibility and engagement with your audience?
  · How did collaboration with peers help you as you wrote and revised your script?
  · What specific feedback was helpful in the revision process?
  · How did you incorporate structural elements such as tone, parallelism, and repetition into your writing?

      How did they affect the text?
  · What considerations for delivery did you make within your writing?
  · Did you find writing for speech more or less difficult than writing a traditional paper? In what ways?
  · What might you do differently if you were to begin again or write a different script?
  · What insights about your topic did you gain from writing your paper?
648 19 · Further Reading

Further Reading

The following titles are well-known examples of script within the genre.
Churchill, Winston. "We Shall Fight on the Beaches." 4 June 1940. International Churchill Society,

    winstonchurchill.org/resources/speeches/1940-the-finest-hour/we-shall-fight-on-the-beaches/.
Gandhi, Mohandas K. "The `Quit India' Speech." 8 Aug. 1942. Mahatma Gandhi One Spot Information Website,

    Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal / Gandhi Research Foundation, www.mkgandhi.org/speeches/qui.htm.
Gehrig, Lou. "Farewell to Baseball Address." 4 July 1939. American Rhetoric: Top 100 Speeches,

    www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/lougehrigfarewelltobaseball.htm.
Kennedy, John F. "Address to Joint Session of Congress." 25 May 1961. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library

   and Museum, National Archives, www.jfklibrary.org/learn/about-jfk/historic-speeches/address-to-joint-
    session-of-congress-may-25-1961.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. "I Have a Dream." 28 Aug. 1963. "The 1963 March on Washington," NAACP,
    www.naacp.org/find-resources/history-explained/1963-march-washington.
Washington, George. "Washington's Address to Congress Resigning His Commission." 23 Dec. 1783. Founders
   Online, National Archives, founders.archives.gov/documents/Jefferson/01-06-02-0319-0004.

Works Cited

"About." Disability Visibility Project, 2021, disabilityvisibilityproject.com/about/.
"Access Is Love." Disability & Intersectionality Summit, 2021, www.disabilityintersectionalitysummit.com/

    access-is-love.
Bates, Jefferson D. Writing with Precision: How to Write So That You Cannot Possibly Be Misunderstood.

    Acropolis Books, 1985.
"Chief Joseph." Encyclopædia Britannica, 17 Sept. 2020, www.britannica.com/biography/Chief-Joseph.
Chief Joseph. I Will Fight No More Surrender Speech (1877). apush-xl.com/DocumentsJOSEPH.pdf.
Churchill, Winston. "We Shall Fight on the Beaches." 4 June 1940. International Churchill Society,

    winstonchurchill.org/resources/speeches/1940-the-finest-hour/we-shall-fight-on-the-beaches/.
Humphrey, Judith. "Writing Professional Speeches: Seven Steps for Perfecting Your Craft." Vital Speeches of

   the Day, vol. 54, no. 11, 15 Mar. 1988, pp. 343-345.
KariO. "How Long Does It Take a Plastic Bottle to Biodegrade?" Postconsumers, 31 Oct. 2011,

    www.postconsumers.com/2011/10/31/how-long-does-it-take-a-plastic-bottle-to-biodegrade.
Kennedy, John F. "Inaugural Address of John F. Kennedy." 20 Jan. 1961. The Avalon Project: Documents in Law,

   History and Diplomacy, Yale Law School Lillian Goldman Law Library, avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/
    kennedy.asp.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. "I Have a Dream, Martin Luther King Jr. Full Speech Best Audio." 28 Aug. 1963.
   YouTube, uploaded by Classical Media, 26 Jan. 2015, www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARvrvJV4th4
Koch, Arthur, and Jason Schmitt. Speaking with a Purpose. 9th ed., Pearson, 2014.
Lincoln, Abraham. "The Gettysburg Address." 19 Nov. 1863. Abraham Lincoln Online,
    www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm.
"A Million Bottles a Minute: World's Plastic Binge `AS Dangerous as Climate Change'." The Guardian, Guardian
    News and Media, 28 June 2017, www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jun/28/a-million-a-minute-

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                            19 · Works Cited 649

    worlds-plastic-bottle-binge-as-dangerous-as-climate-change.
"Parallelism." American Rhetoric: Rhetorical Figures in Sound, created by Michael E. Eidenmuller,

    www.americanrhetoric.com/figures/parallelism.htm.
Pulrang, Andrew. "Frequently Asked Questions." #CripTheVote Blog, 27 Mar. 2018, cripthevote.blogspot.com/

    2018/03/frequently-asked-questions.html.
Rapp, Christof. "Aristotle's Rhetoric." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford U Center for the Study of

    Language and Information, 1 Feb. 2010, plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-rhetoric/.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. "FDR's Pearl Harbor Speech (December 8, 1941)." 8 Dec. 1941. YouTube, uploaded by

    Audio Law Library, 20 Jan. 2018, www.youtube.com/watch?v=kHsCyxdfjvQ.
650 19 · Works Cited
Access for free at openstax.org.
a Writer Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as 20

FIGURE 20.1 Mount Hood, Oregon. Seeing and reseeing, as in this lake reflection, is a practice that may help you
think and understand with greater clarity. (credit: "Mount Hood reflected in Mirror Lake, Oregon" by Oregon's Mt.
Hood Territory/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CHAPTER OUTLINE

20.1  Thinking Critically about Your Semester
20.2  Reflection Trailblazer: Sandra Cisneros
20.3  Glance at Genre: Purpose and Structure
20.4  Annotated Sample Reading: "Don't Expect Congrats" by Dale Trumbore
20.5  Writing Process: Looking Back, Looking Forward
20.6  Editing Focus: Pronouns
20.7  Evaluation: Evaluating Self-Reflection
20.8  Spotlight on ... Pronouns in Context

INTRODUCTION Reflecting on your work is an important step in your growth as a writer. Reflection allows you
to recognize the ways in which you have mastered some skills and have addressed instances when your
intention and execution fail to match. By recognizing previous challenges and applying learned strategies for
addressing them, you demonstrate improvement and progress as a writer. This kind of reflection is an example
of recursive (https://openstax.org/r/recursivity). At this point in the semester, you know that writing is a
recursive process: you prewrite, you write, you revise, you edit, you reflect, you revise, and so on. In working
through a writing assignment, you learn and understand more about particular sections of your draft, and you
652 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

       can go back and revise them. The ability to return to your writing and exercise objectivity and honesty about it
       is one of skills you have practiced during this journey. You are now able to evaluate your own work, accept
       another's critique of your writing, and make meaningful revisions.
       In this chapter, you will review your work from earlier chapters and write a reflection that captures your
       growth, feelings, and challenges as a writer. In your reflection, you will apply many of the writing, reasoning,
       and evidentiary strategies you have already used in other papers--for example, analysis, evaluation,
       comparison and contrast, problem and solution, cause and effect, examples, and anecdotes.
       When looking at your earlier work, you may find that you cringe at those papers and wonder what you were
       thinking when you wrote them. If given that same assignment, you now would know how to produce a more
       polished paper. This response is common and is evidence that you have learned quite a bit about writing.

     20.1 Thinking Critically about Your Semester

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Reflect on and write about the development of composing processes and how those processes affect your
             work.

         · Demonstrate honesty and objectivity in reflecting on written work.
       You have written your way through a long semester, and the journey is nearly complete. Now is the time to step
       back and reflect on what you have written, what you have mastered, what skill gaps remain, and what you will
       do to continue growing and improving as a communicator. This reflection will be based on the work you have
       done and what you have learned during the semester. Because the subject of this reflection is you and your
       work, no further research is required. The information you need is in the work you have done in this course
       and in your head. Now, you will work to organize and transfer this information to an organized written text.
       Every assignment you have completed provides you with insight into your writing process as you think about
       the assignment's purpose, its execution, and your learning along the way. The skill of reflection requires you to
       be critical and honest about your habits, feelings, skills, and writing. In the end, you will discover that you have
       made progress as a writer, perhaps in ways not yet obvious.

     20.2 Trailblazer

     Reflection Trailblazer: Sandra Cisneros

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify and analyze an author's reflections.
         · Demonstrate the ability to think critically about a writer's reflections.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                    20.2 · Trailblazer 653

FIGURE 20.2 Sandra Cisneros (credit: "Sandra           "She experiments,
leyendo parte de su obra" by Embassy of the United   creating a text that is
States-Argentina/flickr, CC BY 2.0)                 as succinct and flexible
                                                      as poetry, snapping

                                                         sentences into
                                                           fragments."

Finding a Home in Writing

Poet and novelist Sandra Cisneros (b. 1954) is best known for her novel The House on Mango Street (1983).
Born in Chicago, Illinois, Cisneros was the only girl in a family of seven children. When she was a child, her
father moved the family several times between Chicago and Mexico City, the capital of Mexico. With these
moves back and forth between the two countries, Cisneros felt detached from both cultures, forcing her to
create her own path to understand herself better.

In school, Cisneros was encouraged to write poems and quickly became known for her writing. However, her
interest in writing did not fully take hold until college, when she took a creative writing course. She graduated
with a BA from Loyola University in Chicago in 1976 and earned an MFA from the Writers' Workshop at the
University of Iowa in 1978. While there, she had an epiphany: "I was in this class, we were talking about
memory and the imagination,... and I realized: `My god, I'm... different from everybody in this classroom'"
(Rodríguez Aranda 65). This important reflection encouraged Cisneros to write about what others could not:
her own experience. The unique part poetry, part prose writing style that she crafted to relay her experiences
eventually found its place among traditional literary genres, giving voice to the once voiceless.

In her memoir, A House of My Own: Stories from My Life (https://openstax.org/r/A_House) (2015), Cisneros
reflects on her journey as a writer through subjects such as autonomy, home, culture, and environment. She
does so by introducing her memories, which develop into a kind of dialogue between the young writer she once
was and the successful writer she is today. In the title essay, "A House of My Own"--originally the introduction
to the 25th anniversary edition of The House on Mango Street--Cisneros writes, "The young woman in this
photograph is me.... She thinks stories are about beauty." By describing herself in the third person from the
vantage point of herself as a successful writer, Cisneros creates space for reflection--the act of thinking about
the arc of her life. She wonders how this young woman with so many fears had the courage to chart her own
path in life. Upon reflection, previously unexamined gifts from her parents provide some answers. In A House
of My Own, Cisneros says that she became a writer because of her mother, "who was unhappy being a mother"
and was "banging on the bars of her cell all her life," and because of her father, who wanted Cisneros to marry
and have babies and so didn't mind if she "majored in something silly like English": "In a sense, everything I
have ever written has been for him, to win his approval." Cisneros's reflection suggests that in some ways, her
life has been about rebirthing herself into a form that her mother would be proud of and a form her father
would come to understand--a form beyond the circumstances of her original birth.

This reflective dialogue across time mirrors the way in which Cisneros sees herself: as someone who writes
from multiple perspectives. Being an American and a Mexican, she writes in two languages and uses elements
654 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

       of both cultures to create characters that she picks up from memory, chance meetings, visits to various places,
       and dreams. She cobbles these parts together to form a title or maybe just a first line, giving her mind time to
       percolate, waiting for the rest of the story to emerge. This is the work of reflection--giving oneself time to think,
       to make connections, to feel, and to put words to ideas.

      Discussion Questions

       1. In what ways did the realization that she was different from other students spur Sandra Cisneros's journey
            as a writer?

       2. What is the purpose of reflection in Cisneros's writing?

       3. What strategies does Cisneros use to generate reflective writing?

       4. What themes emerge when you think about your journey as a writer this semester? Do similarities exist
            between your themes and Cisneros's? Explain

       5. What dialogue might emerge between the writer you were at the beginning of the semester and the writer
            you are now? If applicable, describe an epiphany, or sudden realization, you might have had about your
            writing.

     20.3 Glance at Genre: Purpose and Structure

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify conventions of reflection regarding structure, paragraphing, and tone.
         · Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and expectation.
         · Adapt composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

       Reflective writing is the practice of thinking about an event, an experience, a memory, or something
       imagined and expressing its larger meaning in written form. Reflective writing comes from the author's
       specific perspective and often contemplates the way an event (or something else) has affected or even changed
       the author's life.

      Areas of Exploration

       When you write a reflective piece, consider three main areas of exploration as shown in Figure 20.3. The first is
       the happening. This area consists of the events included in the reflection. For example, you will be examining
       writing assignments from this course. As you describe the assignments, you also establish context for the
       reflection so that readers can understand the circumstances involved. For each assignment, ask yourself these
       questions: What was the assignment? How did I approach the assignment? What did I do to start this
       assignment? What did I think about the assignment? If you think of other questions, use them. Record your
       answers because they will prove useful in the second area.

       The second area is reflection. When you reflect on the happening, you go beyond simply writing about the
       specific details of the assignment; you move into the writing process and an explanation of what you learned
       from doing the work. In addition, you might recognize--and note--a change in your skills or way of thinking.
       Ask yourself these questions: What works effectively in this text? What did I learn from this assignment? How
       is this assignment useful? How did I feel when I was working on this assignment? Again, you can create other
       questions, and note your responses because you will use them to write a reflection.

       The third area is action. Here, you decide what to do next and plan the steps needed to reach that goal. Ask
       yourself: What does (and does not) work effectively in this text? How can I continue to improve in this area?
       What should I do now? What has changed in my thinking? How would I change my approach to this
       assignment if I had to do another one like it? Base your responses to these questions on what you have learned,
       and implement these elements in your writing.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                           20.3 · Glance at Genre: Purpose and Structure 655

FIGURE 20.3 Elements of reflective writing (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Format of Reflective Writing

Unlike thesis statements, which often come at the beginning of an essay, the main point of a piece of reflective
writing may be conveyed only indirectly and nearly always emerges at the end, almost like an epiphany, or
sudden realization. With this structure, readers are drawn into the act of reflecting and become more curious
about what the writer is thinking and feeling. ln other words, reflective writers are musing, exploring, or
wondering rather than arguing. In fact, reflective essays are most enlightening when they are not obviously
instructive or assertive. However, even though reflective writing does not present an explicit argument, it still
includes evidence and cohesion and provides lessons to be learned. As such, elements of persuasion or
argument often appear in reflective essays.
Discovery through Writing
Keep in mind, too, that when you start to reflect on your growth as a writer, you may not realize what caused
you to explore a particular memory. In other words, writers may choose to explore an idea, such as why
something got their attention, and only by recalling the details of that event do they discover the reason it first
drew their attention.
When you tell the story of your writing journey this semester, you may find that more was on your mind than
you realized. The writing itself is one thing, but the meaning of what you learned becomes something else, and
you may deliberately share how that second level, or deeper meaning or feeling, emerged through the act of
storytelling. For example, in narrating a writing experience, you may step back, pause, and let readers know,
"Wait a minute, something else is going on here." An explanation of the new understanding, for both you and
your readers, can follow this statement. Such pauses are a sign that connections are being made--between the
present and the past, the concrete and the abstract, the literal and the symbolic. They signal to readers that the
essay or story is about to move in a new and less predictable direction. Yet each idea remains connected
through the structure of happenings, reflections, and actions.
Sometimes, slight shifts in voice or tone accompany reflective pauses as a writer moves closer to what is really
on their mind. The exact nature of these shifts will, of course, be determined by the writer's viewpoint. Perhaps
one idea that you, as the writer, come up with is the realization that writing a position argument was useful in
your history class. You were able to focus more on the material than on how to write the paper because you
already knew how to craft a position argument. As you work through this process, continue to note these
important little discoveries.
656 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

       Your Writing Portfolio

       As you recall, each chapter in this book has included one or more assignments for a writing portfolio. In
       simplest terms, a writing portfolio is a collection of your writing contained within a single binder or folder. A
       portfolio may contain printed copy, or it may be completely digital. Its contents may have been created over a
       number of weeks, months, or even years, and it may be organized chronologically, thematically, or
       qualitatively. A portfolio assigned for a class will contain written work to be shared with an audience to
       demonstrate your writing, learning, and skill progression. This kind of writing portfolio, accumulated during a
       college course, presents a record of your work over a semester and may be used to assign a grade. Many
       instructors now offer the option of, or even require, digital multimodal portfolios, which include visuals, audio,
       and/or video in addition to written texts. Your instructor will provide guidelines on how to create a multimodal
       portfolio, if applicable. You can also learn more about creating a multimodal portfolio (https://openstax.org/r/
       creating) and view one by a first-year student (https://openstax.org/r/first-year).

      Key Terms

       As you begin crafting your reflection, consider these elements of reflective writing.

         · Analysis: When you analyze your own writing, you explain your reasoning or writing choices, thus
             showing that you understand your progress as a writer.

         · Context: The context is the circumstances or situation in which the happening occurred. A description of
             the assignment, an explanation of why it was given, and any other relevant conditions surrounding it
             would be its context.

         · Description: Providing specific details, using figurative language and imagery, and even quoting from
             your papers helps readers visualize and thus share your reflection. When describing, writers may include
             visuals if applicable.

         · Evaluation: An effective evaluation points out where you faltered and where you did well. With that
             understanding, you have a basis to return to your thoughts and speculate about progress you will continue
             to make in the future.

         · Observation: Observation is a close look at the writing choices you made and the way you managed the
             rhetorical situations you encountered. When observing, be objective, and pay attention to the more and
             less effective parts of your writing.

         · Purpose: By considering the goals of these previous assignments, you will be better equipped to look at
             them critically and objectively to understand their larger use in academia.

         · Speculation: Speculation encourages you to think about your next steps: where you need to improve and
             where you need to stay sharp to avoid recurring mistakes.

         · Thoughts: Your thoughts (and feelings) before, during, and after an assignment can provide you with
             descriptive material. In a reflective essay, writers may choose to indicate their thoughts in a different tense
             from the one in which they write the essay itself.

       When you put these elements together, you will be able to reflect objectively on your own writing. This
       reflection might include identifying areas of significant improvement and areas that still need more work. In
       either case, focus on describing, analyzing, and evaluating how and why you did or did not improve. This is not
       an easy task for any writer, but it proves valuable for those who aim to improve their skills as communicators.

     20.4 Annotated Sample Reading: "Don't Expect Congrats" by Dale Trumbore

       LEARNING OUTCOMES
       By the end of this section, you will be able to:

         · Identify and analyze the elements and organizational pattern of a reflective essay.
         · Demonstrate the ability to think critically about a writer's reflections.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
              20.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Don't Expect Congrats" by Dale Trumbore 657

Introduction

                                                           FIGURE 20.4 Dale Trumbore

Dale Trumbore (https://openstax.org/r/Dale_Trumbore) (b. 1987) is a Southern California composer and writer.
In addition to composing for chorus and orchestra, Trumbore often writes reflectively about artistic conflict
and its resolution. In her book Staying Composed (2019), she writes about the anxiety and self-doubt that often
accompany a career in the arts: "You have to be willing to be a little vulnerable. Real people are flawed." In the
following blog post, she reflects on gender in her career field.

        LIVING BY THEIR OWN WORDS

Womanhood and Composition

I am a female composer. As such, my compositions have been programmed on a concert about motherhood, though
I do not have children; neither did most of the other women programmed on that concert. I've been asked mid-
composition to change the theme of a piece, so the commission would relate to womanhood. (I did, but I didn't
rewrite the minute-and-a-half of music I'd composed back when the commission's theme was "outer space.") I've
been asked to sum up what it means to be a woman in a one-minute piece; I tried, but that piece ended up being
about exactly how impossible the task is.

Eansntaobtalitshing Context. Trumbore sets up the conditions for this reflective essay by mentioning some of the
challenges she has encountered and what she has done about them. She also mentions the difficulty of trying to
"sum up" the entirety of her experience as a woman.end annotat

The hundredth anniversary of the ratification of the 19th Amendment... in 2020... and the aftermath of the #MeToo
movement have created a perfect storm of what I think of as Lady Composer Commissions: pieces that ask the
composer to reflect the experience of being a woman in her work. Equally popular these days is the Lady Composer
Concert, which 1) features works by composers who identify as women, and 2) connects the music of these
composers for no reason other than that they all share a gender identity.
658 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

Canonnotetaxtt. By providing additional context, Trumbore gives readers some background information and insight into the
focus of the essay.end annotat

Promotion of these concerts on social media often goes like this: "We're so excited to feature the work of Lady
Composer 1, Lady Composer 2, Lady Composer 3, Lady Composer 4 [etc.]!" The general tone of these posts seems
to be: "Look at all of the women we rounded up! We found so many of them!" When I am tagged in these posts, I
never know whether to share them, like them, or un-tag myself as quickly as possible and hope the conductor
doesn't notice.

Oanbnsoetravtation. Trumbore points to part of the social and culture disparity between genders and questions how to
respond. This reflection shows awareness of her discomfort and uncertainty about larger meanings.end annotat

Now, I know these concerts mean well, and I would certainly never tell anyone to stop programming the works of
underrepresented composers. As someone who relies on commissions and royalties to pay the rent, I'm also
grateful to have my music programmed on any concert at all. But every time I'm tagged in a post for a concert like
this--with no theme other than "Here's A Bunch of Lady Composers"--I feel as though someone has drawn a sharp-
edged square around my identity. I am positive that these concerts are programmed with earnest and kind
intentions; nevertheless, they make me wonder whether any conductor thinks I want to be programmed like this,
like I am some exotic and fragile butterfly to be pinned down, labeled appropriately, and locked away in a glass box.

Panunrpotoaste. Trumbore uses reflection to see the larger purpose of the concerts. She also questions that purpose and
uses the metaphor of a butterfly to emphasize the situation as she leads into the main purpose of the essay.end annotat

One of my two cats, Cotton, is obsessed with catching and eating flies. He'll stalk one around our small house for
hours before he finally catches and eats the thing, and he's nearly always more preoccupied with the stalking than
the meal itself. But immediately after he's finally caught one, he comes over to my husband or me and meows,
wanting recognition for his work: a gentle pat on the head, maybe, or a "Good job!" In our house, we call this routine
"congrats," as in: "Cotton just swallowed his second fly of the day, then came over for more congrats."

Vanignnoetatte and Description. Trumbore breaks the flow of the essay with a vignette--a brief scene--offering a look into

her life. The vignette connects this part of the essay with the next and establishes a concrete example of her              end annotat

feelings.

This is exactly how the Lady Composer Concerts and their inevitable social media promotion have started to feel to
me: like they are an elaborate exercise in seeking congrats. They are not programmed with the audience in mind; if
anything, they come off as self-congratulatory. ("Look how woke we are!") If these concerts were serving the
audience, they would have a theme beyond "a bunch of women wrote this music."

Manentoatpahtor. Trumbore compares the cat's "congrats" routine with the promotion of the concerts.end annotat

Panunrpotoaste. In addition, she reiterates the larger purpose of the essay by highlighting the topic of gender disparity.end annotat

All you need to do to find this concept ridiculous, of course, is to flip the gender: Imagine a conductor saying that any
random collection of pieces clearly belong together on the same program, because they all were written by men.

Aannnaolytastis and Evaluation. Trumbore defines what is not a valid concert theme and suggests that readers consider a
new position--to judge the gender inequality situation among composers as she does.end annotat

I am certainly not the first person to talk about this; I give the above example of gender-flipping whenever I talk
about Lady Composer Concerts, and I've heard other friends do the same. Still, every time I bring this up, I hope it
will be for the last time: "Music by Women" is not a theme. Collecting a bunch of pieces written by female
composers does not in and of itself constitute an inspired concert program. It certainly doesn't deserve congrats.

Aannnaolytastis. Defining what she considers a theme, Trumbore continues to explain her position and elaborate on the
reality she experiences.end annotat

If you're called to promote the work of composers who identify as women, consider--the same as you would with

Access for free at openstax.org.
20.4 · Annotated Sample Reading: "Don't Expect Congrats" by Dale Trumbore 659

any other program--what the music and/or texts have in common. What's the through-line of this music or collection        end annotat
of texts, regardless of the gender of who wrote it? Is the experience of hearing these particular compositions
enhanced by virtue of their sharing a program? Does the order of the program present a narrative? Are there any                end annota
other pieces, including pieces by composers who identify as men, that would better round out this particular                end annotat
program?

Aannnaolytastis. These questions engage the reader and beg for answers while again pointing to her reflection on the
concerts.

Sanpneoctualtation. Further, she is hinting at a way of changing the status quo in the questions she asks.end annotat

Whenever I discuss "Women in Music"--something else I'm often asked to do--I'm struck once again by the fact that
we're somehow still having the conversation about the lack of Lady Composers. I feel conflicted whenever I'm asked
to talk about the role of women in music; I wish we didn't need to have that discussion, and I resent being asked to
talk about it over and over again. At the same time, if I'd like to hear more conversations in the classical music world
about systemic inequality--and I would--I have to be willing to talk about this myself.

Tanhnooutgahtts and Speculation. Trumbore notes her frustrations with discussions focused on gender and music and
then suggests that she would rather focus on the inequalities if she would be willing to discuss this issue.end annotat

But a single Lady Composer Concert is unlikely to single-handedly resolve the fact that for centuries, classical music
has revered the music of white, mostly dead, usually European men as the highest quality music of all time. In Music
History classes, most of us are taught that this is the worthiest music to study. In Music Theory classes, we analyze
these scores. Whenever we sing in a chorus, we are at the mercy of what our conductor presents as the worthiest
music, and if that is exclusively the work of white and dead and European and male composers, who can blame us
for subconsciously thinking that this is the music most worthy of programming?

Tanhnooutgahtts and Context. Trumbore reflects on her education and notes some of the problematic, and perhaps sexist,
elements of music education. Note again her use of questions to involve readers.end annotat

We don't (just) have a lack of Lady Composers or a dearth of Lady Composer Concerts. We have an entire
educational system designed to teach us to esteem the music of dead white men above the music of all other
composers.

Aannnaolytastis and Evaluation. Trumbore responds to her own question and expands her rationale of reconsidering music
education. In addition, the brevity of this paragraph encourages readers to focus on the larger message in the last
sentence.

So I'm more than happy to congratulate anyone championing the work of historically underrepresented composers.
Yes, please! Let's talk about systemic oppression and racism and the discrimination that composers who are not
white and/or male have faced for centuries. Let's talk about implicit bias and financial privilege and how all of it
affects which voices we perceive as most worthy of our attention.

Sanpneoctualtation. Trumbore drives home the point of the previous paragraph and makes it more explicit for readers,
indicating what she would like to see happen.end annotat

And yet it's equally important to acknowledge that no single concert will fix that systematic imbalance. If it was
going to, the Lady Composer Concert would have already done this, because the Lady Composer Concert has been
around for decades. The Lady Composer Concert is a stale concept; we've tried it already, and we're still having this
conversation.

Sanpneoctualtation. In this paragraph, Trumbore suggests a potentially new direction and opportunity, on which she
elaborates in the next paragraph. In other words, through this reflection, she has arrived at a new way of seeing the
world.

I want to propose an idea that is new, though. If you truly want to champion the works of historically
660 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

       underrepresented composers, what would it look like if you did the loudest work behind the scenes?

       What if you had bold conversations about why you feel compelled to program more historically underrepresented
       groups of composers, but for the concert itself, you presented your program the same way you would any other
       program--highlighting the specific compositions, thematic material, and the reasons that your audience should
       come hear this music?

       What if you championed compositions written by these composers without needing to mention their race or gender
       as part of the promotion of your concert? What if you identified instead what you find most meaningful, exceptional,
       and unique about their compositions?

       And what if you told your peers about these works that you love? Over time, maybe that specificity--naming the
       pieces you love, not just a string of composers' names--would eliminate another common problem I've heard
       conductors discuss: trouble finding quality repertoire written by underrepresented composers.

       Aannnaolytastis and Speculation. After a series of thoughtful questions about underrepresented groups of composers,
       Trumbore provides a way to move forward, not by giving directions, but by asking questions that lead readers to
       obvious answers.end annotat

       If you're having trouble finding such repertoire, let your peers and friend-colleagues know that you're searching for
       this work. Ask for recommendations. You can always reach out to composers directly with requests for perusal
       scores, too. I'm always more than happy to send along perusals when conductors are looking for new works, and I'm
       even happier if I'm asked for works that fit a specific theme. Getting to know a new composer's work can be as
       simple as sending them a quick email through their website's contact form. Ask if they have any pieces that might be
       a good fit for your upcoming concert season's themes. You might even name some of the other works you already
       have in mind for that program and see if that composer can recommend compatible works from their catalogue.

       Tanhnooutgahtts and Speculation. This paragraph continues setting up a way to move forward and helps connect it to the
       previous paragraphs. It reveals more of Trumbore's thoughts on what she wants to do and her ability to do it.end annotat

       Truth be told, I don't want to write another piece about "being a woman." I want to write pieces about emotions that
       are hard to capture in words but easy to express in music, because music has room to hold a staggering amount of
       complexity and nuance. I want to be given commissions with specific concert themes, even oddly specific ones.
       Especially oddly-specific ones; please, give me your commissions for works with texts about weddings that must
       also include percussion, or pieces to pair with Taiwanese music about the sea.

       Eanvnaolutation. Trumbore begins to use pathos and urges readers to understand her position. She also explains how
       she works and what works best for her.end annotat

       I will rise to each challenge; this is what I do for a living, and I'm good at my job. I'll find a text that adheres to each
       theme and write the best music I can write at this moment in time. I do this best when I don't also have to wonder
       whether I am single-handedly summing up the entirety of what it means to "be a woman." If the texts I choose or
       the music I write happens to capture some aspect of the female experience--of a female experience--great. Still,
       that will have been my decision to make.

       Tanhnooutgahtts. In reflecting, Trumbore acknowledges what she needs to do next and begins to gain momentum by
       describing specific activities to meet her goals.end annotat

       When you program the works of underrepresented composers, don't act like my cat does with a freshly-caught fly.
       Don't proudly rattle off the names of women in a Facebook post like you've hunted down their music and are laying
       it at the feet of your audience. Your audience deserves better; they deserve a concert with an actual theme.

       Canonhoetraetnce. By bringing back the cat, Trumbore reminds readers of the "congrats" metaphor she established earlier
       as she continues to advocate for needed change.end annotat

       When it comes time to promote the work of historically underrepresented composers, present their

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                               20.5 · Writing Process: Looking Back, Looking Forward 661

compositions--these works you've come to love--as you would any other excellent repertoire. Shout from the
rooftops why you love each composition. Tell your colleagues and friends. Tell your board members. Tell your
audience. And once you have, don't expect congratulations for doing so. You don't need or deserve praise simply for
doing your job as a conductor. After all, programming music that you admire and respect--sharing that music,
teaching that music, advocating for that music--is reward enough. Isn't it?

Sanpneoctualtation. In this concluding paragraph, Trumbore encourages action toward implementing her points, or at the
very least toward a different way of thinking. The reflection encourages readers, too, to reflect on their feelings, their
experiences, and potential ways to change or improve.end annotat

Discussion Questions

1. What is the happening, and which parts of Dale Trumbore's essay describe it?

2. What parts of Trumbore's essay show reflection?

3. What parts of Trumbore's essay describe an action that results from the reflection?

4. How does Trumbore use her cat to make a reflective point? What effect might it have for readers?

5. What might you do differently if you were Trumbore and wanted to focus on a similar topic?

20.5 Writing Process: Looking Back, Looking Forward

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Apply composing processes and tools as a means to discover and reconsider ideas.
  · Reflect on the development and insights of composing processes and how they affect your work.
  · Adapt and apply composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

One of the best ways to reveal who you are as a writer is to show yourself becoming aware of your strengths and
weakness. This awareness can help you discover not only new ways of seeing the world but also new insights
into yourself. Although such awareness can occur for unexplainable reasons, it usually happens when you
encounter new ideas or have experiences that change you in some way. Reflection allows you to begin this
journey. To grow as a writer, look back at your previous writing. If you look back at a drawing you did in first
grade, you might find it funny or cute. Additionally, and more likely than not, you could do that same drawing
now with a lot more detail and skill than you did back then. Think about writing in the same way: as you add to
your writing skills and abilities, you become more proficient and can take on more challenging writing tasks.
In this section, as you reflect on your writing development during the course, you will find areas of strength
and weakness. The weaker areas are the ones you will want to improve.

Prewriting

Before beginning your reflective essay, take some time to review your work from the course. Write a few
sentences or paragraphs about specific aspects of each assignment, such as its purpose, your feelings, what
you learned, what you did well (and not so well), and where you think you can do significantly better. This
prewriting work will be useful later.

Summary of Assignment: Portfolio Reflection and Self-Evaluation

In the form of a letter (e.g., "Dear Reader"), respond to several questions and discuss various topics related to
your writing development in this course. For example, you might be asked to identify and discuss your
strongest piece of writing. For each claim you make about your strongest assignment, provide reasoning and
evidence from your portfolio to support the statement. When you quote directly from your own writing, be sure
to state which assignment or draft you are quoting. Within the context of your responses, include commentary
on most of the following course topics as well as others that have been significant:
   662 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

   · Writing processes (organizing graphically, outlining, drafting, conferencing, revising, editing, publishing,

   recursivity)

   · Rhetorical situation, rhetoric, and persuasion

   · Reasoning strategies, textual and rhetorical analysis

s  · Evidentiary strateegnidess: evaluation, erensdesarch   end s

   · Word choice, leads, transitions end s

   · Thesis statemente,nsdtrsucture and organization, introductions, conclusions       end s end s

   · Showing, not telling; descriptive writing

   · Voice; feelings, as hindsight or in process

   Depending on the nature of your portfolio, you may be able to create a digital or multimodal reflective letter, as
   mentioned in Glance at Genre: Purpose and Structure.

   Another Lens. Using reflective organization and strategies, create a fictionalized story for readers. Some
   fiction writers base their stories on real events, adding material or characters to help readers connect the plot
   points and make the story more memorable and engaging. For example, consider a school-like setting and a
   host of characters. Incorporate dialogue, details of setting, and other story elements to develop characters and
   create tension.

   Once Upon a Time

   James sat silently across the room as Rafael read the paper James had worked so hard to write. He could not
   have been more nervous watching Rafael, the best writer in the class, review his work. No one had ever read
   James's work other than a teacher. His heart was racing, and beads of sweat formed on his forehead.

   "What do you think?" James asked. Rafael rolled his eyes before locking eyes with James.

   "I'm not finished yet," Rafael answered and returned to the paper, ignoring James.

   James stared at him, contemplating the meaning of every facial wrinkle and twitch of a finger: what did they
   mean? After several aching minutes, Rafael picked up a pen and wrote for several minutes with a slight smile on
   his face. He took a long breath, walked over to James, and handed the paper back with a sheet full of notes.

   He smiled and said, "It's a strong paper. I made some notes I hope you find useful. I was confused only a few
   times, so you could look at where I made suggestions for when you revise." James smiled back, and the look on
   his face showed surprise and relief.

   After quickly reviewing the comments, James turned to his close friend Jess and said, "He didn't destroy my
   paper and actually gave me some good suggestions."

   In this example, James, Rafael, and Jess are not real people, but the characters show how students may react
   during a peer-review workshop. Of course, you might decide to write about a less-than-ideal experience in
   which Rafael laughs at James's work and Jess steps in to help him revise. Or you might set the story in a
   different time or place and create an entirely different situation. Whatever you decide, use your course
   experience and some creativity to create scenarios in which a character reflects on their writing in ways that
   are meaningful and useful not only for you but also for your readers. Then weave these characters into a larger
   narrative. It might end in a published class book or website of student writing and require James to give a
   speech about one of his papers, or it might end in another scenario that follows logically from the narrative you
   have created. Regardless of where you take the story, include realistic elements of reflection as well as how
   your main character develops across the story, faces a challenge, and finds a way to overcome it.

   You can show character development in several different ways. One way is to be inside a character's mind. To
   portray a character thinking rather than talking, employ internal monologue by using sentence fragments
   and other nonacademic writing conventions to show that a person's thought process doesn't follow
   conventional rules of language. For example, a character named Bethany describes her thoughts when

   Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                       20.5 · Writing Process: Looking Back, Looking Forward 663

   revising her first paper. She writes an internal monologue--readers hear her talking to herself while she tries to
   focus on revision. Note how she provides clues for readers to understand what is going on around her.

       OMG, I cannot believe I wrote that! How could I write about a calligraphy pen when I don't even own a

       calligraphy pen? I'm not even sure what one looks like! Bonkers! I wonder if the other people in my class are

s      staring at me right now. I'm afraid to look up. I casually tilt my head up and see no one paying any attention to

       me whatsoever. Wonderful! I'm just another writer in a writing class.

   In this example, the character works through a proceesnsdosf reflection based on her experience. She cannot
   believe she wrote about a calligraphy pen, but perhaps because of her nervousness with writing, this quirk has
   become a unique aspect of her character. You might create other such quirks in one of your characters, such as
   a character who always reads aloud, even in the middle of class, or one who taps a pen on their forehead loudly
   as they read. Then you can use that as a tool to point to another aspect of what you learned in your actual
   course. When writing this fictionalized piece, be mindful of your focus, which is to reflect on your development
   as a writer during this course.

         Quick Launch: Establishing Criteria for Growth

   To get started, you will need to organize your thoughts. After you have reviewed each chapter and its related
   assignment, reflect on your successes and challenges. Use a graphic organizer similar to Table 20.1 to get
   started. If the information already filled in for Chapter 1 works for you, use it. If it doesn't, change it
   accordingly. If you skipped the suggested review of your assignments, do it now. Otherwise, use your notes as
   you complete the chapter reflection table below. Skip any rows related to chapters that you did not cover in
   class.

   Chapter  Key Skills                  Successes                             Challenges
   Number    Learned

            Summarize,  Analyzing wasn't hard, but I learned I had a hard time with evaluation because I

   1        Analyze,    to do it better because I really had to wasn't comfortable giving my opinion since I'm

            Evaluate    think about what the sentence meant just a student. However, I got more comfortable

                        and explain it in my own way.  writing about complex topics and ideas.

   2

   3

   4

   5

   6

   7

   8

   9

   10

   11

   TABLE 20.1 Chapter reflection table
664 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

Chapter  Key Skills                  Successes          Challenges
Number    Learned

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

TABLE 20.1 Chapter reflection table

Once you have completed your own version of the table, use it to guide you as you begin writing. Take each
assignment and stay focused on its goal. In doing so, you may notice a pattern in the assignments that helped
you learn. If you do, incorporate that pattern into your reflective essay, and use it to create a theme.

     Drafting: Getting Started and Following Through

As you work through the task of reflecting, consider the purpose of each assignment and your approach to it, in
addition to the information you have included in the chapter reflection table. Also, read some models to help
stimulate your reflective thinking: Final Reflective Essay by Andrew Duffy (https://openstax.org/r/
Andrew_Duffy); Final Reflection by Anthony Roco (https://openstax.org/r/Anthony_Roco); E-Portfolio Reflection
by Sean Porter (https://openstax.org/r/Sean_Porter); or this Portfolio Summative Reflection
(https://openstax.org/r/Portfolio_Summative). Then, use the template below as a way to create your own unique
reflection on yourself as a developing writer. Focus on the larger impact of what you have learned. Also offer
some insight on what you still need to work on, and explain why. Each aspect that you write about will show a
level of progress and awareness toward improvement. Just as important, it will help you focus on future
writing assignments and allow you to recognize your growth as a writer.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                           20.5 · Writing Process: Looking Back, Looking Forward 665

Portfolio Reflection Template

Dear Reader,

Welcome to my English Composition portfolio. Here, you will find ________.

Complete this statement: This semester, I learned that I am (not) a writer because ________.

Answer these questions in paragraph form. For each claim you make, show your reasoning and provide
quoted evidence from your portfolio:

  · Which is the strongest piece of writing in the portfolio?
      What are the strengths of this essay, and why do you think so?
      In what specific ways has your writing improved this semester?
      How does this essay demonstrate this improvement?

  · Which is the least effective piece of writing in the portfolio?
      What are the weaknesses of this essay, and why do you think so?
      If you could revise this essay one more time, what would you change, and why?
      Specifically, which writing skills still need work, and how will you continue to work on them?

  · How did the process of revision help you re-envision your essays and make changes?
      In what ways was it useful to see what other students were writing?
      How did knowing that others would provide feedback during drafting affect your writing process?
      How did revision affect your skills as a peer workshop partner?

  · In what ways did your writing process evolve over the course of the semester?
      Discuss the issue of perspective, such as when you first entered the course and now.
      What did you learn about writing through its genres, elements of the rhetorical situation, processes, skills,
          and strategies?
      How have you changed as a writer?
      How have your feelings about writing changed?

  · Finish this statement: Before I took this class, I never knew ________.

Sincerely,

Your Name

TABLE 20.2

Structuring Your Responses
As you respond to each of the questions above, use a paragraph planner such as this one.

Topic Sentence/Claim  Reasoning Strategy (Circle All       Quoted Evidence from Portfolio
                                      Used)

                      Revisit Reasoning Strategies:
                      Improving Critical Thinking to find
                      frames and word banks that will
                      help you employ these strategies.

TABLE 20.3 Paragraph planner
666 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

Topic Sentence/Claim              Reasoning Strategy (Circle All        Quoted Evidence from Portfolio
                                                  Used)

The strongest piece of            Analogy                         Shows my use of descriptive writing/figurative
writing in my portfolio is        Cause and effect                language: "Learning a foreign language is like
________ because                  Classification and division     learning to ride a bicycle: you must learn to
________.                         Comparison and contrast         perform multiple tasks at the same time."
                                  Problem and solution
                                  Definition

The strengths of this             Analogy
essay are ________,               Cause and effect
________, and                     Classification and division
________.                         Comparison and contrast
                                  Problem and solution
                                  Definition

This semester, I                  Analogy
improved my skills as a           Cause and effect
writer in the following           Classification and division
ways: ________ and                Comparison and contrast
________.                         Problem and solution
                                  Definition

                                  Analogy

                                  Cause and effect

This essay demonstrates           Classification and division
these skills in that it           Comparison and contrast
________.                         Problem and solution

                                  Definition

TABLE 20.3 Paragraph planner

20.6 Editing Focus: Pronouns

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Demonstrate knowledge of linguistic structures, including grammar.
  · Implement appropriate pronouns in written work.

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                 20.6 · Editing Focus: Pronouns 667

You likely use Pronouns --words that substitute for nouns or noun phrases--in every text that you write,
including this portfolio reflection. Pronouns are one of the eight main parts of speech, the others being nouns,
verbs, adverbs, adjectives, prepositions, conjunctions, and interjections.

Reference, Antecedent, and Case

Reference

Pronoun reference is the practice of using pronouns to replace nouns. The important thing to know about
pronoun reference is that every pronoun must match the noun it replaces in terms of gender and number.
Gender refers to the noun as either masculine, feminine, or neuter.

Masculine: Jorge is an educated man. He is Toby's neighbor.

Feminine: Rico's sister decided to go skating. She came back early.

Neuter: The car has four new tires. It runs much better with them.

However, if you're not certain of someone's gender identity or don't want to project it on them, use the gender-
neutral pronouns them, they, and their. See Spotlight on... Pronouns in Context for more about using gender-
neutral pronouns.

Gender neutral: Pat likes to eat pizza. They like pineapple and bacon with lots of cheese.

Number means singular or plural.

Singular: Toby has one daughter. She is studying art.

Plural: Jorge has two children. They go to the same school.

In addition to gender and number, clarity is often a major issue when using pronouns. For example: When
Lizzie smacked her arm into the glass window, she broke it. Did Lizzie break her arm, or did she break the
window? In this case, the reference is not clear. One way to clarify the meaning would be to write the sentence
this way: Lizzie broke the window when she smacked her arm into it.

Antecedent

The antecedent is the noun, nouns, or other pronoun or pronouns that the pronoun replaces. The antecedent
usually appears earlier in the sentence or in a previous sentence, and the pronoun appears later in the same
sentence or in another sentence.

Example 1: Although my friends tease me about my dancing style, I love them anyway.

Example 2: Mariah said she wanted to go home.

Example 3: The car was far away. Jessica couldn't see what model it was.

Case

Pronoun case refers to the grammatical function of the pronoun in a sentence. Pronouns that are the subjects
(the person, place, or thing that performs the action of the verb or represents what or whom sentence is about)
of a sentence are written in the subjective case. For example: I like pizza. Pronouns that are objects (nouns or
pronouns affected by the action of a verb) of a sentence or preposition are written in the objective case. For
example: Laura gave him the baseball. Jorge and Toby were standing in front of us in line. Lastly, possessive
pronouns pronouns show ownership and are written in the possessive case. For example: The cat picked up
its toy. Those notes are his and mine.

You already know that you cannot have a sentence without a subject and that subjects and objects in sentences
must be nouns or pronouns. Remember, a pronoun is a stand-in for a noun. It is always playing substitute for a
noun or nouns "already out there somewhere." Imagine writing without pronouns:
668 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

      When Marcy woke this morning, Marcy had a headache, so Marcy went to Marcy's medicine cabinet
      and took one of Marcy's headache pills that Marcy's doctor had prescribed for Marcy.

Instead:

      When Marcy woke this morning, she had a headache, so she went to her medicine cabinet and took
      one of her headache pills that her doctor had prescribed for her.

Types of Pronouns

When you think of pronouns, personal pronouns such as those discussed in the previous section, referring to
a specific person or object, are likely the first that come to mind. However, the world of pronouns extends to
reflexive, indefinite, and demonstrative pronouns as well.

Personal Pronouns

Knowing the difference between subject personal pronouns and object personal pronouns will help you use
them correctly.

Form                              First Person Second Person               Third Person

Subject                           I, we                          you       he, she, it, they

Object                            me, us                         you       him, her, it, them

Possessive my, mine, our, ours your, yours his, hers, its, their, theirs

TABLE 20.4

                                  Subject Position Object Position

                                                             I       me
                                                           you       you
                                                           she       her
                                                            he       him

                                                            it         it
                                                           we         us
                                                          they      them
                                                          who      whom
                                                        whoever  whomever

                                  TABLE 20.5

Seeing both versions across from each other helps emphasize that each personal pronoun has its counterpart.
In other words, if it isn't we, then it is us, and if it isn't me, then it is I.
Correct  She is such a sweet little dog.
Incorrect  Her is such a sweet little dog.
It is fairly obvious here which pronoun is correct. You have been saying it correctly all along, probably without

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                           20.6 · Editing Focus: Pronouns 669

being able to articulate the grammatical rule that made you do so. However, knowing the subject or object
distinction can be especially helpful in knowing whether to use I or me. People often make mistakes when a
sentence has a plural object. For example:

Jasmine and I ordered pizza for dinner. The pizza was delivered to Jasmine and me.

In the first sentence, the plural subject is Jasmine and I. I is the subject personal pronouns. In the second
sentence, me is an object of the preposition (to), and the object personal pronoun--me--is correct. If the
second sentence had the singular object pronoun me, no problem would arise. You would simply say that the
pizza was delivered to me, not to I. Remember that an object personal pronoun stays an object personal
pronoun no matter how many other objects are part of it.

Reflexive Pronouns

Reflexive pronouns are straightforward. They are pronouns that "reflect," as an image does in a mirror. They
refer to the same person or thing.

John couldn't stop looking at himself in the mirror.

John is the original noun, or antecedent, and himself is the pronoun that points back at him. Note that
reflexive pronouns always end in self or selves.

First Person  Second Person                  Third Person

myself, ourselves yourself, yourselves himself, herself, itself, themselves

TABLE 20.6

Indefinite Pronouns

While reflexive pronouns always refer to themselves--that is, the subject and object are the same person, place,
thing, or idea--indefinite pronouns are the opposite. As their name suggests, they are not definite; they are
indefinite and do not refer to specific nouns. They do get their meaning across, but the nouns they refer to are
not known. These are some of the most common indefinite pronouns:

              all       either      most     other
              another   everybody   much     several
              any       everyone    nobody   some
              anybody   everything  none     somebody
              anything  few         no one   someone
              both      many        nothing  something
              each      more        one

            TABLE 20.7

Demonstrative Pronouns

Demonstrative pronouns point directly at something. They use all their pronoun power to indicate their
preference, so much so that when someone uses a demonstrative pronoun, it is hard not to imagine them
pointing at something directly. Good news and bad news come along with demonstrative pronouns. The good
news is that there are only four demonstrative pronouns: this, that, these, and those. The bad news--and it's
670 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

not really bad--is that words that commonly play the role of pronouns are multitalented. The same word can
play another role (part of speech) in a sentence. Sometimes these four words function as adjectives, which
always modify nouns and pronouns. In the sentence That is my car, the word that is playing the role of a
pronoun. It is the subject of the sentence. Only nouns or pronouns can be subjects. However, if the sentence
read That car is mine, then that would be an adjective because it modifies (tells something about) the noun car.

Common Mix-Ups

  · It's vs. its: This is an easy one to mix up but easy to correct. It's means it is or it has. For example: It's a hot
     day or It is a hot day. Its refers to possession. For example: This car has its problems. To be sure you are
     correct, substitute it is. To say The car has it is problems makes no sense, so its is correct.

  · Who vs. whom: Perhaps the most effective way to recognize which to use is to equate who to he and whom
     to him. For example: Who/Whom wrote the book? He wrote the book, so who is correct. Remember that
     whom is in the objective case. Think about it like this: whom is like them, so you might say, This is for
     them. Therefore, This is for whom? or Whom is this for? would be correct.

  · I vs. me: I is always a subject; me is always an object. So Demarcus and I left the building is correct
     because I is the subject. Conversely, Give the package to me and You gave me good advice are both correct
     because me is an object. Remember to use the correct pronoun with compound objects, as in the sentence
     Reflection has helped other class members and me improve our writing.

In Chapter 20, you have learned how to use different types of pronouns to substitute for nouns and noun
phrases. You have also learned about common mix-ups when using pronouns.

20.7 Evaluation: Evaluating Self-Reflection

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Articulate how genre conventions for structure, tone, and mechanics vary.
  · Evaluate a written work for critical language awareness, clarity and coherence, and rhetorical choices.

As you know, one of the most important aspects of improving as a writer is the ability to evaluate yourself and
your writing. Certainly, writing assignments help you, but it is important to learn this kind of evaluation for
yourself and work to improve. Moreover, as you deconstruct your writing, you will recognize some aspects that
carry over to other courses and disciplines, thus demonstrating the universality of writing. Use this rubric to
help you plan, write, or review your reflective essay.

Rubric

      Score  Critical Language                          Clarity and Coherence                     Rhetorical Choices
                 Awareness
5                                                                                          The writer consistently
Skillful     The text always adheres to                 The writer consistently explains   provides meaningful analysis,
             the "Editing Focus" of this                their progress, clearly            examples, explanations,
             chapter: clear use of                      demonstrating purpose and a        observations, speculation, and
             pronouns, as discussed in                  combination of thought and         honest criticism that lead to a
             Section 20.6. The text                     narrative in an expert way. Well-  thoughtful and purposeful
             shows ample evidence of                    chosen transitions and             self-evaluation.
             the writer's intent to                     consistently clear connective
             consciously meet or                        ideas link the parts of the
             challenge conventional                     reflection.
             expectations in
             rhetorically effective ways.

TABLE 20.8

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                   20.7 · Evaluation: Evaluating Self-Reflection 671

Score         Critical Language             Clarity and Coherence                Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness

4             The text usually adheres      The writer explains their progress,  The writer usually provides
Accomplished  to the "Editing Focus" of     clearly demonstrating purpose        meaningful analysis,
              this chapter: clear use of    and a combination of thought and     examples, explanations,
              pronouns, as discussed in     narrative. Transitions, if not       observations, speculation, and
              Section 20.6. The text        always enough, and generally         honest criticism that lead to
              shows some evidence of        clear connective ideas link the      purposeful and thoughtful
              the writer's intent to        parts of the reflection.             self-evaluation. However,
              consciously meet or                                                some areas may be somewhat
              challenge conventional                                             less developed than others.
              expectations in
              rhetorically effective ways.

3             The text generally adheres    The writer explains their progress,  The writer provides some
Capable       to the "Editing Focus" of     if not always clearly                meaningful analysis,
              this chapter: clear use of    demonstrating purpose and a          examples, explanations,
              pronouns, as discussed in     combination of thought and           observations, speculation, and
              Section 20.6. The text        narrative. Some transitions help     honest, if sometimes
              shows limited evidence of     achieve coherence, but there are     superficial, criticism that lead
              the writer's intent to        not quite enough, nor are ideas      to purposeful and occasionally
              consciously meet or           consistently connected.              thoughtful self-evaluation.
              challenge conventional                                             Some or even most areas may
              expectations in                                                    be less developed than others.
              rhetorically effective ways.

2             The text occasionally         The writer attempts to explain       The writer provides a
Developing    adheres to the "Editing       their progress but does not clearly  minimum of meaningful
              Focus" of this chapter:       demonstrate purpose or a             details, analysis, examples,
              clear use of pronouns, as     combination of thought and           explanations, observations,
              discussed in Section 20.6.    narrative. There may be too much     speculation, and honest
              The text shows emerging       of one or too little of both.        criticism that lead to
              evidence of the writer's      Transitions are either missing or    purposeful and thoughtful
              intent to consciously meet    ineffective, as are connecting       self-evaluation. Some or even
              or challenge conventional     ideas. The essay may be difficult    most areas may be far less
              expectations in               to follow throughout or in places.   developed than others, or all
              rhetorically effective ways.                                       areas may need considerable
                                                                                 elaboration.

TABLE 20.8
672 20 · Portfolio Reflection: Your Growth as a Writer

       Score  Critical Language                         Clarity and Coherence               Rhetorical Choices
                  Awareness
 1
 Beginning    The text does not adhere                  The paper shows little or no        The writer provides few
              to the "Editing Focus" of                 progression through the writer's    meaningful details, analysis,
TABLE 20.8    this chapter: clear use of                growth and demonstrates             examples, explanations,
              pronouns, as discussed in                 minimal attention to purpose or a   observations, speculation, or
              Section 20.6. The text                    combination of thought and          honest criticism that leads to
              shows little to no evidence               narrative in a useful way. There    purposeful and thoughtful
              of the writer's intent to                 may be too much of one or too       self-evaluation. Most areas are
              consciously meet or                       little of both. Transitions are     seriously undeveloped.
              challenge conventional                    either missing or ineffective, and
              expectations in                           the essay may be difficult to
              rhetorically effective ways.              follow throughout or in places.

20.8 Spotlight on ... Pronouns in Context

LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Recognize and avoid gender bias in writing and general language use.
  · Apply conventions of usage and current terminology to writing, including gender-neutral pronouns when

      applicable.

By now, you have a working knowledge of what pronouns are and how to use them. This section focuses on
more nuanced uses of pronouns and their place in the contemporary world--an emerging field of interest as
people work to develop language that best captures their multiple identities.

Eliminating Gender Bias

It is important to remember that many thoughtful and powerful English-language works from the past took
masculine words for granted. English use of words such as man, men, he, him, and his was, one would hope,
meant to include both men and women. Consider Thomas Jefferson's "All men are created equal" and Thomas
Paine's "These are the times that try men's souls." The contemporary equivalent of those words might be "All
people are created equal" and "These are the times that try our souls," which are two of several possible fixes
for such gender exclusivity. When you read historic texts, recognize that the rules were different then, and the
writers are no more at fault than the culture in which they lived. Contemporary writing, however, should
reflect inclusivity, which in turn reflects the culture in which you live today. (See Spotlight on... Bias in
Language and Research for more about language bias.)

As you edit to avoid gender-biased language, you will notice that English does not have an agreed-upon
gender-neutral third-person singular pronoun to match the gender-neutral third-person plural pronouns
(they, their, them). Writers and speakers use he (him, his) for men and she (her, hers) for women. In the
sentence "Everybody has his own opinion," the indefinite pronoun everybody needs a singular pronoun to
refer to it. Although it is grammatically correct to say, "Everybody has his own opinion," the sentence excludes
women. But until recently, it was considered grammatically questionable to write, "Everybody has their own
opinion," although their is gender neutral. When editing, be alert to such constructions, and consider these
ways to use or fix them:

  · Make the sentence plural: "People have their own opinions."
  · Include both pronouns (This solution excludes people who do not fall within a gender binary.): "Everybody

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                 20.8 · Spotlight on ... Pronouns in Context 673

      has his or her own opinion."
  · Eliminate the pronoun: "Everybody has an opinion."
  · Alternate masculine and feminine pronouns throughout your sentences or paragraphs, using she in one

     paragraph and he in the next. Be careful, though; to avoid confusing readers, you might change them in
      each section or chapter.

Most writers have used all of these solutions at one time or another. As always, use the strategy that makes for
the clearest, most graceful writing.

Additionally, it has become more common and generally accepted to use they, their, and them as singular
pronouns. However, depending on the context, using a plural pronoun to refer to a single individual can be
confusing to readers when its antecedent is unclear.

Pronouns for Nonbinary and Transgender People

You cannot always know how individuals identify themselves, nor can you assume their gender is either male
or female. The best approach with people you don't know is simply to ask which pronouns they prefer and to
respect their choice. Some people identify themselves with the pronouns they/them/theirs, and this
preference is generally acceptable politically, socially, and grammatically. Other gender-neutral pronouns
exist as well, such as ze/hir/hirs, but they are used less often. If you are unsure, an option is simply to use the
person's name.

If an individual has a specific identity and prefers a masculine, feminine, or gender-neutral pronoun, there are
ways they can inform people of it. (Notice the use here of they as a singular pronoun.) For example, if one
identifies as female, that person can include the pronouns she/her as part of their email signature: "Jane Doe
(she/her)." Similarly, a person who identifies as nonbinary can include the preferred pronouns they/them/their
in their signature.

Write about Pronouns

Take a moment and write about how pronoun use impacts you. Also, write about how people understand each
other through pronouns, while being mindful of the differences between people. Think carefully about
perspectives on gender, and be sure to respect other points of view and interpretations of pronoun use. Finally,
explain how pronoun use is an important component of identity.

As an additional exercise, review your portfolio and (re)consider your use of pronouns. Your development as a
writer and enhanced understanding of pronouns will provide new insight into their use. Where might you have
made other decisions about pronouns, and what impact might they have had? Consider including these
insights in your reflective essay.

Avoid Discriminatory Language

Above all, your writing should not hurt people or exclude any group from humanity. As you edit, ensure that
your language does not discriminate against categories of people based on gender, race, ethnicity, social class,
or sexual orientation--or anything else.
674 20 · Further Reading

Further Reading

The following texts provide additional information or examples regarding reflective writing in various
    disciplines and settings.

Bolton, Gillie, and Russell Delderfield. Reflective Practice: Writing and Professional Development. 5th ed., Sage
    Publications, 2018.

Dillard, Annie. Pilgrim at Tinker Creek. 1974.Harper Perennial Modern Classics, 2013.
Stevens, Dannelle D., and Joanne E. Cooper. Journal Keeping: How to Use Reflective Writing for Effective

   Learning, Teaching, Professional Insight, and Positive Change. Stylus Publishing, 2009.
Tan, Amy. Where the Past Begins: A Writer's Memoir. Ecco, 2017.
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. 1854. Project Gutenberg, www.gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm.
Williams, Kate, Mary Woolliams, and Jane Spiro. Reflective Writing. 2nd ed., Red Globe Press, 2020.

Works Cited

Albritton, Laura. Review of A House of My Own: Stories from My Life, by Sandra Cisneros. Harvard Review
   Online, 15 Mar. 2016, harvardreview.org/book-review/a-house-of-my-own-stories-from-my-life/.

Cisneros, Sandra. A House of My Own: Stories from My Life. Alfred A. Knopf, 2015.
Rodríguez Aranda, Pilar E. "On the Solitary Fate of Being Mexican, Female, Wicked and Thirty-Three: An

   Interview with Writer Sandra Cisneros." The Americas Review, vol. 18, no. 1, Jan. 1990, pp. 63-80.
Trumbore, Dale. "Be a Real Person." Cantate, vol. 31, no. 2, Winter 2019, p. 25, calcda.org/wp-content/uploads/

    2019/01/Cantate-winter-19-web.pdf.

Access for free at openstax.org.
          Handbook 675

HANDBOOK

OUTLINE

H 1. Introduction
H 2. Paragraphs and Transitions
H 3. Clear and Effective Sentences
H 4. Sentence Errors
H 5. Words and Language
H 6. Point of View
H 7. Verbs
H 8. Pronouns
H 9. Punctuation
H 10. Mechanics
H 11. Quotations
H 12. Index and Guide to Documentation
H 13. MLA Documentation and Format
H 14. APA Documentation and Format
H 15. Further Reading
H 16. Works Cited

H 1. Introduction

This handbook is a brief yet comprehensive reference for you to consult as you write papers and other
assignments for a college course. You can refer to it as you draft paragraphs and polish sentences for clarity,
conciseness, and point of view. You can read it to learn how to identify and revise common sentence errors and
confused words. You can use it to help you edit your writing and fine-tune your use of verbs, pronouns,
punctuation, and mechanics. And you can have it open as you integrate and cite quotations as well as other
source material in your papers in MLA or APA style.

Designed as a reference tool, the handbook is organized to help you get answers to your questions. You do not
need to read the entire handbook to get helpful information from it. For example, if your instructor has noted
that you need to work on comma splices, you can refer to Sentence Errors, before you turn in a final draft of
your writing. If you know you frequently misuse commas, refer to Punctuation, and check your sentences
against the advice there. And if you, like many writers, can't remember which punctuation marks go inside and
outside quotation marks, refer to Quotations. Becoming familiar with the handbook and the various topics will
allow you to use it efficiently.

H 2. Paragraphs and Transitions

Paragraphs help readers make their way through prose writing by presenting it in manageable chunks.
Transitions link sentences and paragraphs so that readers can clearly understand how the points you are
making relate to one another. (See Editing Focus: Paragraph and Transitions for a related discussion of
paragraphs and transitions. See Evaluation: Transitions for a related discussion of transitions in multimodal
compositions.)

Effective Paragraphs

Paragraphs are guides for readers. Each new paragraph signals either a new idea, further development of an
existing idea, or a new direction. An effective paragraph has a main point supported by evidence, is organized
in a sensible way, and is neither too short nor too long. When a paragraph is too short, it often lacks enough
676 Handbook

       evidence and examples to back up your claims. When a paragraph is too long, readers can lose the point you
       are making.

      Developing a Main Point

       A paragraph is easier to write and easier to read when it centers on a main point. The main point of the
       paragraph is usually expressed in a topic sentence. The topic sentence frequently comes at the start of the
       paragraph, but not always. No matter the position, however, the other sentences in the paragraph support the
       main point.

      Supporting Evidence and Analysis

       All the sentences that develop the paragraph should support or expand on the main point given in the topic
       sentence. Depending on the type of writing you are doing, support may include evidence from sources--such
       as facts, statistics, and expert opinions--as well as examples from your own experience. Paragraphs also may
       include an analysis of your evidence written in your own words. The analysis explains the significance of the
       evidence to the reader and reinforces the main point of the paragraph.

       In the following example, the topic sentence is underlined. The supporting evidence discussed through cause-
       and-effect reasoning comes in the next three sentences. The paragraph concludes with two sentences of
       analysis in the writer's own words.

             Munildlieornlisnoef retired Americans rely on Social Security benefits to make ends meet after they turn 65.end underline
             According to the Social Security Administration, about 46 million retired workers receive benefits, a
             number that reflects about 90 percent of retired people. Although experts disagree on the exact
             numbers, somewhere between 12 percent and 40 percent of retirees count on social security for all of
             their income, making these benefits especially important (Konish). These benefits become more
             important as people age. According to Eisenberg, people who reach the age of 85 become more
             financially vulnerable because their health care and long-term care costs increase at the same time
             their savings have been drawn down. It should therefore come as no surprise that people worry about
             changes to the program. Social Security keeps millions of retired Americans out of poverty.

      Opening Paragraphs

       Readers pay attention to the opening of a piece of writing, so make it work for you. After starting with a
       descriptive title, write an opening paragraph that grabs readers' attention and alerts them to what's coming. A
       strong opening paragraph provides the first clues about your subject and your stance. In academic writing,
       whether argumentative, interpretative, or informative, the introduction often ends with a clear thesis
       statement, a declarative sentence that states the topic, the angle you are taking, and the aspects of the topic
       the rest of the paper will support.

       Depending on the type of writing you're doing, you can open in a variety of ways.

         · Open with a conflict or an action. If you're writing about conflict, a good opening may be to spell out what
             the conflict is. This way of opening captures attention by creating a kind of suspense: Will the conflict be
             resolved? How will it be resolved?

         · Open with a specific detail, statistic, or quotation. Specific information shows that you know a lot about
             your subject and piques readers' curiosity. The more dramatic your information, the more it will draw in
             readers, as long as what you provide is credible.

         · Open with an anecdote. Readers enjoy stories. Particularly for reflective or personal narrative writing,
             beginning with a story sets the scene and draws in readers. You may also begin the anecdote with dialogue
             or reflection.

       The following introduction opens with an anecdote and ends with the thesis statement, which is underlined.

             Betty stood outside the salon, wondering how to get in. It was June of 2020, and the door was locked. A

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                     Handbook 677

      sign posted on the door provided a phone number for her to call to be let in, but at 81, Betty had lived
      her life without a cell phone. Betty's day-to-day life had been hard during the pandemic, but she had
      planned for this haircut and was looking forward to it: she had a mask on and hand sanitizer in her
      car. Now she couldn't get in the door, and she was discouraged. In that moment, Betty realized how
      much Americans' dependence on cell phones had grown in the months she and millions of others had
      been forced to stay at home. Bunetdteyralinndethousands of other senior citizens who could not afford cell
      phones or did not have the technological skills and support they needed were being left behind in a
      society that was increasingly reliant on technology.end underline

Closing Paragraphs

The conclusion is your final chance to make the point of your writing stick in readers' minds by reinforcing
what they have read. Depending on the purpose for your writing and your audience, you can summarize your
main points and restate your thesis, draw a logical conclusion, speculate about the issues you have raised, or
recommend a course of action, as shown in the following conclusion:

      Although many senior citizens purchased and learned new technologies during the COVID-19
      pandemic, a significant number of older people like Betty were unable to buy and/or learn the
      technology they needed to keep them connected to the people and services they needed. As society
      becomes increasingly dependent on technology, social service agencies, religious institutions,
      medical providers, senior centers, and other organizations that serve the elderly need to be equipped
      to help them access and become proficient in the technologies essential to their daily lives.

Transitions

Transitional words and phrases show the connections or relationships between sentences and paragraphs
and help your writing flow smoothly from one idea to the next.

Flow

A paragraph flows when ideas are organized logically and sentences move smoothly from one to the next.
Transitional words and phrases help your writing flow by signaling to readers what's coming in the next
sentence. In the paragraph below, the topic sentence and transitional words and phrases are underlined.

      Suonmdeerlcionme panies court the public by mentioning environmental problems and pointing out that they
      do not contribute to these problems.eFunondrduexrnladimneerplilne,etnhdeunnadtueralilngeas industry often presents natural gas
      as a good alternative to coal. Hunodweervlienre, ancdcuornddienrglitnoethe Union of Concerned Scientists, the drilling and
      extraction of natural gas from wells and transporting it through pipelines leaks methane, a major
      cause of global warming ("Environmental Impacts"). Yuentdeleenradlkinusneadrerrlainrely mentioned by the industry.
      By taking credit for problems they don't cause and being silent on the ones they do, companies
      present a favorable environmental image that often obscures the truth.

Transitional Words and Phrases

Following are some transitional words and phrases and their functions in paragraphs. Use this list when
drafting or revising to help guide readers through your writing. (See Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions
for another discussion on transitions.)

  Type of Transition                                       Examples

to compare or show    likewise, similarly, in like manner
similarity

TABLE H1
678 Handbook

Type of Transition                                             Examples

to contrast or change  but, yet, however, nevertheless, still, at the same time, on the other hand, conversely
direction

to add to              also, and, furthermore, next, then, in addition

to give examples       for example, for instance, to illustrate, specifically, thus

to agree or concede certainly, of course, to be sure, granted

to summarize or        finally, in conclusion, in short, in other words, thus, in summary
conclude

to show time           first, second, third, next, then, soon, meanwhile, later, currently, concurrently, at the
                       same time, eventually, at last, finally

to show a spatial      here, there, in the background, in the foreground, in the distance, to the left, to the right,
relationship           near, above, below

TABLE H1

H 3. Clear and Effective Sentences

This section will help you write strong sentences that convey your meaning clearly and concisely. See Editing
Focus: Sentence Structure for a related discussion and practice on effective sentences.

Emphasis

The most emphatic place in a sentence is the end. To achieve the strongest emphasis, end with the idea you
want readers to remember. Place introductory, less important, or contextual information earlier in the
sentence. Consider the differences in these two sentences.

      Less Emphatic Angel nuneeddesrltionestart noweinf hdeuwndanertslintoehave an impact on his sister's life.

      More Emphatic If Angel wants to have an impact on his sister's life, he nuneeddesrltionestart now.end underline

Concrete Nouns

General nouns name broad classes or categories of things (man, dog, city); concrete nouns refer to particular
things (Michael, collie, Chicago). Concrete nouns provide a more vivid and lively reading experience because
they create stronger images that activate readers' senses. The examples below show how concrete nouns,
combined with specific details, can make writing more engaging.

      All General Nouns Approaching the library, I see puneodpelrelieannneddudunondgdeserermlnliindinleleuinngdaebrloinuet ouuntdseidrlein,ebneudtunnoderline
      subjects to write about. I'm tired from my wunadlkeeranlnidndeugnodienrsliidnee.

      Revised with Concrete Nouns Approaching BunradnedrloineLibrary,eInsdeuensudkneadrtelirbnloienaerderseannddubuninkddeeerrrsllieiwnneedauvinndgerline
      through sutnuddeernlitnsewnhdoutnadlkerinlincuelnudseterrlisneoenndtuhnedluiebnrrdlaienrryelisnteeps.eAndfruiennddelrylicunoneldlieerewlninadietusnfodreritlisnoewner to
      return. Subjects to write about? Nothing strikes me as especially interesting. Besides, my heart is still
      pounding from the walk up the hill. I wipe my sweaty fuonrdeehrelaindeeannddugnodienrsliidnee.

Active Voice

Active voice refers to the way a writer uses verbs in a sentence. Verbs have two "voices": active and passive. In
the active voice, the subject of the sentence acts--the subject performs the action of the verb. In the passive
voice, the subject receives the action, and the object actually becomes the subject. Although some passive

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                 Handbook 679

sentences are necessary and clear, a paper full of passive-voice constructions lacks vitality and becomes
wordy.

Active-voice verbs make something happen. By using active verbs wherever possible, you will create stronger,
clearer, and more concise sentences.

      Passive Voice On the post-training survey, the anti-harassment tutorial wunadserraltiendeehnigdhulny dinefrolirnmeative underline
      byeenmdpulnoydeeersli.ne

      Revised in Active Voice On the post-training survey, eumndpelorlyineeserunandtdeuednretlndhinederaulinnntdei-ehralirnaessment tutorial
      highly informative.

Conciseness

Concise writing considers the importance of every word. Editing sentences for emphasis, concrete nouns, and
active voice will help you write clearly and precisely, as will the following strategies. To be concise, eliminate
wasted words and filler--not ideas, information, description, or details that will interest readers or help them
follow your thoughts. (For more on conciseness, see Editing Focus: Sentence Structure.)

Use Action Verbs

Using action verbs is one of the most direct ways to cut unneeded words. Whenever you find a phrase like the
ones below, consider substituting an action verb.

Instead of the phrase . . .  Use an action verb

reach a decision, come to a decision decide

made a choice                chose

hold a meeting               meet

arrive at a conclusion       conclude

have a discussion            discuss

TABLE H2

Cut Unnecessary Words and Phrases

Eliminate words and phrases that do not add meaning. Consider the following sentences, which say essentially
the same thing.

      Wordy In almost every situation that I can think of, with few exceptions, it will make good sense for
      you to look for as many places as possible to cut out needless, redundant, and repetitive words and
      phrases from the papers, reports, paragraphs, and sentences you write for college assignments. (49
      words)

      Concise Whenever possible, cut needless words and phrases from your college writing. (11 words)

The wordy sentence is full of early-draft language in three chunks. The first chunk comes at the beginning of
the sentence. Notice how In almost every situation that I can think of, with few exceptions, it will make good
sense for you to look for as many places as possible is reduced to Whenever possible in the concise sentence.

The second chunk of the wordy sentence is needless, redundant, and repetitive. The concise version reduces
those four words to needless because the words have the same meaning. The third chunk of the wordy
sentence comes at the end. Notice how papers, reports, paragraphs, and sentences you write for college
680 Handbook

assignments is reduced to your college writing. The meaning, although expanded to all writing, remains the
same.

The following phrases are common fillers that add nothing to meaning. They should be avoided.

  · a person by the name of
  · for all intents and purposes
  · in a manner of speaking
  · more or less

Some common filler phrases have single-word alternatives, which are preferable.

                                  Replace a common filler phrase . . . With a single word

                                  at all times           always

                                  at the present time    now

                                  at this point in time  now

                                  for the purpose of     for

                                  due to the fact that   because

                                  the reason being       because

                                  in the final analysis  finally

                                  last but not least     finally

                                  TABLE H3

Avoid there is/there are and it is

Starting a sentence with there is, there are, or it is can be useful to draw attention to a change in direction.
However, starting a sentence with one of these phrases often forces you into a wordy construction. Wordiness
means the presence of verbal filler; it does not mean the number of words, the amount of description, or the
length of a composition. (For more on these constructions, see Editing Focus: Sentence Structure.)

      Wordy Tunhdereerliisnoeften uncertainty about whether or not employeeseanrde ruenqdueirleindeto turn on their
      cameras during online meetings, and tuhnedreralirneeesnodmuenedmerpllionyeees wunhdoedrnoldin'uet.nHdeorwlienveer, iutnisdethrleine
      expectation of employersetnhdatucnadmeerlriansebuenedtnuedrnliuenndedoenrl.ine

      Concise Eunmdpelrolyinees are often uncertain whether theyemndusutntudrenrloinnetheir cameras during online
      meetings, and suonmdeerdlionne't.eHndowuenvdeerr,leuinmnedpelorlyineres expectecnadmuenradsertolinbee turned on.

Parallelism

Within a sentence, parallelism--the repetition of a word or grammatical construction-- creates symmetry and
balance, makes an idea easier to remember, and sounds pleasing to the ear. In the first example below, the
parallelism is established by the repetition of the phrase beginning with who. In the second example, the
parallelism is created by the underlined nouns.

      Unparallel After 25 years, the battle over the reintroduction of wolves continues between
      environmental activists, wunhdoesrulipnpeort it,eanndduhunnudndeetrelrirlnisneaend people who own cattle ranches and are
      opposed.end underline

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 681

      Parallel After 25 years, the battle over the reintroduction of wolves continues between environmental
      activists, wunhdoesrulipnpeort it,eanndducnadtetlrelirnaenchers and hunters, wunhdoeorplipnoese it.end underline

      Unparallel Exercises that improve core strength include curnudnecrhliense,elunendgduleinfrtdlsie,narnelndinduewunndhdeernlriylnioneue do push-
      ups and planks.end underline

      Parallel Exercises that improve core strength include curnudnecrhliense,elunendgduleinfrtdlsie,npurnelundinsduehen-rudlipenrsel,eianneddupunlndadenerklrislni.enened underline

Variety

Varying the length and structure of sentences makes your writing more interesting to read.

Simple Sentences

A simple sentence has one idea expressed in a single main clause (also known as an independent clause). A
main clause contains a subject and a predicate and can stand alone as a sentence. A simple sentence can be
short or long, as shown in the examples below. The phrases in the long sentence add information, but the
sentence remains a simple sentence nonetheless because it has only one clause.

      The cuonrdoenralivnireusesdnpodrueubalndedeuaenrnrdoldiundenroedluinbinelethuendweorrllidnein 2020.

      School-age cuhnidlderelinneeanndducnodllergleinsuetnuddeernlitnsewdnoedureublnpeduuesnrhldeinedreeilnindtoedvoirutbulaelulenadrenrilningeenvironments in March
      2020, with schools closing for unspecified lengths of time.

Compound Sentences

A compound sentence contains two or more main clauses that are equally important to the meaning of the
sentence. (A main clause contains a subject and a predicate and can stand alone as a sentence.) You can create
compound sentences in the following ways:

  · Compound Sentence Using a Coordinating Conjunction

     Create a compound sentence by using a coordinating conjunction--for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so
     (fanboys)--to join main clauses. To remember the coordinating conjunctions, use the mnemonic device
     fanboys.

            Runesdtearulirnaentseannddusnmdaelrllruinentedaeilrelrinseednxodpueubrlneiedunencrledidneerslntiendeedpodurbolpesuinndreervlienneue during the pandemic, and underline
            manyewdnoedureublnfeodruecnrelddineetrenolidcnldeoosue.ble underline

            Runesdtearulirnaentseannddusnmdaelrllruinentedaeilrelrinseednxodpueubrlneiedunencrledidneerslntiendeedpodurbolpesuinndreervlienneue during the pandemic, yet underline
            manyesdnuodruvubilnveedudenertlnhdinderedlionwuebnlteuurnn.derline

  · Compound Sentence Using a Semicolon

      A semicolon can join two main clauses that are closely related in meaning. When using a semicolon, you
      must have a complete sentence before and after it.

          Runesdtearulirnaentseannddusnmdaelrllruinentedaeilrelrinseednxodpueubrlneiedunencrledidneerslntiendeedpodurbolpesuinndreervlienneue during the pandemic; munadneyreldinnodueublneduenrldinereline

            were forcedetnodcldoosue.ble underline

  · Compound Sentence Using a Semicolon and Transitional Word or Phrase

     A transitional words or phrases such as however, in fact, meanwhile, therefore, consequently, as a result,
     instead, or furthermore indicates the relation of two or more equally important ideas in the main clauses.

          Runesdtearulirnaentseannddusnmdaelrllruinentedaeilrelrinseednxodpueubrlneiedunencrledidneerslntiendeedpodurbolpesuinndreervlienneue during the pandemic;

            however, munadneyrelsdinunodruevubilnveedudenertlnhdinderedlionwuebnlteuurnn.derline

Complex Sentences

A complex sentence contains one main clause (a clause that contains a subject and a predicate and can stand
682 Handbook

       alone as a sentence) and one or more subordinate clauses (also known as dependent clauses). Subordinate
       clauses begin with a subordinating word or phrase such as although, because, even if, when, whenever, since,
       as though, whether, as long as, until, or while. The main clause expresses the main idea of the sentence, and
       the subordinate clause expresses the less important idea. Like a main clause, a subordinate clause has a
       subject and verb; however, unlike a main clause, it cannot stand alone as a sentence. A subordinate clause
       punctuated as a sentence is a type of sentence fragment. The subordinate clauses in the following sentences
       are underlined.

             Aunltdheorulginhethe federal government provided financial assistance,etnhdeumnodneerlyinceame too late for many
             businesses. Wunhdeenrlsincheools and universities shut down in March of 2020,esntduduenndtesrhliande to learn at
             home, aunsditeuraltiinoen that proved challenging for many households.end underline

      Compound-Complex Sentences

       A compound-complex sentence contains two or more main clauses (clauses that contain subjects and
       predicates and can stand alone as sentences) and one or more subordinate clauses (clauses that begin with a
       subordinating word such as although, because, even if, when, whenever, since, as though, whether, as long as,
       until, and while). A compound-complex sentence is an effective structure to use when you want to express
       three or more ideas in a single sentence. The example sentence has two main clauses (double underline) and
       three subordinate clauses (single underline).

             Wunhdeenrlsincheool districts reopened,epdnoadruuebnledtseuhrnlaidndeertolindecideewunnhddedethorleuirnbetleheuynwdearnltinede their children to attend
             classes in person,eadnnodudubtnhledeeuyrnhlidanederltionbee ready for classes to move onlineeiunfntdhddeoreluinbweleruenoduetrblrineaeks of the
             coronavirus in their community.end underline

    H 4. Sentence Errors

       These four common sentence errors can make your writing hard to read: fragments, comma splices, run-on
       sentences, and mixed constructions.

     Sentence Fragments

       A sentence fragment is a group of words that lacks a subject, a verb, or both, or it is a subordinate clause (a
       clause that begins with a subordinating word such as although, because, since, and so on) punctuated as
       though it were a sentence by itself. Although most are grammatical errors, sentence fragments can be used
       judiciously in conventional writing so long as the purpose is clear to readers and the fragment is clearly
       intended.

      Unintentional Sentence Fragments

       Often a sentence fragment follows a complete sentence and expands on it, as illustrated in the examples below
       (fragments are underlined). You can correct most fragment errors by attaching the fragment to the sentence to
       which it belongs or by rewriting the fragment as a complete sentence.

             Sentence Fragment People think that they will be happy if they are well off. Tunhdatemrlionneey will make
             everything better.end underline

             Revised by Attaching the Fragment to a Complete Sentence People think that they will be happy if
             they are well off aundetnhrldaintuemndonerelyinweill make everything better.

             Sentence Fragment Psychologist David Myers explains how students have increasingly chosen to
             attend college to make more money. Thus fuunrdtheerlrineexplaining his point of people's desire to use money
             to gain happiness.end underline

             Revised by Attaching the Fragment to a Complete Sentence Psychologist David Myers explains how
             students have increasingly chosen to attend college to make more money, tuhnudsefrulirntheer explaining his
             point of people's desire to use money to gain happiness.end underline

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 683

      Sentence Fragment Although income grew, people's happiness did not. Wunidtherliicnhepeople reporting
      that even though they had plenty of money, their happiness had not changed much.end underline

      Revised by Adding a Verb Although income grew, people's happiness did not. Runicdheprleinopele reportedend underline
      that even though they had plenty of money, their happiness had not changed much.

      Sentence Fragment For many people, increased income is being spent on the things that people are
      unable to pay less for. Tunhdinegrslinlieke taxes, childcare, transportation, and housing.end underline

      Revised by Adding a Subject and a Verb For many people, increased income is being spent on things
      that people are unable to pay less for. Tunhdeseerlinceludeetnaxdeusn, cdheirlldincaere, transportation, and housing.

Intentional Sentence Fragments

Intentional sentence fragments force quick reading, inviting readers to stitch meaning to together. Intentional
fragments are most common in creative writing and advertising.

      The rabbit darted out of the shadows. Aunfldaesrhlionfemovement.eTnhdeudnodgelrulningeed and strained at the leash.

Comma Splices

A comma splice is a common error that occurs when two complete sentences are joined by a comma. You can
correct a comma splice by adding a coordinating conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so), adding a period
and creating two sentences, adding a coordinating conjunction and creating a compound sentence, or
subordinating one clause and creating a complex sentence.

      Comma Splice The author sheds light on the financial sacrifice many mothers make, they take care of
      their children without compensation and often lose professional status.

      Revised with a Coordinating Conjunction The author sheds light on the financial sacrifice many
      mothers make, fuonrdetenhredlyiuntnaedkerclainreeof their children without compensation and often lose professional
      status.

      Comma Splice Many college students see their education as the way to become wealthy, some are
      sacrificing happiness to pursue high-paying careers.

     Revised with a Period Many college students see their education as the way to become wealthy. Some

      are sacrificing happiness to pursue high-paying careers.

      Comma Splice Psychologist David Myers conducted multiple surveys asking people about their
      attitudes about money, the results revealed that people felt they needed more regardless of how much
      they had.

      Revised with a Semicolon Psychologist David Myers conducted multiple surveys asking people about

     their attitudes about money; the results revealed that people felt they needed more regardless of how

      much they had.

      Comma Splice Love cannot be paid for, it is a gift that parents give because they love their children.

     Revised with a Semicolon and Transitional Word or Phrase Love cannot be paid for; iunnddeeerdli,enintedisuanderline

      gift that parents give because they love their children.

      Comma Splice Students are choosing majors to enable them to earn more money, they are under the
      misconception that earning money guarantees happiness.

      Revised with a Subordinate Clause Students are choosing majors to enable them to earn more
      money buencdaeurslienetenhedyuanrdeeurnlidneer the misconception that earning money guarantees happiness.
684 Handbook

     Run-on Sentences

       In a run-on sentence, two or more complete sentences are not separated by any punctuation. Like comma
       splices, most run-on sentences can be revised in one or more of the following ways: adding a coordinating
       conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so), adding a period and creating two sentences, separating the
       sentences with a semicolon, separating the sentences with a semicolon and transitional word or phrase (such
       as on the other hand, however, consequently, and so on), or turning the less important sentence into a
       subordinate clause starting with a subordinating word such as although, because, if, when, since, and so on.

             Run-on Sentence The DNR eventually designated the area as crucial habitat the protection came too
             late to save the nesting birds.

             Revised with a Comma and a Coordinating Conjunction The DNR eventually designated the area as

           crucial habitat, buuntdetenhredlipnurenodteecrtlionne came too late to save the nesting birds.

             Run-on Sentence Most people realize that being wealthy won't just happen many college students
             choose a major that will ensure they make money.

           Revised with a Period Most people realize that being wealthy won't just happen. Many college

             students choose a major that will ensure they make money.

             Run-on Sentence Parents do not expect any financial reward they care for their children out of love
             and responsibility.

           Revised with a Semicolon Parents do not expect any financial reward; they care for their children out

             of love and responsibility.

             Run-on Sentence The average American family's expenses have risen faster than incomes they have
             saved less than prior generations.

             Revised with a Semicolon and Transitional Word or Phrase The average American family's

           expenses have risen faster than incomes; ausndaerrelsinuelt,etnhdeyunhdaveerlsianveed less than prior generations.

             Run-on Sentence College students have the opportunity to choose any major they tend to choose
             those that offer immediate opportunities to earn money when they graduate.

             Revised with a Subordinate Clause Aunltdheorulginheecnodlleugnedseturldinenets have the opportunity to choose any
             major,uetnnhdedeyurtlneindedrtloincehoose those that offer immediate opportunities to earn money when they
             graduate.

     Mixed Sentence Constructions

       A mixed sentence contains parts that do not fit together because of grammar or meaning. In the following
       example, the writer needs to revise either the second part to fit with the first part or the first part to fit with the
       second. (See Editing Focus: Mixed Sentence Constructions for more on mixed sentence constructions.)

             Mixed Sentence Bunydsetarrlitnineg my general studies classes last semesteregunandvdeuemrnldieneterhlienoepportunity to take
             classes in my major this fall.end underline

             Second Part Revised By starting my general studies classes last spring, Iuhnaddeertlnhindeeoupnpdoertluinneity to take
             classes in my major this fall.

             First Part Revised Sutnadretirnlignemenyd guenndeerralilnsetudies classes last spring gave me the opportunity to take
             classes in my major this fall.

       Just because . . . doesn't mean Constructions. Just because . . . doesn't mean constructions are common in
       speech but should be avoided in writing.

             Just because JuunsdtebrelicnaeuseeInwdaunnt dtoerbleinaedoctor duonedsenr'ltinmeeaneInwdilul ngedteirnlitnoemedical school.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 685

      Revised Simply wanting to be a doctor doesn't guarantee admission to medical school.

      Revised Although I want to be a doctor, I will need to work hard to get into medical school.

H 5. Words and Language

The English language is rich and always evolving, offering you many ways and words to express yourself in
writing and speech.

Language Varieties

English is not one language but many, made up of regional and social dialects. In addition, groups speak using
specialized language among themselves that can be difficult for outsiders to understand. As a writer, be aware
of the audience for your writing. Use language that your readers will understand directly or from context.

Dialects

English dialects are distinctive versions of the language used in geographical regions and/or by particular
social or ethnic groups. Standard American English, the English spoken by newscasters, is one such dialect, as
are African American Vernacular English, Creole, Appalachian English, and others. English dialects have many
features in common, but each has particulars of grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation. (For an in-depth
discussion of dialects and academic writing, see Spotlight on ... Variations of English.)

Slang

Groups of people with similar skills and interests often develop slang that allows them to express ideas quickly
and vividly. Slang also signals knowledge about a particular topic, such as meme culture, music, sports, and
more. Slang is generally considered too casual for most academic writing, but it may be appropriate for
personal essays. In your papers, be aware of your purpose and audience when choosing to use slang. Avoid
using slang that your readers are unlikely to understand.

Technical Expressions

Experts in many professional fields use specialized and technical expressions that allow them to communicate
efficiently and clearly with each other. Such language is often incomprehensible for nonexperts and should be
avoided in writing for general readers. (For tips on writing about a technical topic for an audience of
nonspecialists, see Spotlight on ... Discipline-Specific and Technical Language.)

Biased Language

Biased words and expressions exclude or demean people on the basis of gender, sex, sexual orientation, age,
ethnicity, social class, or physical or mental traits.

Biased Language Based on Sex and Gender

English includes words and expressions that are considered biased based on sex and gender, such as
mankind, businessman, chairman, fireman, and so on. These are commonly replaced by gender-neutral words
such as humanity, businessperson, chair or chairperson, and firefighter. (See Spotlight on ... Bias in Language
and Research for more on language bias.)

In addition, the English pronoun he has traditionally been used as the gender-neutral pronoun. For example,
the construction A duoncdteorrleisnnhedouulnddhearvlienea caring attitude toward hunisdepenardtliunenetdsewrlainseonce common but is now
widely viewed as gender biased because many doctors are not men. For a discussion of the pronoun he used as
the gender-neutral pronoun, see Pronouns.

Labels and Stereotypes

Be sensitive to labels and stereotypes that may insult a group of people you are writing about. Avoid labels that
don't put people first, such as cancer victim and wheelchair-bound. Don't make assumptions about entire
686 Handbook

groups of people that promote stereotypes, such as teenagers are rebellious, elderly people don't hear well,
conservatives are rich, or women are more emotional than men. (See Spotlight on ... Bias in Language and
Research for more on language bias.)

Exact Words

As a general rule, use plain, direct words in your writing. Avoid reaching for a word that sounds fancy or
impressive, especially if you are unsure about the meaning. If you use a word that is only vaguely familiar to
you, look it up in a dictionary to ensure you are using it correctly. (You can type the word and "def" to get a
definition.) Doing so has the added benefit of building your vocabulary.

Words Commonly Confused

The words in the following list are commonly confused or misused by writers. As you write, consult this list or
use a reliable online tool, such as Merriam-Webster (https://openstax.org/r/merriam-webster), to check the
meanings and usage of words you're unsure of. Keep a list of words that cause you trouble as you become
aware of them. Then, after you draft a document, do a search for the words on your list. (For a discussion of
homonyms, homographs, and homophones, see Editing Focus: Words Often Confused.)

Confusing                         Definitions and Examples
  Words

accept,         Accept means "to receive willingly." Except is used mostly as a preposition meaning "excluding."
except          He aucncdeeprltiendeeanlldthuendgeifrtlsineuexncdeeprltienmneidneu.nderline

advice,         Advice is a noun meaning "guidance." Advise is a verb meaning "to recommend." My mother gives
advise          good audnvdiecreleiwnnehdeunnsdheerlauindnevdiesrelsinemened aubnoduetrlminye college courses.

affect, effect  The verb affect means "to produce a change in." The noun effect means "result." The wine underline
                affectedemned,ubnudteitrlsineemed to have no eufnfdeectreloinndemuyndroeorlminme ate.

all ready,      All ready means "completely prepared." Already means "happened by or before now." We were underline
already         allerunendaddueynrelfdinoerdertluhinneedterirpli,nbeut the train had aulnrdeeadrlyineleenfdt.underline

all right,      All right is always two words meaning "acceptable" or "satisfactory." Alright is an informal
alright         spelling.

all together,   All together means "everyone or everything together." We put the tickets aulnledtunoendgrdleiuentnrheldeinererflnoinrdeunderline
altogether      safekeeping. Altogether means "completely" or "entirely." The book is aulntdogeerltihnerend underline
                incomprehensible.

allusion,       An allusion is an indirect or implied reference. The poem includes an aulnludseirolinneetnodthuendBeibrlien.eAn
illusion        illusion creates a false impression of reality. Magic relies upon iullnudseiorlnin,eesnedeuinngdewrhlianteyou believe
                instead of what is really there.

A lot           Aunldoteerisnlindaeluwnadyesrtliwnoe words meaning "much" or "many."
                Aunlodteeirsnlidaneumnidsseprleinlleing.

apart, a part   Apart denotes a separation. Social distancing requires people to stand six feet aupnadretreflinrnodemunedaechrline
bare, bear      other. A part denotes a segment of something. The dog is auenpundnaderdtrueeloinrnfldiednoeeurrlnindfaemrlilnye.

                As verbs, bare means "to uncover." Bear means "to endure." Bunedaererwlniindtheumndeewrlhinilee I bunardeeemrnliydnesuonudle. rline

TABLE H4

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                           Handbook 687

Confusing        Definitions and Examples
  Words

complement,      Complement means "to add to" or "to complete." Compliment means "to make an approving
compliment       remark." Many people now cuonmdeprlliimneentetnhde ufrnedsehrglirnaey paint that cuonmdeprlleinmeentsetnhde uexntdeerriolirnestone
                 on the house. Complimentary also means "free" or "without cost." Because they sold advertising
                 space for the newspaper, they received cuonmdeprlliimneentaryetnicdkeutnsdteorltihnee game.

conscience,      Conscience is a noun that refers to the awareness of one's actions being right or wrong. I have a
conscious        guilty cuonndsecrileinnece.eCndonusncdioeurlsinise an adjective meaning "awake" or "alert." She remained cuonndsecriloinuesend underline
                 after hitting her head on the windshield.

disinterested,   Disinterested means "impartial." Uninterested means "not interested." She was chosen as a underline
uninterested     disinterestedepnadrtuyntdoehrelianreboth sides of the disagreement. Unfortunately, she was unidnetrelrineestedeind underline
                 the dispute.

elicit, illicit  Elicit is a verb meaning "to bring out." Illicit means "unlawful." His claims eulnicdieterldineaenrdesupnodnesrleinferom
                 the mayor about the effort to stop demand for iullnicdieterdlnirnduegusn.derline

emigrate,        People emigrate, or leave, one country. They immigrate to a new country to live. When my family underline
immigrate        emigratedefnrodmunCdheilrel,intehey iumnmdeigrlrianteedetnodthuendUenriltiendeStates.

everyday,        Everyday is an adjective meaning "common," "ordinary," or "used daily." Every day is a noun
every day        phrase meaning "every day." Eunvedreyrdlianyeetnadskusnadrerolines you do euvnedreyrelduinnadeyd,euelnnrilkddieneuebrnlridnueesrhlineg your teeth
                 and washing dishes.

farther,         Farther refers to distance. I can't carry these groceries any fuanrdtheerlri.enFneudruthnedremrlienaens "in addition,"
further          "more," and "to a greater extent" and refers to abstractions like time or amount. I can't discuss
                 this issue any fuunrdtheerlri.enned underline

fewer, less      Fewer refers to items that can be counted. Less refers to items that cannot be counted: I have underline
                 fewereansdsiugndmeernlitnsethan my roommate, and she has luensdsetrnimlidneeutnhdaenrlIindeo. Cacti need luensdsewrnlaidnteurnderline
                 than other plants.

good, well       Good is an adjective. That color looks guonoddeerolninndeyuonud. eWrleinlleis an adverb. Marguerite speaks Chinese underline
                 well.eWndelulnisdeursleindeas an adjective only in reference to health. She looks wunedlleearnflitdneeur nredceorvlienreing from
                 the flu.

imply, infer     Imply means "to suggest." Your email iumnpdleierlsineyenodu'urendueprsliente. Infer means "to conclude." I iunnfdereernlindeunderline
                 from your email that you're upset.

its, it's        Its is a possessive pronoun. The dog wagged iutnsedtnaedirll.iunInte'dseisrlianceontraction of "it is" or "it has." Iutn'sdeenrdlinuenderline
                 my turn. Its followed by an apostrophe is incorrect.

lay, lie         Lay means "to put or set something down." Please luanydetenhrdelinubenodokesrlionnethe table. Lie means "to be in
                 or move into a horizontal position" or "to be situated." I need to luieneddneodrwliunneadnedrlirneest my eyes. The
                 towns luienednneedraliruntnehdeewrlianteerfalls. Note also that lay is the past tense of lie. I fell asleep as soon as I underline
                 layednodwunntdoerrelisntemy eyes.

lead, led        The past tense of the verb to lead is led. The noun lead (rhymes with red) is the metal. Nina luenddeaenrdlinuenderline
                 group of tourists past the old luenaddeemrnliidnneeu.nderline

TABLE H4
688 Handbook

  Confusing                                                   Definitions and Examples
    Words
              Lose is a verb meaning to "mislay" or "not win." I luonsdeeearnlsidnoeucnkdeevrelirnyetime I do laundry. These
lose, loose   teams never luonsdeeetrnhlidenieur ngdamerelisn.eLoose means "not tight" or "not secure." The luonodseerelsinhnduetutnedrsemrlianye be
              unsafe in a storm.
myself,
herself,      uenndderulnindeerline          undeenrdlinuenderline
himself,      Do not use the -self pronouns in place of a personal pronoun in an effort to sound more formal:
yourself,                                    underlienned underlinuenderline
ourselves,    Malia and I [not myself] wrote the report. The report was written by Malia and me [not myself].
themselves,   end underline
yourselves    Use the -self pronouns in the following situations: Malia wrote the report herself. She treats

peak, peek,   herself to brunch on Sundays.
pique
              Peak means "a highest point" or "to reach a highest point." After a difficult climb, the hikers finally
precede,      reached the puneadke.erlPninedeeuknmdeeralinnse"a secretive look" or "to take a secretive look." My brother puneedkeerldineend underline
proceed       at his birthday gifts. As a verb, pique means "to spark interest." The two classes puniqdueerdlienhneedr underline
prejudice,    interest in physics. As a noun, pique also means "irritation." His puniqdueerelaintdeheurndperorlbinineg questions
prejudiced    was obvious.

principal,    Precede means "to go before." The example that punredceerdlienseetnhdisuonndeeirslipneak/peek/pique. Proceed
principle     means "to go forward." The judge's decision allowed the lawsuit to punrodceerelidn.end underline

raise, rise   Prejudice is a noun that is sometimes used incorrectly in place of prejudiced, an adjective. His
              outrageous views were highly punredjeurdlicnede[ndotupnrdeejurldinicee].
set, sit
              Principal has several meanings: "a chief or head, particularly of a school," "a capital sum of
than, then    money," or "first or highest in rank, importance, or value." Principle refers to a "rule of conduct or
              action." The school punridnecriplianleeonudtluinneddetrhlineepunridnecriplilneesebnedhiunnddtehrelinceode of conduct. The small underline
that, which   principaleindthuenirdsearlvininegs account is not their punridnecriplianleesnodurucnedoefrliinnceome.

that, who,    Raise means "to lift" or "to grow" and always takes an object. She ruanidsedrleihnneedr uhnanddertlointeell the story
which         of how she ruanidsedrleitnnhedreuencdheilrdlirneen on her own. Rise means "to get up" and does not take an object.
              Like the sun, the moon ruinsedseerinlindtehuenedaesrtlienren sky.

              Set means "to put" or "to place" and takes an object. He suentdetenhrdelinugernodceerrliense on the table. Sit means
              "to be seated" and does not take an object. She suintsdeeinrldtinhuensdaemrlieneseat for every class.

              Than is used to compare. I am older tuhnadneeyrnloidnue.uTnhdeenrlinedicates time. Do your homework, and tuhnedneernlidneunderline
              we'll get pizza.

              That is used to introduce information essential to the meaning of a sentence. The phone tuhnadteIrnlidneunderline
              bought five years ago no longer charges fully. Which is most often used to introduce information
              that is nonessential to the meaning of a sentence. My iPhone 7, wunhdicehrleIinbedoungdhet rfilvineeyears ago, no
              longer charges fully. (For more on nonessential and essential information, see Editing Focus:
              Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information.)

              Use that and which to refer to things and most animals. The tiger tuhnadtehrnaliddneuensdcearpleindewas found.
              Use who to refer to people and animals with names. Doctors wunhdoeetrnrleidnaeutenddeCrOliVneID-19 patients were
              often called heroes.

TABLE H4

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                               Handbook 689

Confusing      Definitions and Examples
  Words

their, there,  Their is a possessive pronoun. There indicates place. They're is a contraction of "they are." The
they're        Smiths rescued tuhnedierermlninidsesuindgecralitnferom that tree over tuhnedreer;elitunnhndeeduyen'rdelienhrnealdipnpueyndtoerhlianvee him back.

to, too, two   To can be a preposition indicating direction. I am going tuonedtnhederlupinnoedole.rOlinr eit can be part of an infinitive
               (the to form of a verb). I like tuonedsnwedrilmuinn.edToeorlimneeans "also" or "excessively." Do you like to swim tuonod?eenrdlinuenderline
               Two is a number. I swim tuwnodetnirmldineuesnedveerrliyneweek.

unique,        Uunndiqeurleinemenedaunnsd"eornlieneof a kind." Uunnduesrulainlemnedaunnsd"eurnlincoemmon." Saying that something is more
unusual        unique than something else is incorrect because something unique cannot be compared. Use
               unusual instead when comparing.

weather,       Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere. Whether refers to alternatives. Wunhdeetrhlienreewnedautntednedrline
whether        the game in person or watch it on TV depends on the wunedaethrleinr.end underline

                     Who's is the contraction of "who is" or "who has." Wunhdoe'srleignoedinugntdoetrhlienegame? Whose is the
who's, whose

                     possessive form of "who." Wunhdoesrelienbneadckupnadcekrlisnethis?

your, you're   Your is the possessive form of "you." You're is the contraction of "you are." Yuonud'erreleignnoedinugntdoebrleine
               relieved that I found yuonudreeernlaidnrreuinngdberelhinined the desk.

TABLE H4

H 6. Point of View

Point of view refers to the vantage point from which a story, event, report, or other written work is told. The
point of view in which you write depends on the genre in which you are writing. For example, you will likely use
first person in personal narrative writing. For most academic writing, you'll use third person. (See Editing
Focus: Characterization and Point of View for a related discussion of point of view in narrative writing.)

First Person

In the first-person point of view, the writer or narrator (I, we) is present in the writing. First person is
commonly used in personal writing genres, such as literacy narratives, memoirs, and profiles, as well as in
fiction.

      After midnight--my paper started, my exam studied for--I leave the library and head back to my
      apartment. In the dark, I listen closely when I hear footsteps behind me, and I step to the edge of the
      sidewalk to let a man pass. At my door, I fumble for my key, open the door, turn on the light, and step
      inside. I am safe, ready to eat, read a bit, and return to my paper.

Second Person

Second-person point of view is used occasionally when an outsider (you) becomes part of a story. It should not
be confused with a writer or speaker using "you" when directly addressing an audience (you). Nor should it be
confused with giving instructions (drive forward, add one cup of brown sugar, close the door) or with its similar
use in textbooks such as this one. However, second person is not considered appropriate in most academic
writing.

Writers often slip into second person when they intend to write in third person. In the example below, the
writer starts in third person and shifts by accident to second person. To check your sentences for second
person, search your documents for you, and revise as needed.
690 Handbook

             Shift from Third Person to Second Person The federal government should raise the minimum wage
             because it has the responsibility to ensure puneodpelrelieennaedrnunadwearglienyueonudeecnraldninuleinvdeeornli.nTehe current minimum
             wage, $7.25 per hour, is not enough to pay ruenndte,erlnelidtnauelnodnersliunpeport a family. Many people cannot lift
             themselves out of poverty. A higher minimum wage can help you.
             Revised The federal government should raise the minimum wage because it has the responsibility to
             ensure wunodrkeerlrisneenadrnunadwearglientuehnedyeecrnalidnnuelinvdeeornli.nTehe current minimum wage, $7.25 per hour, is not
             enough to pay aunsdinegrleinpeerson'sernedntu, nledtearlloine support a family. Many people cannot lift themselves
             out of poverty. A higher minimum wage can help them.

     Third Person

       The third-person point of view (he, she, it, they) is customary for fiction and for academic writing, such as
       research papers, reports, visual and textual analysis papers, argumentative essays, and the like. Third-person
       point of view emphasizes the information instead of the writer.

             The hikers and other passive trail users argue that mountain bikes should not be allowed on narrow
             trails traditionally traveled by foot and horse. Tunhdeyeerplniondineutnoduetrtlhinaet the bikes' wide, treaded tires cause
             erosion, that the bikers' high speeds startle hikers and horses, and that tuhnedireerpnlridneseuenndceerolinnetrails
             disrupts the tranquility that hikers and bird watchers seek.

    H 7. Verbs

       In a sentence, a verb expresses an action, an occurrence, or a state of being.

     Subject-Verb Agreement

       In many sentences, making the verb agree with the subject is straightforward: Iuerunnunddndeeurenlrnvilndedinereuyernldidnaeeyr.liMnye suinsdteerrelruinundnedsueenrnldidneerulnindeerline
       every other day. Sometimes our burnodtehrelrinejuonenidnduseenrulndisnd,eearulninnddeauelrnlledionefedrulsiunnrueudnnedreetlnorinlgdienutehnedre.rHlionweever, subject-verb agreement
       gets tricky in the following circumstances. (See Editing Focus: Subject-Verb Agreement for more on subject-
       verb agreement.)

      Agreement with Compound Subjects

       Two or more subjects joined by and take a plural verb in most sentences:
             Yuongdaeralnindemeditationeadnrodeueeubnflnfededucdetnorilvudienebrelaelcinutienvidteierslinfoer relieving stress.

       However, when the parts of the subject form a single idea or unit, the verb is singular:
             Munadcearloinei and cheeseeidnsoedmunubydlnefddaouveunorblrdiilneteerulmindeaelr.line

       When compound subjects are joined by or or nor, the verb agrees with the word closest to it:
             Either your aunts or your munodtehrelrinerdneodmuubelnmedbueenrrldisneewrenlhidnedereouyboluerugnrdeaetr-lginraendmother's grave is located.
             Neither the image nor the wunodrdesrlecdinoodenuvubelneydeutenhnrdeldinmdereoeluisnbselaeguenodf ethrleinaedvertisement clearly.

      Agreement When Words Come between Subject and Verb

       The verb must agree with the subject even when words and phrases come between them:
             The cuonsdteornflditnhueenfdliegrhlitnseidsoepunrbdolhedioubunitbdivleeer.ulindeerline
             A buonxdeeonrfldinuvenitdaetirolinnsewith stamps and return addresses wdoausbeonlnedutdhnoedudeberlseiknu.enderline

      Agreement When the Verb Comes Before the Subject

       The verb must agree with the subject, even when it comes before the subject:
             AdoreuebJunalnedmdudenorsdluiaenbnreldleinTueanmdearrlaineaentdthuenfdreornltinoef the line?

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 691

      There wdoeurebeltenhudrendedopueurneblodilnpeeelruelnieanndhedeeraulidnndoeef rulsinien line.
      Under the table adroeueabnlnuedneudwdnoesudrpeblairlnpelieenureneadnneddrulainmudeneadrgleairnzleine.end underline

Agreement with Everyone and Other Indefinite Pronouns

An indefinite pronoun is general; it does not refer to a specific person, place, or thing. Most indefinite
pronouns take a singular verb, but not all. Those that take a singular verb include anybody, anyone, anything,
each, everybody, everyone, everything, nobody, no one, nothing, one, somebody, someone, and something.

      Eunvedreyrolinneeeindthuencdlearslsinhdeoasubplreeupnardeedrelainnrdeesdeoaurbclhe purnodpeorslianl.e
      Nunodbeordlyineaenmdounngdtehreliancecused suspects addomubilteseutnondtdhdeerolcuirnbiemle eu.nderline
The following indefinite pronouns take a plural verb: both, few many, others, and several.
      Suenvdeerralilneonefdthuensdteurdliennets in the class hdoavueblperuopnodseerdlienrnedsedaoruchbilnegunhuderrilcinaenes.
      Bunotdheeronlfidntheuensduesrpliencets deonuybelcenoudmndmdoeuitrbtlilnegeutnhdeecrrlinmee.
Several indefinite pronouns take a singular or plural verb depending on whether the word they refer to is
singular or plural. These include all, any, enough, more, most, neither, none, and some.
     Munodseteronlfidntheuencdlearslsinhdeoasubplreoupnosdeedrlerinedseedaoruchbilnegunadtoeprliicnreelated to climate change. (Most refers to class.)
     Munodseteronlfidntheuensdteurdliennets in the class hdoavueblperuopnodseerdlienrnedsedaoruchbilnegunadtoeprliicnreelated to climate change. (Most
     refers to students.)
     Nuneditehrelrinetenhde sutnuddeernlitnsenunordeetnhrdleintueenadcehrelrinsehdoavueblperuopnodseerdlienanefdiedldoutrbilpe. u(Nnediethrleinr/enor refers to students and
     teachers.)

Agreement with Collective Nouns

Collective nouns such as audience, band, class, crowd, family, group, or team can take a singular or a plural
verb depending on the context. When the group acts as a single unit, which is the most common construction,
use a singular verb:

      The buannddeerrdlneiondhueeubalnerdsuensrledeinevdrelridnyoeduabyl.e underline
When the group acts individually, use a plural verb, or to avoid confusion, add the word members and use a
plural verb.

      The juunrdyedrnoldiunnubeolntedauegnrldeineerolnnindaedvoeurbdliectu.nderline
      The juunrdyemrnldeinmuenbderesrldinoeunbolteaugnrdeeerolnnindaedvoeurbdliectu.nderline

Agreement with Words Such as News and Statistics

Some nouns that end in -s, such as athletics, economics, measles, news, physics, politics, and statistics seem
plural but are usually regarded as singular in meaning. In most situations, these words take a singular verb:

      Day after day, the nunewdesrewdlnioanduseubebnlaeddue.dnroldiunebreleinuenderline
      Sutnadtiesrtliicnseefdnuodlufiublllnseedaunemndrldiadnetohreulirbneleqeuuinredmerelinntefor many college majors.
When a word like economics, politics, or statistics refers to a specific situation, use a plural verb:
      The eucnodneormliniceseonfdthuensdieturlaitnioen adroeuehbnaledrdudnotoudebcrolelminupenrdeehrelninde.

Agreement with Titles and Words Used as Words

Whether singular or plural in form, titles and words used as words take singular verbs:
     Directed by Spike Lee, Dunad5eBrllionoedsecdneodnutubelnresdueeanrldoinuedrenoldiunbfeoleuruvnedteerrlaines returning to Vietnam to find the
692 Handbook

      remains of their squad leader and the fortune they hid together.

     Cunhdiledrleineidnsoedtunhubdelnepddloueuunrrbldailneefreoulirnmdeeorflicnheild.

Verb Tense

Tense expresses the time of a verb's action--the past, present, or future. Tense comes naturally in speech, but
it can be tricky to control in writing. The following guidelines will help you choose the appropriate tense for
your writing and use it consistently. (See Editing Focus: Verb Tense Consistency for a related discussion of
consistent verb tense.)

Verb Tense in Narrative Writing

Personal experience stories, such as literacy narratives, memoirs, personal essays, or profiles, can be written
in either the past or the present tense. Although the most natural way to tell a story about a past experience is
to write in the past tense, the present tense can draw readers into the story and give the illusion that the
experience is happening as they are reading it. In the following examples, the writer describes driving with her
Native American grandfather to a tribal conference. Notice the difference between the past and present tense.

      Narrative Writing Using Past Tense I sdaotuesbnildendutonlyudbnelreelxiuntnetodeGrrlainnedfather and wdoautcbhleeduenhndimderdlsoilnouewbley utenadrerline
      the thin white paper from the tip of the cigarette. He gdaotuhbelreeudnetdnhedrtdloionbueabclceouindoenrelinheand and droouvbeletnhudendoeurlbinleeunderline
      van with the other. I mdoeumbloeriuznedehrnilsdinedevoeurbylemuonvdeearslihneewdoeunbteltenhudrondudogeuhrbltilhneeumndoetirolinnseof the prayer, which double underline
      endedewnhdednohueblbdeloeuuwnbedltenhederulnitdnodobeeuarbclilcenoeuonudtetrhleinweindow and into the wind.

      Narrative Writing Using Present Tense I sdioteusnbildleendutolnyudbnelerexliutnnteodeGrrlainnedfather and wdoautcbhleehnuimdndseolroulwibnley utenadrerline
      the thin white paper from the tip of the cigarette. He gdaotuhbelresuetnhdeetdorolbiunabeclceouindoenrelinheand and droiuvbelseetnuhndeddeorulibnle underline
      van with the other. I mdoeumbloeriuznedehenirsdliednvoeeurbylemuonvdeearslihneegdoeusbetlnehdruondudoguehrbltliheneeumndoetirolinnseof the prayer, which double underline
      endsewnhdednohueblbdeloouuwnbsdleetnhruldenintdoeeobrualbicnlceeouonudtetrhleinweindow and into the wind.

Verb Tense in Academic Writing

Academic disciplines differ in their tense preferences for signal phrases used in formal essays and reports to
introduce and discuss evidence. A signal phrase is a verb that tells readers the words or ideas that follow come
from another source. Signal phrases include words such as argues, asserts, claims, comments, denies,
discusses, implies, proposes, says, shows, states, and suggests. (For more discussion and a more extensive list
of signal phrases, see Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and Quotations.)

                                  acknowledges declares observes

                                  admits     endorses poses

                                  agrees     explains posits

                                  argues     finds    proposes

                                  asserts    grants   reports

                                  believes   illustrates reveals

                                  claims     implies says

                                  comments   insists  shows

                                  concedes   maintains states

                                  concludes  notes    suggests

                                  TABLE H5

Access for free at openstax.org.
                  Handbook 693

 thinks   writes
TABLE H5

If you are writing for a course in English, a foreign language, or a related discipline and using MLA
documentation style, you generally will use the present tense or the present perfect tense in signal phrases.

      Present Tense The film critic Manohla Dargis cdloauimblseetunhndadtde.or.lu.inblee underline

      Present Perfect Tense The film critic Manohla Dargis hdoasubcleaiumneddeertnhlidanted.o.u. ble underline

When you are analyzing a work of literature, common practice is to use the literary present tense in discussing
both the work of the author and the action that occurs in the work:

      Being cool idsoekunebdyledtoouutnhbdeleelriulvinesdeeorfltihne speakers in "We Real Cool," a poem by Gwendolyn Brooks. Brooks double underline
      usesesnhdordtoluinbeles aundesrtalinzeas in which speakers ldiostuewbnlhdeaudt onitudmbelrelainunnesdteorblienecool: dropping out of school,
      staying out late, playing pool, drinking, carousing, and so on. Being cool udonuitbelseetunhndedsdeporeulaibnkleerusn, adnerdlitnheey double underline
      celebrateetnhdeidr oliufebslteyulen,deevrelninaes they adcokunbolewulenddgeereliinndethdeofuinblael ulindeeorflitnhe poem that their coolness mdoauyble underline
      causeetnhdemdotuobdlieeuynoduenrgli.ne

      (For more on literary present tense, see Editing Focus: Literary Works Live in the Present.)

If you are writing for a course in history, art history, philosophy, religion, or a related discipline in the
humanities, you generally will use the present tense or the present perfect tense in signal phrases.

      Present Tense The historian Eduardo Galeano adroguubelseetunhndadtde.or.lu.inbele underline

      Present Perfect Tense The historian Eduardo Galeano hdoasubalreguenddeetnhrldaintd.eo.u. ble underline

On the other hand, if you are writing for a course in the social sciences, such as psychology, political science, or
economics; a course in the natural sciences, such as biology, chemistry, or physics; or a technical field such as
engineering, you will generally use past tense or present perfect tense for most signal phrases.

      Past Tense The study fdoouunbdletnhudantdieonrudlbinvleiduunadlsewrlihnoeidentify as transgender . . . (past tense)

      Present Perfect Tense: Several recent studies hdoavueblfeouunnddeetnhrldaintdieonudbivleiduunadlsewrlihnoeidentify as
      transgender . . .

Verb Tense Consistency

Whichever tense you choose, be consistent throughout a piece of writing. You may need to shift tenses to
indicate actual changes in time, but the governing tense should remain constant. (See Editing Focus: Verb
Tense Consistency for a related discussion of consistent verb tense.)

      Inconsistent Blinking back tears, I cdlouutcbhleeudnemndydertdlwionoue-byleeaur-nodledrslionneto my chest, kdiosusbehlneisdufdnoordueehbreleianuden, adnedrlidnoeuble underline
      will gatheremnyd tdhoiunbglse. Iutnidsdoee2unr0bdl0ilned3eo,uaunnbddleerIulwdinoadeusebehrnlleidnaudeneodduebtroleianucentidverdliuntey in Iraq with the National Guard. I hdouugebnledudnoduebrlleinuenderline
      my spouse, my mom, my dad, my brothers, and my grandma. Then I tduorunbealnenduddncdodloiuemurbblblileneudeunenondnddeetrrdhllioeinnubeebulse tuhnadt edroliunbele underline
      takesemnde tdooaubfuletuurnedtehralti,nien all honesty, wdoausbetnelerdruidnfoyduinebrgleitnouemndee.rline

      Consistent Blinking back tears, I cdlouutcbhleeudnemndydertdlwionoue-byleeaur-nodledrslionneto my chest, kdiosusbeldeehuninsddfdoeoruelihbneleeaudn, adnedrlidnoeuble underline
      gatheredemnyd tdhoiunbglse. Iutnwddoaeusrbel2inln0ed0eud3no,dauenbrdleinIuwdenoadusebehrnlleidnaudeneodduebtroleianucentidverdliuntey in Iraq with the National Guard. I double underline
      huggedemnyd sdpoouubsle,umnydemrloinme, my dad, my brothers, and my grandma. Then I tduorunbeldeeaunndddecdorloilumiunbbbelleeudunenondnddeerrdllioinnueeble underline
      the bus that wdoouubldletauknedeemnrdelintdoeoaubfuletuurnedtehralti,nien all honesty, wdoausbetnelerdruidnfoyduinebrgleitnouemndee.rline

Irregular Verbs

Most verbs are regular and form the past tense and past participle forms by adding -d or -ed.

  · I bake/I baked/I have baked
694 Handbook

         · She discovers/she discovered/she has discovered
         · They shovel/they shoveled/they have shoveled

       Some verbs, however, are irregular and form the past tense and participle in another way. Below are a few of
       the approximately 200 irregular verbs in English. For a comprehensive list of irregular verbs, see this list
       (https://openstax.org/r/this_list).

         · begin/began/begun
         · bring/brought/brought
         · buy/bought/bought
         · do/did/done
         · drive/drove/driven
         · fall/fell/fallen
         · go/went/gone
         · have/had/had
         · is/was/been
         · lead/led/led
         · hide/hid/hidden
         · ring/rang/rung
         · run/ran/run
         · see/saw/seen
         · sing/sang/sung
         · sit/sat/sat
         · shake/shook/shaken
         · speak/spoke/spoken
         · take/took/taken
         · wear/wore/worn
         · write/wrote/written

     Verb Mood

       Verbs have three moods: indicative, imperative, and subjunctive. Mood can be said to indicate a speaker's
       attitude or intention.

      Indicative Mood

       Use the indicative mood to state a fact or an opinion or to ask a question:

             Thousands of women currently sdeoruvbeleeinudtnhddeoemurlbinleietaurnyd. erline

             I tdhoiunbkleecnoudlnleddgoeeurtlbiunleiteiuonndidesoreeulnixbndpleednousunibdvlee.rulindeerline

             The weather wdoausbeanlwedfuudnlodfuoebrrlmeinuenchdeorflitnhe winter but wdoilulbimlepurnodvereslnoindoend.ouble underline

             Hdoauvbeelyenoudundsddouoeuburbmlbilnleieteutuenndddeyeenorrdulliinrdneroeeuqbuleesutnfdorertliimne off?

      Imperative Mood

       Use the imperative mood to give instructions and commands. The subject, you, is often implied but not stated:

             (dYoouub)lUe suenetdnhederlodinoeluinbleefuonrmdetrolirneequest time off.

             (dYoouub)lSeuubnmdeitrelyinonduerdroeuqbuleesutnfdorertliimne off by Friday.

             Ydoubmleuustnsduebrlminieteynodurdroeuqbuleesutnodnetrilmine.

      Subjunctive Mood

       Use the subjunctive mood to express wishes, suggestions, or requirements or to state hypothetical or unlikely

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 695

conditions:

      The rules state that every member bdeoeupnbrdleesdeuonutdbfeloerrliutnhneedevroltien.e

      I wish you wdoeurebelheneudrneddtooeursbleilneeuthnedexrlhinibeition.

      The governing board could be more effective if all members wdoeurebelaencudtinvddeo.eurblilneeunderline

      Students who failed the class would have passed hdoaduebtnhledeuydncdodoouemubrbllpeilnleeueutnendddeeaernlrlidlnaindeseosiugbnlme uendtse.rline

H 8. Pronouns

A Pronouns is a word used in place of a noun. Some pronouns are I, you, he, she, we, they, who, and everyone.
The noun a pronoun replaces or refers to is its antecedent. (See Editing Focus: Pronouns for a related
discussion of pronouns.)

Pronoun Reference

A pronoun should refer to a clear and specific antecedent.

      Clear Antecedent All nine munedmerbleinrseeonfdthuensdcehrolionleboard voted in favor of changing the district's
     mascot. Tunhdeyeerelnxindpeluanindeedrltihneir reasoning during the meeting. (They refers clearly to members.)

      Unclear Antecedent In Smith's essay, suhnedeenrxdlpinluaenindserwlihnyemany American families have less money
      saved and more debt than families in the 1970s.

      Revised In hunerdeensrdlsianuyen, Sudmnerdilteihnreleinxdepluanindserwlihnyemany American families have less money saved and more
      debt than families in the 1970s.

Problems with pronoun reference occur in the following situations:

Vague this, that, which, or it. The pronouns this, that, which, and it should not refer to words expressing an
idea, an event, or a situation.

      Vague Reference The school board voted to change the district's mascot without holding special
     meetings with the public. Tunhdiseemrnlidandueensdoemrleinceommunity members angry. (Are community members
     angry about the vote or about the lack of special meetings?)

      Revised The school board voted to change the district's mascot without holding special meetings with
      the public. Tunhdeierrdlienceision to avoid public discussion before the voteemndaduensdoemrleinceommunity members
      angry.

Indefinite it, they, or you. The pronouns it, they, and you should have a definite antecedent in a sentence.

     Indefinite it Crittenden explains that mothers are taken for granted and disrespected, even though
      our society calls iutnetnhddermulinnodesetrilminpeortant job in the world.

      Revised Crittenden explains that mothers are taken for granted and disrespected, even though our
      society calls munodtehrelrinhoeodetnhde munodsetrilminpeortant job in the world.

     Indefinite they Japan has considerable wealth compared to Ireland, but tuhnedyeehrnlaidvneuenadloewrlisnuebjective
      well-being index.

      Revised Japan has considerable wealth compared to Ireland, but Juanpdaenrelisneecitizensehnadveunadloewrline
      subjective well-being index.

     Indefinite you The federal government should raise the minimum wage to ensure yuonudeenraldrinuenadwearglienuenderline
      youecnadn ulinvde eornli.ne

      Revised The federal government should raise the minimum wage to ensure wunodrkeerlrisneenadrnunadwearglientuehnedyeernlidnuenderline
      can live on.
696 Handbook

     Pronoun-Antecedent Agreement

       In many sentences, making a pronoun agree with its antecedent is straightforward: My nuneidgehrblionresegnadveumndeetrhliene
       keys to tuhnedireeranlpidnaerutnmdeenrlti.nHeowever, pronoun-antecedent agreement gets tricky in the following circumstances.

      Agreement with Generic Nouns and Indefinite Pronouns

       Generic nouns refer to a type of person or job someone performs, such as athlete, child, scientist, doctor, or
       hairdresser. Indefinite pronouns include words such as anyone, each, everyone, everything, many, most, and
       none.
       All generic nouns and most indefinite pronouns are singular in meaning. Traditionally, these words took the
       singular pronouns he/him/his because English does not have a gender-neutral third-person pronoun that
       refers to people: Everyone has his own opinion or A doctor needs to show that he cares about his patients.
       More recently, writers have been replacing he/him/his or his/her with they/them/their when the person's
       gender is unknown or unimportant or when the person has indicated a preference for non-gendered
       pronouns:

             Everyone has tuhnedireeronlwidnneuonpdienriloin.e
             A doctor needs to show that tuhnedyeecrnalidrneueanbdoeurtlitunhneedireerpnlaidntieuentdse.rline
       These plural pronouns are increasingly accepted and intentionally used by writers, teachers, and editors.
       Many prominent publications and style guides indicate that the plural pronoun should replace binary or
       singular ones in most cases. If using a plural pronoun does not fit the situation (such as in a paragraph where
       the pronoun they is also used several times to indicate a group), try rewriting the sentence in either of these
       ways:
             Remove the pronoun. Everyone has aunedonepdrilniuninoende. rline
             Make the antecedent plural. Puenodpelreliehnnaedveunthdeeirlionwen opinions. Dunodcteorrlisnenenededuntodesrhloinwethat they care
             about their patients.

      Agreement with Collective Nouns

       Collective nouns such as audience, band, class, crowd, family, group, or team can take a singular or plural
       pronoun depending on the context. When the group acts as a single unit, which is the most common
       construction, use a singular pronoun. When the group members act individually, use a plural pronoun. If using
       the plural sounds awkward, add the word members so that the plural is clear.

             The band went through iutnsedcneodrmliupnnleedteerplilnaeylist.
             The band loaded tuhnedireerinlidsnteurunmdeernlitnseon the bus. The band munedmerbleinrseelonadduenddtuehnreldirneereinlidsnteurunmdeernlitnseon the
             bus.

     Pronoun Case

       Pronouns have three cases: subjective, objective, and possessive. Pronouns change case according to their
       function in a sentence.

         · Subjective case pronouns function as subjects: I, we, you, he/she/it, they, who/whoever:
                   Antonio and Iuesnnhddaerurelniandneeralpinaertment downtown in a neighborhood wunedelinekrdeli.unnederline

         · Objective case pronouns function as objects: me, us, you, him/her/it, them, whom/whomever:
                   The manager gave usnedanetdroluinrneodfetrhlienbeuilding.

         · Possessive case pronouns show ownership: my/mine, our/ours, your/yours, his/her/hers/its, their/theirs,
             whose:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 697

            Ounudrefnrildeinnuednsdleirvleinine the building too.
Pronoun case gets tricky in the circumstances explained below.

Case in Compound Structures

Compound subjects use subjective case pronouns. Compound objects use objective case pronouns.
      Subjective Case AundtoenrliioneaenndduIuenhnndaddevereurllinoinncdeecearsliinoenal disagreements about the dishes.
      Objective Case Occasional disagreements about the dishes come up between Aundtoenrliioneaennddumunnedd.eeenrrldliinnueenderline

Case After than or as

In a comparison, the case of the pronoun indicates which words have been left out:
      Antonio cares more about having a clean kitchen than Iue[ndndode].urlnindeerline
      Sometimes I think Antonio cares more about a clean kitchen than [he cares about] muned.eenrdlinuenderline

Who or Whom

Use the subjective case who in place of a subject--whether it is the subject of the sentence or the subject of a
clause:

      Wunhdoeeirnslidgnoeuindgetrolitnhee concert? (subject of sentence)
      Give the tickets to wunhdoeervleinrecnadnuunsedethrleinme. (subject of clause)
      She is the person wunhdoeirnsldibneuesntdqeuralilnifeied for the job. (subject of clause)
      She is the person wunhdoeIrntlhdiniunenkdiserblienset qualified for the job. (subject of clause; the intervening words "I
      think" don't change the subject or verb of the clause)
Use the objective case whom in place of an object, whether it is the object of a verb, preposition, or clause:
      I don't know wunhdoemrleitnodeasukn.d(oebrljiencet of verb)
      To wunhdoemrleisnhdeouulnddIegrilvineethe extra concert tickets? (object of preposition)
      Give the tickets to wunhdoemrleivneereynoduucnhdoeorslei.n(eobject of clause)

We or us with a Noun

Use we with a subject. Use us with an object.
      Wunedecenirtdliiznuenendsemrluinset vote in order to make our voices heard. (subject)
      Legislators need to hear from usnedcnietdrizluiennneds.e(rolibnject)

Case Before or After an Infinitive

Use the objective case before and after an infinitive (the to form of a verb: to run, to walk, to eat):
      The agent asked Antonio and munedetenordlwinurientedearrlienveiew.
      We agreed to give hunimdearnlpdinousenitdiveerlrienveiew.

Case Before a Gerund

Generally, use the possessive case of a pronoun before a gerund (the -ing form of a verb used as a noun: gentle underline
snoring,eenldeguanndtedurinlnidnienrgl)ei:nned underline

      He grew tired of tuhnedireerpnlaidnretuynindgerlalitneeinto the night.
      The rental agreement depends on yuonudreearnlpidnperuonvdinerglitnhee lease terms.
698 Handbook

    H 9. Punctuation

       This section covers the major marks of punctuation: commas, apostrophes, semicolons, colons, periods,
       question marks, exclamation points, dashes, and parentheses. (For using brackets and ellipses, see
       Quotations.)

     Commas

       Commas alert readers to brief pauses within sentences.

      Commas with Main Clauses

       Use a comma before a coordinating conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so) joining main clauses:

           Businesses in the metropolitan area are growing,uannddeerulninndeeumnpdleorylmineent is down.
           Many job seekers use online sites like Indeed.com,ubnudteearnlifdneweunsdtiellrlsienned traditional cover letters and

             résumés through the mail.

           A solution must be determined soon,uonrdetenhrdelinpuernodbelrelminewill continue.
      Commas with Introductory Information

       Use a comma after an introductory element at the start of a sentence:

           Aunftdeerrcllianses is over,ewnedsuhnodueldrligneet lunch and review our notes.
           Suhnudfefrlilningehis feet nervously,ehnedwuanitdeedrlfionrethe train.
           Hunodweervlienre, nthdeucnirdceurmlinsetances have not changed.
      Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information

       (See Editing Focus: Commas with Nonessential and Essential Information for a related discussion of commas.)
       Nonessential information refers to information that is usually not necessary to the basic meaning of a
       sentence. Nonessential information is set off by commas. In the following sentence, the word original tells
       readers which labs no longer meet the needs of the teachers and students. The underlined information adds
       information but does not change the meaning of the sentence and thus is nonessential to the basic meaning:

           The original technical education labs,uwndheicrhlinweere installed 50 years ago,ennodlounngdeerrlmineeet the needs of

             the teachers and students.
       Essential information, on the other hand, is necessary to the meaning of the sentence. In following example,
       the word original is no longer part of the sentence; the underlined words convey necessary information about
       the labs:

             The technical education labs tuhnadtewrleirneeinstalled 50 yearseangdo unnodloenrlgineer meet the needs of the teachers
             and students.
       You can test whether information is nonessential by removing the information. If the meaning of the sentence
       is unchanged, the information is nonessential. If the meaning becomes too general or changes, the
       information is essential. In the sentence above, only the labs installed 50 years ago, as opposed to other labs,
       no longer meet the needs of teachers and students. Note, also, the use of which with nonessential information
       and that with essential information.
       Commas Around Nonessential Information

       Place commas around information that is not essential to the meaning of a sentence:

           The entire technology department,uwndheicrhlinceonsists of nine teachers and five staff members,ehnads underline

             contributed to a report on the needed updates to the technical education labs.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 699

     The technology department chair,uwndheortleinaeches welding,ewnrdoutentdheerlfineal report.
     Updates to the labs will begin in June,uwndheernlisncehool is not in session.end underline

No Commas Around Essential Information
Do not place commas around essential information:

      According to the technical education teachers, the labs need equipment tuhnadtesrtluindents are likely to
      encounter in the workplace.end underline
      Faculty wunhdoetrelainceh auto mechanicsehnadveunredqeurleisnteed updates to their lab.
      The teachers are concerned about the labs buencdaeursliensetudents are not learning the skills they need.end underline
      The amount of lab space tuhnadtenreliendes to be updatedeins dsuubnsdtaenrltiinael.
      The department has consulted the industry expert SutnadceyrJlianmees.end underline

Serial (Oxford or Harvard) Commas

For clarity, use a comma between items in a series:

     He studied all the notes, emails, memos, and reports related to the data breach.

Be aware, however, that certain style manuals, such as the AP Stylebook, do not use the serial comma, also
called the Oxford or Harvard comma.

Commas with Numbers, Dates, Titles with Names, and Addresses
     The sign gave the city's population as 122,887.
     Nobel Prize winner Toni Morrison died on August 5, 2019.
     Diana Wong, M.D., is a practicing obstetrician.
     The mailing address for the Smithsonian Institution is 600 Maryland Avenue SW, Washington, D.C.,

      20002.

Common Comma Errors

Misplaced commas can make sentences choppy and obscure the intended meaning.
No Comma after a Subject or a Verb

      Anyone who was still at the party,uelnendfdtewurlnhinednertlhineeband stopped playing.
      The party ended,ueannfdtdeerurtlnhindeebralinndestopped playing.
No Comma after a Conjunction Connecting Parts of a Compound Subject, Verb, or Object
      Some musicians in the band,ueannndddeurmlniandneyrloifntehe guests danced until midnight. (compound subject)
      The band stopped after two hours,ueannndddeurtolniondkearlwineell-deserved break. (compound verb)
      Guests enjoyed the music,ueannndddeurthlniendderalnincieng. (compound object)
No Comma after a Series
      The band played 80s rock,uepnnuddneukr,lniandnedrlninewe wave, all night long.
No Comma before an Indirect Quotation

     Online reviews say,uetnhnaddteturhlneinbdaenrdliins ethe best in the area.
700 Handbook

     Apostrophes

       An apostrophe has two functions. It indicates possession, and it forms contractions.

      Apostrophes to Show Possession

       Use an apostrophe and -s to indicate possession with a singular noun or an indefinite pronoun:

           Juancdke'rsleibnrdeotuhnedreisrlminye suinsdteerr'lsiencneodwuornkdeerr.line
           In their family, euvnedreyrolinnee'sefnavdournitdeedrelisnsert is ice cream.

       If the 's in a singular noun is pronounced, add apostrophe -s:

           The buunsdienrelisnse'seindcounnsdisetrelnintehours caused customers to go elsewhere.
           Los Aundgelrelisn'seeanirdpuonrtd,eLrAliXn,eis one of the busiest in the United States.

       If the 's is not pronounced in a singular noun, some writers choose to add an apostrophe alone; however, MLA,
       APA, and Chicago use the apostrophe and s in these cases:

           David Munydeersrl'iebnnoedoku,nTdheerlPinuersuit of Happiness, was published in 1992.
           David Munydeersrl'sinebenodoku,nTdheerlPinuersuit of Happiness, was published in 1992.

       When the noun is plural and ends in -s, place the apostrophe after the final -s:

           American hunoudseerhlionleds'eindcoumnedserhlainve grown since the 1970s because more women have entered the

             workforce.

           These fuanmdielrielisn'eenxdpeunnsdeesrlhinavee risen too.

       When the noun is plural and does not end in -s, add an apostrophe and -s:

           Social muneddeiral'isneenffdecutnodnercloinnetemporary life cannot be underestimated.
           During the pandemic, parents' stress grew as they helped with their cuhnidlderelinn'esesncdhouonldinegr.line
      Apostrophes to Form Contractions

       Contractions are common in speech and in informal writing. Use an apostrophe in contractions:

           When I say I cuannd'et,erlInimndeueanndeIrwulinondnee'tr.elinndeunderline
           Iutn'sdetenhrdelinbuensdteorplitnioen under the circumstances.
           "Yuonud'erreleitnnhede buensdtefrrliienned anyone can have," Mikayla said.
           Tunhdeye'rrleinedenrdivuinngdteorltihneeir favorite hangout spot.
      Common Apostrophe Errors

       Apostrophes are not used to form plural nouns, singular verbs, or personal or relative pronouns.
       Not in Plural Nouns

             How many hotel ruonodmerslei[neodturnodoemr'lsin] sehould be reserved for the wedding?
             The Lewises and the Riveras [not Lewis's and Rivera's or Lewis' and Riveras'] have confirmed their
             reservations.
       Not with Verbs Ending in -s
             Nikki ruunndseer[nliodnteurnudne'sr]lienveery day.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 701

     Jamal wunadlkesrel[innodetuwnadlekr'sli]ntoe work.
Not with Possessive Personal Pronouns or Relative Pronouns

     The book is yuonudresrel[innodetuynoduerr'sli].ne
     The dog was barking and wagging iutnsed[neodrltiuintne'sd]etraliln. e
     Wunhdoesrelie[nneodtuwnhdoe'rsl]ianpeartment is this?

Other Punctuation

Semicolons

The semicolon joins main clauses (a clause that contains a subject and a predicate and can stand alone as a
sentence). A semicolon is also used to separate items in a series that contain commas.

  · Use a semicolon to join main clauses that are closely related in meaning and that are not joined by a
     coordinating conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so).

          Originally built in 1928, the school had been remodeled multiple times;uetnnhddeeruelnisndueeltrlwinaes an

            architectural mashup.
  · Use a semicolon to join main clauses that are connected by a transitional word or phrase such as for

     example, however, therefore, indeed, or after all:

          The governor has proposed increased funding to K-12 public schools;uhnodwerelvineer,etnhde luengdiselraltiunree

            must approve the budget.
  · Use a semicolon between items in a series that contain internal commas:

          The candidates for the award are Michael, who won the essay competition; Sasha, the top debater;

            and Giselle, who directed several student productions.

Colons

A colon introduces lists, summaries, and quotations. A colon also separates titles from subtitles.
  · A colon can introduce a list:

          Successful athletes have the following qualities:upnhdyesrilicnael ability, mental toughness, commitment,

            and optimism.end underline
  · A colon can also introduce a summary or an explanation, which may or may not be a main clause (a clause

      that contains a subject and a predicate and can stand alone as a sentence):

          The team had one goal left before the end of the season:utnodwerinlinthee state championship.end underline

  · Book titles often include a subtitle. A colon separates the subtitle from the title:

         Forcing the Spring: Inside the Fight for Marriage Equality
End Punctuation

A sentence ends with a period, a question mark, or an exclamation point.
  · A period ends declarative (statement) and imperative (command) sentences:

          The administration canceled classes.
          Do not attempt to drive to school this morning.

  · A question mark ends a direct question and indicates uncertainty in dates:
702 Handbook

                Where is Times Square?
                She asked, "What time is it?"

         · An exclamation point ends an emphatic or emotional sentence:

                "What a mess!" she blurted out.
                "Stop! That hurts!" he shouted.
      Dashes and Parentheses

       Dashes and parentheses enclose nonessential information in a sentence.
         · Use a dash or dashes to set off nonessential information, to indicate a contrast or a pause, or to mark a
             change of direction.

                We did not notice the rain at first--it began so softly--but soon we were soaked.
                Nothing is as exciting as seeing a snowy owl in a winter farm field--except maybe seeing two

                   snowy owls.
         · Use parentheses to enclose nonessential information such as explanations, asides, examples, and dates.

                He graduated with high honors (magna cum laude) and found a job immediately.
                The city of Madison (home of the University of Wisconsin) is the state capital of Wisconsin.

    H 10. Mechanics

     Capital Letters

       Use capital letters in the following situations.
         · Capitalize the first word of a sentence: The weather is rainy today.
         · Capitalize proper nouns and proper adjectives: Monday, New Orleans, Mexico, Florida, Halloween,
             United States Constitution, Department of Education, University of Texas, Native American, Islam, Italian,
             Freudian.
         · Capitalize titles that precede a person's name: Dr. Atul Gawande, Senator Tammy Baldwin. [But: Atul
             Gawande, a doctor; Tammy Baldwin, a senator]

       Many online resources, such as this one (https://openstax.org/r/this-one), list words that should be capitalized.
       You can also consult a dictionary, such as Merriam-Webster (https://openstax.org/r/Merriam-Webster), to
       determine whether to capitalize a word.

     Titles of Works

       Titles of books, articles, stories, plays, poems, films, and other works are handled differently depending on the
       documentation style you are using. The guidelines here follow MLA style.

      Capitalization in Titles and Subtitles

       Capitalize the first and last words in a title and subtitle and other important words. Do not capitalize articles
       (a, an, the), coordinating conjunctions (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so), or prepositions (above, with, of, in,
       through, beyond, under) unless they are the first or last words in the title or subtitle.

         · Forcing the Spring: Inside the Fight for Marriage Equality (book)
         · Judas and the Black Messiah (film)
         · "American Military Performance in Vietnam: Background and Analysis" (article)

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 703

Italics for Titles of Long Works

Use italics for long works that are published, produced, or released separately from other works. These include
books, long poems, plays, movies, videos, published speeches, periodicals (newspapers, magazines, and
academic and professional journals), websites, long musical works, works of visual art, computer software, TV
or radio programs and series, and pamphlets.

  · Four Fish: The Future of the Last Wild Food (book)
  · The New Yorker (periodical)
  · The Los Angeles Times (newspaper)
  · American Idiot (album)
  · Parasite (film)
  · Saturday Night Live (TV program)

Quotation Marks for Titles of Shorter Works

Put quotation marks around the titles and subtitles of individual shorter works or those that are published or
released within larger works. These include articles in periodicals (newspapers, magazines, and academic and
professional journals), pages or works on a website, short stories, short poems, essays, songs, episodes of TV or
radio programs and series, book chapters, and unpublished speeches.

  · "Living with a Visionary" (article in a magazine)
  · "A World of Fields and Fences" (work on a website)
  · "New York Day Women" (short story)
  · "Corson's Inlet" (short poem)
  · "Return from ISIS" (TV episode)

H 11. Quotations

A quotation reproduces the exact written or spoken words of a person or an author, which may include a
group. (See Editing Focus: Quotations for a related discussion of direct quotations and Editing Focus:
Integrating Sources and Quotations for help with integrating quotations from sources.)

Quotations from Written or Spoken Sources

Put quotation marks around quotations from a written or spoken source.

Quoting a Source

When quoting the words of a source, introduce quoted material with a signal phrase so that readers know the
source and purpose of the quotation. Place the quotation inside double quotation marks. When using
parenthetical citations, note that the sentence period comes after the parentheses. If you include the author's
name in your signal phrase, give only the page number in parentheses (first example). If you do not give the
author's name in your signal phrase, give the name in parentheses (second example):

     In Walden, Thoreau sets forth one individual's antidote against the "lives of quiet desperation" led by

      the working class in mid-nineteenth-century America (5).

     Walden sets forth one individual's antidote against the "lives of quiet desperation" led by the working

      class in mid-nineteenth-century America (Thoreau 5).

     Abraham Lincoln wrote "that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish
     from the earth" in his Gettysburg Address.

Quoting or Writing Dialogue

When quoting or writing dialogue between speakers, including characters in a fictional work, place their words
in double quotation marks, and start a new paragraph for each speaker:
            704 Handbook

                   "It's good to see you--I guess," Brayden said, as Christopher walked up to the door. "I thought you
                   were gone for good."
                   "I missed you too much," Christopher said, looking down at his feet.
public domainStingle and Double Quotation Marks

                 Put single quotation marks around a quotation within a quotation, using double quotation marks around the
                 full quotation:

                       Kennedy writes that after a year of teambuilding work, including improvements in communication,

                   evaluation, and small-gernoduppuqbulaicrtdeormlyaminetetings, morale among staff members "improved from
                   `average' to `excellent'" (17).
              Long Quotations

                 Introduce a long quotation (four typed lines in MLA style; 40 or more words in APA style) with a signal phrase
                 that names the author and ends with a colon. Indent this entire block quotation one-half inch. If you quote
                 more than one paragraph, indent the first line of each subsequent paragraph one-half inch. Do not use
                 quotation marks. Note that the sentence period comes before the parenthetical citation:
                 In her memoir, Twenty Years at Hull-House, reformer Jane Addams recounts vivid stories of child labor:

                              The visits we made in the neighborhood constantly discovered women sewing upon sweatshop work,
                              and often they were assisted by incredibly small children. I remember a little girl of four who pulled
                              out basting threads hour after hour, sitting on a stool at the feet of her Bohemian mother, a little bunch
                              of human misery. For even for that there was no legal redress, for the only child labor law in Illinois,
                              with any provision for enforcement, had been secured by the coal miners' unions, and was confined to
                              the children employed in the mines. (199)

              Poetry Quotations

                 When you quote one, two, or three lines from a poem, use the following format, putting quotation marks
                 around the line or group of lines and separating the lines with a slash:

                       The 17th-century writer Aphra Behn (1640-1689) wrote humorous poems about love and heartbreak,

                   including "Love's Power," which opens with "Love when he Shoots abroad his Darts / Regards not
                   where they light" (1-2).

                 When you quote more than three lines from a poem, set them off from your text. Indent the quotation one-half
                 inch, and do not use quotation marks. Note that the sentence period comes before the parenthetical citation.

                       In the poem "The Character," Aphra Behn (1640-1689) uses the familiar alternate rhyme scheme, also
                       known as ABAB:
                       Such Charms of Youth, such Ravishment
                       Through all her Form appear'd,
                       As if in her Creation Nature meant,
                       She shou'd a-lone be ador'd and fear'd. (1-4)

            Altering Quotations

                 When you alter a quotation to fit into your sentence, you must indicate the change you made.

              Ellipses

                 An ellipsis [. . .] indicates that you have omitted words from a quotation. In the example below, the writer

                     Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 705

omitted words from the middle of the sentence.
     In her memoir, Twenty Years at Hull-House, reformer Jane Addams explains that there were no
      enforceable laws against small children helping their mothers with sweatshop sewing work, and that

     "the only child labor law in Illinois . . . had been secured by the coal miners' unions, and was confined

      to the children employed in the mines" (199).
If you omit the end of a sentence or a complete sentence, include the sentence period:

      The author explains as follows: "Damage to the Broca's area of the brain can affect a person's ability to

     comprehend spoken language. . . . A person may understand speech relatively well when the

      sentence grammar is simple and the content familiar but may struggle when the grammar and
      content are more complex" (Hollar-Zwick 45).

Brackets

Use brackets [ ] to indicate a change you have made to a quotation:

     Abruzzi cited the study, noting that "[t]he results provide hope to patients [with muscular
     dystrophy]."

Punctuating Quotations

Periods

Place the period inside quotation marks if no source is cited:

     The meteorologist said, "Today's weather will be sunny and mild."

If you are citing a source in parentheses, place the quotation marks at the end of the quotation, followed by the
citation and the sentence period:

     In Twenty Years at Hull-House, Jane Addams recalls vivid images of child labor: "I remember a little

      girl of four who pulled out basting threads hour after hour, sitting on a stool at the feet of her

     Bohemian mother, a little bunch of human misery" (199).

(See Long Quotations and Poetry Quotations above for exceptions to this rule.)

Commas

Commas go inside quotation marks:

     "Tomorrow's weather will be cool and rainy," the meteorologist said.
Colons and Semicolons

Colons and semicolons go outside quotation marks:

     The sign read "Closed": No more films would be shown at the theater. (Note: Use a capital letter if a

      complete sentence follows the colon.)

Question Marks and Exclamation Points

Question marks and exclamation points go inside quotation marks if they are part of the quotation:

     "Would you like a sandwich?" asked Adelaide.

Question marks and exclamation points go outside quotation marks if they are not part of the quotation:

     "I can't believe you haven't read "The Lottery"!
706 Handbook

H 12. Index and Guide to Documentation

Although formal differences exist among the conventions for documenting sources, the underlying principle of
all documentation systems is the same: When borrowing words, facts, or ideas from someone else, writers
must indicate that the material is borrowed. They do this by providing a citation in the text of their paper that
points readers to detailed publication information about the source of the material, usually at the end of the
paper but sometimes in footnotes. The following examples are in MLA style:

      Citation in the Text

      Describing Martin Luther King, Jr.'s visit to India, IusnadbeerllWinielkersonennodteusntdheartlKinieng was taken aback by
      the suggestion that Black Americans were the equivalent of the Dalits in the Indian caste system (u2n2d).enrldinuenderline

      Works-Cited Entry

     Wilkerson, Isabel. Caste: The Origins of Our Discontents. Penguin, 2020.

Documentation Styles by Discipline

Each discipline has its own authority or authorities that provide rules about issues such as spelling of technical
terms, preferred punctuation, and editing mechanics, as well as documentation style. In addition, if you write
for publication in a magazine, professional journal, book, or website, the publisher will have a "house" style,
which may vary in some details from the conventions listed in the authoritative guidelines for the discipline in
which you are writing. Below are the sources of style manuals for various disciplines. Always check with your
instructor about which style to use in a class.

                                  Discipline                    Documentation Style

              languages, literature, philosophy, and some arts  Modern Language Association (MLA)

              social sciences, education, and some other sciences American Psychological Association (APA)

              history, religion, fine arts, and business        Chicago Manual of Style (CMS)

              life sciences                                     Council of Science Editors (CSE)

              chemistry                                         American Chemical Society (ACS)

              physics                                           American Institute of Physics (AIP)

              journalism                                        Associated Press (AP)

              medicine                                          American Medical Association (AMA)

              law                                               Bluebook: A Uniform System of Citation

TABLE H6

Index to MLA Documentation Models

The models, listed numerically, provide examples of in-text citations and works-cited entries (MLA). The
models themselves are located in Handbook Section 13 (H13).

In-Text Citation Models

1. One author
2. Two or more works by the same author
3. Two authors

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                             Handbook 707

 4. Three or more authors
 5. Authors with the same last name
 6. Organization, government, corporation, or association as author
 7. Unknown author
 8. Work in more than one volume
 9. Work with no page or other reference numbers
10. One-page or entire work
11. Source quoted in another source (indirect quotation)
12. Literary works

       Poetry and verse plays
       Fiction and prose plays

13. Two or more works in the same citation
14. Sacred text

Endnotes and Footnotes (MLA)

Format of the List of Works Cited (MLA)

 Authors and Contributors (MLA)

15. Book: one author
16. Book: two authors
17. Book: three or more authors
18. Book: two or more works by the same author
19. Author and editor
20. Author and translator
21. Author and illustrator
22. Work by an organization, a government, a corporation, or an association
23. Unknown author

 Articles in Journals, Magazines, and Newspapers (MLA)

24. Basic format for a journal article in a database
25. Article in an academic journal

       Database
       Print
       Online

26. Article in a weekly or biweekly magazine
       Database
       Print
       Online

27. Article in a monthly or bimonthly magazine
       Database
       Print
       Online

28. Article in a newspaper
       Database
       Print
       Online

29. Editorial or letter to the editor
30. Review
708 Handbook

       Books and Parts of Books (MLA)

      31. Basic entry for a book
      32. Print book
      33. E-book
      34. Book, anthology, or collection with an editor
      35. Work in an anthology or chapter in an edited collection
      36. Two or more works in an anthology or edited collection
      37. Revised or later edition
      38. Multivolume work
      39. One volume of a multivolume work
      40. Book in a series
      41. Republished work
      42. Sacred text
      43. Introduction, preface, foreword, or afterword
      44. Published letter
      45. Conference paper

       Websites and Parts of Websites (MLA)

      46. Basic format for a short work or page on a website
      47. Short work or page on a website
      48. Blog post
      49. Entire website
      50. Wiki

       Social Media (MLA)

      51. Basic format for a social media post
      52. Social media post
      53. Online forum post
      54. Online comment

       Personal Communication (MLA)

      55. Email
      56. Text message
      57. Personal letter

       Video, Audio, and Other Media Sources (MLA)

      58. Film
      59. Online video
      60. Television programs

              TV series
              TV episode

      61. Advertisement
              Print
              Online

      62. Cartoon or comic
              Print
              Online

      63. Painting or other visual artwork

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                               Handbook 709

       Original work
       Reproduction
       Online

64. Map, chart, or diagram
       Print
       Online

65. Sound recording
       Album
       Song
       Online

66. Radio
67. Podcast
68. Interview

       Broadcast
       Online
       Personal interview

69. Video game, software, or app

 Other Sources (MLA)

70. Live lecture, speech, address, or reading
71. Live performance
72. Letter in an archive
73. Dissertation
74. Pamphlet

Index to APA Documentation Models

 The models, listed numerically, provide examples of in-text citations and reference entries (APA). The models
 themselves are located in Handbook Section 14 (H14).

In-Text Citation Models (APA)

75. One author
76. Two authors
77. Three or more authors
78. Authors with the same last name
79. Organization, government, corporation, or association as author
80. Unknown author
81. Two or more works in the same citation
82. Work with no page numbers
83. Source quoted in another source (indirect quotation)
84. Entire work
85. Personal communication

Format of the References List (APA)

 Authors (APA)

86. One author
87. Two authors
88. Three to twenty authors
89. Work by an organization, a government, a corporation, or an association
710 Handbook

90. Unknown author
91. Two or more works by the same author

Articles in Journals, Magazines, and Newspapers (APA)

92. Basic format for an article in an academic journal

93. Article in an academic journal
       With DOI
       With URL
       Without DOI or URL

94. Article in a magazine
       Database
       Print
       Online

95. Article in a newspaper
       Database or print
       Online

96. Blog post
97. Published interview
98. Editorial or letter to the editor
99. Review

Books and Parts of Books (APA)

100.  Basic entry for a book
101.  Print book or e-book
102.  Book, anthology, or collection with an editor
103.  Article in an edited book, anthology, or collection
104.  Translated or reprinted book
105.  Revised edition
106.  One volume of a multivolume work
107.  Report or publication by a government agency or other organization
108.  Conference paper

Web Sources (APA)

109.  Basic format for a page or work on a website
110.  Page or work on a website
111.  Wiki

Social Media (APA)

112. Social media post
113. Online forum post

Video, Audio, and Other Media Sources (APA)

114.  Film
115.
116.  Online video

      Television programs
       TV series
       TV episode

117. Music recording

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                        Handbook 711

118.  Radio
119.  Podcast
120.  Painting or other visual artwork
121.  Map, photograph, or other visual
122.  Video game, software, or app

H 13. MLA Documentation and Format

MLA style is the preferred form for documenting research sources in English and other humanities disciplines.
The following are general features of MLA style:

· All material borrowed from sources is cited in the text of a paper by the author's name and page number (if
   available).

· A works-cited list at the end of a paper provides full publication data for each source cited in the text of the
   paper.

· Additional explanatory information provided by the writer (but not from external sources) goes in either
   footnotes or endnotes. These notes are optional.

The instruction in this section follows the MLA Handbook, 8th edition (2016). For more information on MLA
style, see this site (https://openstax.org/r/this-site). For examples of student papers in the textbook using MLA
documentation style, see Section 4 in Chapters 5, 7, 9, 12, and 16.

MLA In-Text Citations

In-text citations feature author names, page numbers, and sometimes titles, depending on what information is
available. The Index located in H12 provides a listing of the models that are included below.

1. One author

When you quote, paraphrase, or summarize a source, include the last name of the source's author, if known, in
a signal phrase or in parentheses at the end of your sentence. Provide the page or pages on which the original
material appeared. Do not include the word page or the abbreviations p. or pp. Use a hyphen [-] to indicate a
number range (See Spotlight on ... Citation for more on quoting, paraphrasing, and summarizing sources):

      Becker points out that Joe Biden's views on same-sex marriage changed during a personal visit to a
      family while he was vice president (285-86).

      While he was vice president, Joe Biden's views on same-sex marriage changed during a personal visit
      with a family (Becker 285-86).

2. Two or more works by the same author

If you cite two or more works by the same author in your paper, give the title of the specific work in your
sentence or a short version of the title in parentheses:

      According to Lewis Thomas in Lives of a Cell, many bacteria become dangerous only if they
      manufacture exotoxins (76).

      According to Lewis Thomas, many bacteria become dangerous only if they manufacture exotoxins
      (Lives 76).

      Many bacteria become dangerous only if they manufacture exotoxins (Thomas, Lives 76).

See Model 18 for how to cite two works by the same author in the works-cited list.

3. Two authors

If you cite a work with two authors, include both authors' names in a signal phrase or in parentheses:

      In the preface to Half the Sky, Kristof and WuDunn explain their focus on the issues of sex trafficking
712 Handbook

             and sex work, violence against women, and maternal mortality (xxi).
             In the preface to Half the Sky, the authors explain their focus on the issues of sex trafficking and sex
             work, violence against women, and maternal mortality (Kristof and WuDunn xxi).
       4. Three or more authors

       For works with more than two authors, give the last name of the first author followed by "et al.":
             Of the survey respondents, twenty-two percent described themselves as concerned about future job
             prospects (Pronkowski et al. 9).

       5. Authors with the same last name

       When authors of different sources have the same last name, include their initials:
             Since the legalization of marijuana for recreational use, frequent use among adults has risen (J. T.
             Greene 21; M. Greene 30).

       6. Organization, government, corporation, or association as author

       When no author is given for a work published by a corporation, a government, an organization, or an
       association, indicate the group's name in a signal phrase or in parentheses:

             The United States Forest Service describes its mission as "sustain[ing] the health, diversity, and
             productivity of the nation's forests and grasslands to meet the needs of present and future
             generations" (8).
       7. Unknown author

       When the author of a work is unknown, use the work's title in a signal phrase or a shortened version of the title
       in parentheses and a page number if available. Put quotation marks around article titles, and put book or
       journal titles in italics:

             In a pointed 2020 editorial, "Don't Let the Games Begin," The New York Times argued that college
             athletic departments should support public health by canceling sports seasons until athletes and the
             public were vaccinated.
             In a pointed 2020 editorial, The New York Times argued that college athletic departments should
             support public health by canceling sports seasons until athletes and the public were vaccinated
             ("Don't Let").
       8. Work in more than one volume

       If you cite only one volume of a multivolume work, give the page number in parentheses. If you cite more than
       one volume of a multivolume work, give the volume number for each citation before the page number, and
       follow it with a colon and one space:

             Hill notes that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's The Adventure of the Dancing Men was first published in the
             Strand Magazine and later in Collier's Weekly (1: 332).
       9. Work with no page or other reference numbers

       When the work has no page numbers, give the author's name in a signal phrase or in parentheses. If the source
       has paragraph, chapter, or section numbers, use them with the abbreviations par., ch., or sec.:

             Chen reports that the number of Americans seeking help with mental health rose during the
             pandemic that began in 2020. (ch. 2)
             The number of Americans seeking help with mental health rose during the pandemic that began in
             2020 (Chen, ch. 2).

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 713

For an audio or a video recording, give the start and stop times for the segment you are citing shown on the
player in hours (if available), minutes, and seconds:

      It is well known that maternity leave is available in countries around the world, including Norway,
     which popularized its policy in a comic YouTube video showing a pregnant woman on skis
      announcing the start of her one-year paid leave (01:48-02:07).
10. One-page work or entire work

When you cite a work that is one page long or an entire work, such as a book, website, single-page article,
tweet, video, or film, you do not need to cite a page or give a reference number:

     In Da 5 Bloods, director Spike Lee connects the Civil Rights movement to the war in Vietnam through
      the music, montages of the era, and characters' stories.
11. Source quoted in another source (indirect quotation)

When a quotation or any information in your source is originally from another source, try to track down the
original source. If you cannot find it, use the abbreviation "qtd. in":

      The group, which has researched global health including access to food, sounded the alarm about a
      potential "worldwide food crisis" in the early 2000s (qtd. in Sing 32).
12. Literary works

  · Poetry and verse plays

     For poems, provide line numbers for reference, and include line or lines in the first reference:

      In "The Character," Aphra Behn describes a lovely young woman, starting with her eyes: "Her Eyes all
      sweet, and languishingly move" (line 4).

     Cite verse plays using act, scene, and line numbers, separated by periods: (Hamlet 4.4.31-39)

  · Fiction and prose plays

      When citing a prose literary work available in various editions, provide additional information after the
      page number, such as the chapter, act, or scene number, for readers who may be consulting a different
      edition. Use a semicolon to separate the page number from this additional information: (331; ch. 5) or (78;
      act 2).
13. Two or more works in the same citation

When you cite more than one work in parentheses, use a semicolon between them:

      Americans who resisted or ignored civil defense are often portrayed as heroic people who chose not to
      build fallout shelters or as marginalized people who could not afford them (Garrison 57; Mechling and
      Mechling 109).
14. Sacred text

When you cite passages from the Bible or another sacred text such as the Qur'an, give the title of the edition
you are consulting the first time you refer to it. Then give the book (abbreviate the title if it is longer than four
letters), chapter, and verse, separated by periods:

      Several times in the New Testament of the Bible, Jesus comments on wealth, telling his disciples, "And
      again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
     enter into the kingdom of God" (King James Version, Matt. 19.24).
714 Handbook

      Endnotes and Footnotes

       Writers use notes to offer comments, explanations, or additional information that cannot easily be integrated
       into the rest of a paper. Use notes to cite several sources within a single context if a series of in-text citations
       will detract from the readability of the text.

       Text with Superscript

       The standard ingredients for guacamole include avocados, lemon juice, onion, tomatoes, coriander, salt, and
       pepper.1 Hurtado's poem, however, gives this traditional dish a whole new twist.

       Note

       1. For variations see Beard 314, Egerton 197, Eckhardt 92, and Kafka 26. Beard's version, which includes olives
       and green peppers, is the most unusual.

       A note may be placed as a footnote at the bottom of the page on which the in-text citation appears or on a
       separate page of endnotes at the end of the paper. This should be titled "Notes" or "Endnotes" and appear
       between the last page of the paper and the works-cited list. Include all sources given in notes in the works-
       cited list.

     MLA Works Cited

       Each source cited in the text of your paper refers readers to the list of works cited, a complete list of all the
       sources you quoted, paraphrased, or summarized. Every source cited in the text of your paper must be
       included in the works-cited list, and every source in the works-cited list must be cited in the text of your paper.

      Format of the List of Works Cited (MLA)

       After the last page of the paper, start a new page with the centered title "Works Cited" at the top. Create an
       entry for each source using the following guidelines and examples:

         · Begin each entry at the left margin, and indent subsequent lines one-half inch. (In Microsoft Word, you
             can also highlight the entire page when you are finished and select "Hanging" from the Special options on
             the Indentation section of the Paragraph menu.)

         · Alphabetize the entries according to authors' last names. If two or more authors have the same last name,
             alphabetize by first name or initial. Alphabetize sources with unknown authors by the first word of the
             title, excluding a, an, or the.

         · Double-space the entire page.

      Core Elements (MLA)

       Each entry in the list of works cited consists of core elements:

         · Author. Who is responsible for the work?
         · Title. What is the work called?
         · Publication information. Where can the work be found so that others can consult it? Publication

             information includes the date of publication and any larger work, which MLA calls a "container," in which a
             shorter work is published, such as a journal, magazine, newspaper, database, streaming service, and so
             on.

             A note on access dates. Although access dates for online sources are not required, MLA acknowledges that
             an access date can indicate the version of a source you consulted. If you add an access date, place it at the
             end of the works-cited entry in this format: "Accessed 4 Apr. 2020." Ask your instructors whether they
             require access dates.

      Authors and Contributors for Books and Articles (MLA)

         · Authors. Give the author's last name, a comma, the author's first name and any middle name or middle

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 715

      initial, and then a period. For works with more than one author, an organization as an author, or an
      unknown author, see the models below.
  · Contributors. People who contributed to the work in addition to the author are called contributors. Refer
      to them by their role in a phrase such as "adapted by," "directed by," "edited by," "illustrated by,"
      "introduction by," "narrated by," "performance by," and "translated by." (See Models 19, 20, 21, 30, and 58
      for examples.)
15. Book: one author
Sotomayor, Sonia. My Beloved World. Vintage Books, 2013.
16. Book: two authors
Kristoff, Nicholas D., and Sheryl WuDunn. Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women
   Worldwide. Alfred A. Knopf, 2009.
17. Book: three or more authors
Barlow, David H., et al. Abnormal Psychology: An Integrative Approach. 8th ed., Cengage Learning, 2017.
18. Book: two or more works by the same author

When you cite two works by the same author, use three hyphens in place of the author's name, and alphabetize
the works by title:
Trethewey, Natasha. Memorial Drive: A Daughter's Memoir. Ecco, 2020.
---. Native Guard: Poems. Mariner Books, 2007.
19. Book author and editor

Add the editor's name after the title:
Hemingway, Ernest. Conversations with Ernest Hemingway, edited by Matthew J. Bruccoli, UP of Mississippi,

    1986.
20. Book author and translator

Add the translator's name after the title:
Ferrante, Elena. My Brilliant Friend. Translated by Ann Goldstein, Europa Editions, 2012.
If you are citing the work of the translator, place the translator's name in the author position:
Goldstein, Ann, translator. My Brilliant Friend. By Elena Ferrante, Europa Editions, 2012.
21. Book author and illustrator

Add the illustrator's name after the title. If you are citing the work of the illustrator, place the illustrator's name
in the author position, as shown in the preceding example:
Fasler, Joe. Light in the Dark: Writers on Creativity, Inspiration, and the Artistic Process. Illustrated by Doug

    McLean, Penguin Books, 2017.
22. Work by an organization, a government, a corporation, or an association
If the author and publisher are not the same, start with the author:
United States Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration. Healthy Living Resource Guide.

    Government Printing Office, 2020.
If the author and the publisher are the same, give the title of the work in place of the author, and list the
organization as the publisher:
716 Handbook

       MLA Handbook. 8th ed., Modern Language Association of America, 2016.
       "This Is Who We Are." U.S. Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Mar. 2019,

           www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/This-is-Who-We-Are.pdf.
       23. Unknown author

       If no author is given, start with the title.

       "The Most Beautiful Battalion in the Army." Grunt Magazine, 1968, pp. 12-15.

      Articles in Journals, Magazines, and Newspapers (MLA)

       Articles, reviews, editorials, and other short works are published in journals, newspapers, and magazines.
       They appear in print, on databases, and on websites (though often through a paywall). As a student, you are
       likely to access many articles and other short research sources primarily through databases available through
       your library.
       24. Basic format for a journal article in a database

       Author's Last Name, First Name. "Title of Article." Title of Journal, volume number, issue number, Date of
       Publication, page numbers. Title of Database, DOI or URL.

         · Author. Give the last name, a comma, the first name, and any middle name or initial. Do not list an
             author's professional title, such as Dr. or PhD. End with a period.

         · Title of the article. Give the full title and any subtitle, separating them with a colon. Capitalize all
             significant words in the title. Put the title of the article in quotation marks. End with a period inside the
             closing quotation mark.

         · Title of the journal. Put the title of the journal in italics. Capitalize all significant words in the title. End the
             title with a comma.

         · Volume and issue numbers. Use the abbreviations vol. and no. followed by the number and a comma.
         · Publication date. Give the month or season and the year of publication, if available. Use the following

             abbreviations for months: Jan., Feb., Mar., Apr., Aug., Sept., Oct., Nov., and Dec. Do not abbreviate May,
             June, or July.
         · Page numbers. Give p. (singular) or pp. (plural) and the page number or numbers of the article, followed
             by a period.
         · Title of the database. Put the database title in italics, followed by a comma.
         · Location. Give a DOI if available, and end with a period. If there is no DOI, give a URL, preferably a
             permalink, without http://.
       25. Article in an academic journal

         · Database

             Daddis, Gregory A. "Out of Balance: Evaluating American Strategy in Vietnam, 1968-72." War & Society,
                 vol. 32, no. 3, Oct. 2013, pp. 252-70. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1179/0729247313Z.00000000026.

         · Print

             Daddis, Gregory A. "Out of Balance: Evaluating American Strategy in Vietnam, 1968-72." War & Society,
                 vol. 32, no. 3, Oct. 2013, pp. 252-70.

         · Online

             Squires, Scot. "Do Generations Differ When It Comes to Green Values and Products?" Electronic Green
                 Journal, no. 42, 2019, escholarship.org/uc/item/6f91213q.

             The journal in the example numbers issues only, so no volume number is given.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 717

26. Article in a weekly or biweekly magazine

To cite an article in a weekly or biweekly magazine, give the author, title of the article, title of the magazine,
publication date (day, month, year), and page numbers. If you found the article through a database, add the
title of the database and a DOI or URL. If you found the article online, add the URL.

  · Database
     Sanneh, Kelefa. "The Color of Money." The New Yorker, 8 Feb. 2021, pp. 26-31. EBSCOhost,
          search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&AuthType=aph&AN=148411685&site=ehost-
          live&scope=site.

  · Print
     Sanneh, Kelefa. "The Color of Money." The New Yorker, 8 Feb. 2021, pp. 26-31.

  · Online
     Ferrer, Ada. "My Brother's Keeper." The New Yorker, 22 Feb. 2021, www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/
          03/01/my-brothers-keeper.

27. Article in a monthly or bimonthly magazine

To cite an article in a monthly or bimonthly magazine, give the author, title of the article, title of the magazine,
publication month and year, and page numbers. If you found the article through a database, add the title of the
database and a DOI or URL. If you found the article online, add the URL.

  · Database
     Sneed, Annie. "Giant Shape-Shifters." Scientific American, Sept. 2017, pp. 20-22. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1038/
         scientificamerican1017-20.

  · Print
     Sneed, Annie. "Giant Shape-Shifters." Scientific American, Sept. 2017, pp. 20-22.

  · Online
     Stewart, Jamila. "A Look Inside the Black Designers of Canada Initiative." Essence, July 2020,
          www.essence.com/fashion/black-designers-of-canada-digital-index/.

To cite a comment on an article, see Model 54.
28. Article in a newspaper

To cite an article in a newspaper, give the author, title of the article, title of the newspaper, publication date
(day, month, year), and the page numbers. If you found the article through a database, add the title of the
database and a DOI or a URL. If you found the article online, add the URL.

  · Database
     Krueger, Alyson. "When Mom Knows Best, on Instagram." The New York Times, 27 Nov. 2019, pp. B1-B4.
         EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&AuthType
          =aph&AN=139891108&site=ehost-live&scope=site.

  · Print
     Krueger, Alyson. "When Mom Knows Best, on Instagram." The New York Times, 27 Nov. 2019, pp. B1-B4.

  · Online
     Smith, Doug. "They're Building Affordable Housing for the Homeless--Without Government Help." Los
718 Handbook

                 Angeles Times, 10 Feb. 2021, www.latimes.com/california/story/2021-02-10/theyre-building-
                 affordable-housing-for-the-homeless-without-government-help.
             To cite a comment on an article, see Model 54.
       29. Editorial or letter to the editor

       An editorial may or may not have an author's name attached to it. If it does, give the author's name first. If it
       does not, start with the title. In both situations, add the designation Editorial or Letter to the Editor after the
       title.
       "For Better Elections, Copy the Neighbors." Editorial. The Wall Street Journal, 16 Feb. 2021, www.wsj.com/

           articles/for-better-elections-copy-the-neighbors-11613518448.
       30. Review

       To cite a review of a book, film, television show, or other work, give the name of the reviewer and title of the
       review, add Review of before the title of work being reviewed, and give the name of the work's author, director,
       or creator after the title.
       Girish, Devika. "Refocusing the Lens on Race and Gender." Review of Test Pattern, directed by Shatara Michelle

           Ford. The New York Times, 18 Feb. 2021, www.nytimes.com/2021/02/18/movies/test-pattern-review.html.

      Books and Parts of Books (MLA)

       Use the following guidelines for books and parts of books, such as a selection from an anthology, an article in a
       collection, a published letter, and so on.
       31. Basic entry for a book

       Author's Last Name, First Name. Title of Book. Publisher, Year of Publication.
         · Author. Give the last name, a comma, the first name, and any middle name or initial. Do not list an
             author's professional title, such as Dr. or PhD. End with a period.
         · Title of the book. Put the book's title in italics. Give the full title and any subtitle, separating them with a
             colon. Capitalize all significant words in the title, even if the book's cover does not use conventional
             capitalization. End the title with a period.
         · Publisher. List the publisher's name without words such as "Inc." or "Company." Shorten "University
             Press" to "UP." End with a comma.
         · Year of publication. Provide the publication date, and end with a period.

       32. Print book

       Wilkerson, Isabel. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration. Vintage Books,
           2010.

       33. E-book formatted for a specific reader device or service

       Wilkerson, Isabel. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration. Kindle ed., Vintage
           Books, 2010.

       34. Book, anthology, or collection with an editor

       Add the abbreviation ed. or eds. (if more than one) after the editor's first name:
       Lunsford, Andrea, ed. Reclaiming Rhetorica: Women in the Rhetorical Tradition. U of Pittsburgh P, 1995.
       35. Work in an anthology or chapter in an edited collection

       After the author and title of the work, give the title of the anthology or edited collection, name of the editor,
       publication information, and page numbers of the work:

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 719

Royster, Jacqueline Jones. "To Call a Thing by Its True Name: The Rhetoric of Ida B. Wells." Reclaiming
   Rhetorica: Women in the Rhetorical Tradition, edited by Andrea Lunsford, U of Pittsburgh P, 1995, pp.
    167-84.

36. Two or more works in an anthology or edited collection
When you cite two or more selections from the same anthology or edited collection, list the anthology
separately under the editor's name. In the entries for the selections you cite, include the editor's name and the
page numbers on which the selections appear:
Lipscomb, Drema R. "Sojourner Truth: A Practical Public Discourse." Lunsford, pp. 227-46.
Lunsford, Andrea, ed. Reclaiming Rhetorica: Women in the Rhetorical Tradition. U of Pittsburgh P, 1995.
Royster, Jacqueline Jones. "To Call a Thing by Its True Name: The Rhetoric of Ida B. Wells." Lunsford, pp.

    167-84.
37. Revised or later edition
For a book published in an edition other than the first, give the edition number after the title:
Strunk, William, Jr., and E. B. White. The Elements of Style, 4th ed., Pearson, 2019.
38. Multivolume work
For a book published in more than one volume, give the total number of volumes after the title:
Klinger, Leslie S. The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes. 2 vols., W. W. Norton, 2005.
39. One volume of a multivolume work
Klinger, Leslie S. The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes. Vol. 2, W. W. Norton, 2005.
When each volume of a multivolume set has an individual title, list the volume's full publication information
first, followed by series information (number of volumes, dates). When separate volumes were published in
different years, give inclusive dates:
Churchill, Winston S. Triumph and Tragedy. Houghton Mifflin, 1953. Vol. 6 of The Second World War. 6 vols.

    1948-53.
However, if the volume you are using has its own title, you may cite the book without referring to the other
volumes as if it were an independent publication.
40. Book in a series
Add the title of the series at the end of the entry:
Thaiss, Christopher. Language across the Curriculum in the Elementary Grades. WAC Clearinghouse, 2011,

    wac.colostate.edu/books/landmarks/thaiss/. Landmark Publications in Writing Studies.
41. Republished book
Give the original publication date after the title and the date the book was republished after the publisher:
Evans, Elizabeth E. G. The Abuse of Maternity. 1875. Arno, 1974.
42. Sacred text
Give the complete title of the version you consulted followed by the name of the editor and/or translator, the
edition, the publisher, and the publication date:
The Bible. Authorized King James Version. Edited by Robert Carroll and Stephen Prickett, Oxford UP, 2008.
The Koran. Translated by N. J. Dawood, rev. ed., Penguin Books, 2015.
720 Handbook

       43. Introduction, preface, foreword, or afterword

       Start with the author of the introduction, preface, foreword, or afterword, followed by a description of the work
       you are citing, such as "Foreword." Give the author of the work after the title:
       Offill, Jenny. Foreword. Mrs. Dalloway, by Virginia Woolf, Penguin Classics, 2021, pp. vii-xiv.
       44. Published letter

       Roosevelt, Theodore. Letter to Upton Sinclair. 15 Mar. 1906. Theodore Roosevelt: Letters and Speeches, edited
           by Louis Auchincloss, 2004, pp. 310-11.

       45. Conference paper

       Killi, Stainer, and Andrew Morrison. "Could the Food Market Pull 3D Printing Appetites Further?" Industry
           4.0--Shaping the Future of the Digital World: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
           Sustainable & Smart Manufacturing, edited by Paulo Bartolo et al., CRC Press, 2021, pp. 197-203.

      Websites and Parts of Websites (MLA)

       Use the following guidelines for works that are published only online and do not have an overarching
       publication, such as a journal, newspaper, magazine, or database.
       46. Basic format for a short work or page on a website

       Author's Last Name, First Name. "Title of Short Work." Title of Website, Publisher, Publication Date, URL.
         · Author. Give the last name, a comma, the first name, and any middle name or initial. Do not list an
             author's professional title, such as Dr. or PhD. End with a period.
         · Title of the short work. Put the title in quotation marks. Give the full title and any subtitle, separating
             them with a colon. Capitalize all significant words in the title. End with a period inside the closing
             quotation mark.
         · Title of the website. Put the title of the website in italics. Capitalize all significant words in the title. End
             the title with a comma.
         · Publisher. If the publisher of the website is different from the title of the website (as shown in Model 48),
             give it next, followed by a comma. If they are the same (as shown in Model 47), give only the title of the
             website.
         · Publication date. Give the day, month, and year the work was posted, if available. Use the following
             abbreviations for months: Jan., Feb., Mar., Apr., Aug., Sept., Oct., Nov., and Dec. Do not abbreviate May,
             June, and July.
         · URL. Give the URL, without "http://."

       47. Short work or page on a website

       Shetterly, Margot Lee. "Katherine Johnson Biography." NASA, 24 Feb. 2020, www.nasa.gov/content/katherine-
           johnson-biography.

       If the source you are citing has no author listed, start with the title. If the page has no title, give the name of the
       site and a descriptive label, such as "Home page" or "Blog post."
       48. Blog post

       Blazich, Frank A. "The Cold Morning of the Day After." Smithsonian Voices, Smithsonian Magazine, 5 Feb.
           2021, www.smithsonianmag.com/blogs/national-museum-american-history/2021/02/05/cold-morning-
           day-after/.

       49. Entire website

       Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library. Yale U, 2021, beinecke.library.yale.edu/.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 721

If the website lists an editor, give the person's name as you would an author, followed by a comma and ed.
50. Wiki
"Coronavirus." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, 22 Feb. 2021, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coronavirus.

Social Media (MLA)

Social media include posts made to various platforms and forums, comments made by individuals to posts,
and online articles.
51. Basic format for a social media post
Author. "Text of untitled post" or "Title of post" or Descriptive label. Title of Site, Date of Post, Time of Post,
URL.

  · Author. Give the author's handle and name. End with a period.
  · Text, title, or description of post. Match the capitalization exactly, add quotation marks, and end with a

      period inside the closing quotation mark.
  · Title of the social media site. Put the title of the site in italics, ending with a comma.
  · Publication date and time. Give the day, month, year, and time of the post. Use the following abbreviations

     for months: Jan., Feb., Mar., Apr., Aug., Sept., Oct., Nov., and Dec. Do not abbreviate May, June, and July.
  · URL. Give the URL, without "http://."
52. Social media post
@Holleratcha (James Holler). "People go out and vote tomorrow!" Twitter, 2 Nov. 2020, 2:08 p.m., twitter.com/

    holleratcha/status/1270432672544784384.
Death Valley National Park. "What does it mean to protect something you love?" Facebook, 23 Feb. 2021, 5:01

    p.m., www.facebook.com/DeathValleyNPS/posts/4108808255810092.
See Model 54 for how to cite a comment.
53. Online forum post
@Duckpond318. "Turkeys in the arboretum." Reddit, 15 Mar. 2021, 11:22 a.m., www.reddit.com/r/Wildlife/

    comments/lqlbo3/turkeys_in_the_arboretum/. Accessed 4 Feb. 2021.
54. Online comment
AKJersey. Comment on "Can We Stop Fighting about Charter Schools?" The New York Times, 22 Feb. 2021,

    www.nytimes.com/2021/02/22/opinion/charter-schools-democrats.html#commentsContainer.

Personal Communication (MLA)

Use the following guidelines to cite email, text messages, and letters that you sent or received.
55. Email

Roberts, Jeffrey. "Study results." Received by Kenneth Berg, 21 Oct. 2020.
56. Text message

Igoe, Beverlee. Text message. Received by Alison McGrath, 2 Apr. 2020.
57. Personal letter

Atwood, Margaret. Letter to the author. 11 Mar. 2007.

Video, Audio, and Other Media Sources (MLA)

Use the following guidelines to cite various media sources.
722 Handbook

       58. Film
       Begin with the title, followed by the director, the studio, and the year released.
       Casablanca. Directed by Michael Curtiz, Warner Brothers, 1942.
       You may also cite other contributors and their roles after the title (as illustrated below). If your paper is
       concerned with a particular person's work on a film, such as the director, an actor, or someone else, begin with
       that person's name and arrange all other information accordingly. For a film you stream, add the title of the
       streaming service and the URL:
       Moonlight. Directed by Barry Jenkins, performances by Mahershala Ali, Naomie Harris, and Trevante Rhodes.

           A24, 2016. Netflix, www.netflix.com/watch/80121348?trackId=13752289&tctx=8%2C.
       59. Online video
       NASA. "Apollo 11 Moonwalk - Original NASA EVA Mission Video." 20 July 1969. YouTube, 17 July 2014,

           www.youtube.com/watch?v=S9HdPi9Ikhk.
       60. Television series or episode

         · TV Series
             The Good Place. Michael Schur, creator. NBC, 2016-20.

         · Streamed TV episode
             "Jason Mendoza." The Good Place, season 1, episode 4, NBC, 2016. Netflix, www.netflix.com/watch/
                 80191852?trackId=13752289&tctx=%2C%2C.

       61. Advertisement
         · Print
             XOFLUZA. Flu medication advertisement. The New Yorker, 8. Feb. 2021, pp. 5-6.
         · Online
             General Motors. "Will Ferrell Super Bowl Ad." YouTube, 3 Feb. 2021, www.youtube.com/
                 watch?v=mdsPvbSpB2Y&t=24s.

       62. Cartoon or comic
         · Print
             Davis, Jim. "Garfield." Cartoon. Courier [Findlay, OH], 17 May 1996, p. 18.
             If the source you cite appears in a local newspaper, as it does here, give the city and state in brackets after
             the name of the newspaper if the city is not part of the newspaper's name.
         · Online
             Gauld, Tom. "Waiting for Godot to Join the Zoom Meeting." You're All Just Jealous of My Jetpack, 31 Jan.
                 2021, myjetpack.tumblr.com/.

       63. Painting or other visual artwork
         · Original work
             Rivera, Diego. Detroit Industry Murals. 1932-33. Detroit Institute of Art.
             If the city is not part of the name of the museum, add it after museum. For example, if the work you viewed
             was at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, you would end the entry as follows: Museum of Modern
             Art, New York.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 723

  · Reproduction
     Neel, Alice. Elenka. 1936. Alice Neel: People Come First, by Kelly Baum and Randall Griffey, The
          Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2021, p. 142.

  · Online
     Basquiat, Jean-Michel. Untitled. 1983. Museum of Modern Art, www.moma.org/collection/works/
          63997?artist_id=370&page=1&sov_referrer=artist. Accessed 24 Sept. 2020.

64. Map, chart, or diagram
  · Print
     Everglades National Park. National Geographic Society Maps, 2019.
  · Online
     "Map: Expedition of Lewis and Clark." National Park Service, 2 Jan. 2018, nps.gov/subjects/
          travellewisandclark/map.htm.

65. Sound recording
Sound recordings include songs, albums, and spoken word. If you stream a sound recording or watch a
performance online, add the name of the streaming service, such as Spotify, Apple Music, or Amazon Music,
after the date. If you access the recording online, add the name of the website and the URL after the date.

  · Album
     Prince. Purple Rain. Warner Brothers, 1984.

  · Song
     The Supremes. "Baby Love." Where Did Our Love Go, Motown, 1964. Spotify.

  · Online
     Gorman, Amanda. "The Hill We Climb." 20 Jan. 2021, YouTube, www.youtube.com/watch?v=LZ055ilIiN4.

66. Radio
The Road to Higher Ground. Hosted by Jonathan Overby. WPR, 9 Jan. 2021.
If you listened to the radio program online, add the URL after the date.
67. Podcast
McEvers, Kelly, host. "This Is Not a Joke." Embedded, season 9, episode 2, NPR, 7 Nov. 2019, Apple Podcasts.
If you listened to the podcast on the web, add the URL instead of the podcast service.
68. Interview

  · Broadcast
     Wilkerson, Isabel. Interview. Fresh Air, NPR, 4 Aug. 2020.

  · Online
     Sowell, Thomas. Interview. Hoover Institution, 3 Jan. 2015, www.wsj.com/video/uncommon-knowledge-
          thomas-sowell-basic-economics/51837CB6-9FF2-305AE55D179A.html.

  · Personal interview
      Wong, Diana. Personal interview. 12 Sept. 2020.
724 Handbook

       69. Video game, software, or app

       Houser, Dan, et al., writers. Grand Theft Auto V. Rockstar Games, 2013. Xbox 360.

      Other Sources (MLA)

       70. Live lecture, speech, address, or reading

       Diaz, Shanna. "Your Dazzling Brain: The Symphony of Sleep." Community Lecture Series, University of New
           Mexico Health Science and the City of Albuquerque, 13 Mar. 2018, Albuquerque Academy.

       71. Live performance

       Hamilton. By Lin-Manuel Miranda, directed by Thomas Kail, 11 Mar. 2018, CIBC Theater, Chicago.
       If you watch a video of a performance online, cite it as you would cite an online video.
       72. Letter in an archive

       Mucklestone, Ada. Letter to Maj. Gen. Ralph J. Olson. 6 Nov. 1958. Wisconsin Historical Society, Madison,
           Alphabetical Subject File, 1950-66, 1715, Box 13.

       73. Dissertation

         · Database
             Park, Eun Jung. Korean American Artists and the 1992 Los Angeles Riots. 2013. U of California, San Diego,
                 PhD dissertation. ProQuest, www.proquest.com/doc-view/1425303659.

         · Print
             Boothby, Daniel W. The Determinants of Earnings and Occupation for Young Women. 1978. U of California,
                 Berkeley, PhD dissertation.

       74. Pamphlet

       "Facts about Fallout." Civil Defense Administration, 1961.

     MLA Paper Format

       Follow your instructor's formatting guidelines or those indicated here. For sample papers with MLA format and
       works-cited pages, visit this site (https://openstax.org/r/this-site1).

         · Margins. Use one-inch margins on all sides.
         · Spacing. Double-space throughout the paper, including the works-cited page.
         · Paragraph format. Indent paragraphs one-half inch.
         · Page numbers. Start numbering on the first page of your paper and continue to the end of the works-cited

             page. Place page numbers in the upper-right corner, and add your last name before the page number:
             "Coleman 3."
         · Identifying information. Put your name, your instructor's name, the course title, and the date in the left
             corner of the first page of the body of the paper, not in the header. Double-space this information.
         · Title. Center the title on the first page. Do not use italics, boldface, all capitals, or quotation marks. Do not
             add extra space below the title.
         · Long quotations and quotations from poetry. See Quotations for how to cite long quotations and poetry
             quotations.

    H 14. APA Documentation and Format

       Disciplines in the social sciences--psychology, sociology, anthropology, political science, economics, social
       work, and often education--use the APA name-and-date system of documentation. APA style highlights authors
       and dates of publication because timeliness of published material is of primary importance in these

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 725

disciplines. The following are general features of APA style:
  · All material borrowed from sources is cited in the text of a paper by the author's name, date of publication,
      and page numbers (if available).
  · A list of references at the end of a paper provides full publication data for each source cited in the text of
      the paper.

The instruction in this section follows the Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association, 7th
edition (2020). For more information on APA style, visit this site (https://openstax.org/r/link). For examples of
student papers in the textbook using APA documentation style, see Section 4 in Chapters 6, 8, and 15.

In-Text Citation Models (APA)

In-text citations feature author names, dates of publication, and page numbers, depending on what
information is available. The Index located in H12 provides a listing of the models that are included below.
75. One author

When you quote, paraphrase, or summarize a source, include the last name of the source's author, if known, in
a signal phrase or in parentheses at the end of your sentence. Give the publication date after the author's
name. Provide the page or pages on which the original material appeared preceded by p. or pp. See Spotlight
on ... Citation.

      According to Thomas (1974), many bacteria become dangerous only if they manufacture exotoxins (p.
      76).
      Many bacteria become dangerous only if they manufacture exotoxins (Thomas, 1974, p. 76).
If you cite two or more works by the same author, published in the same year, use letters after the year to
distinguish them: (Gallivan, 2019a, 2019b, 2019c).
76. Two authors

      Smith and Hawkins (1990) confirmed that bacteria producing exotoxins are harmful to humans (p.
      17).
      The study confirmed that bacteria producing exotoxins are harmful to humans (Smith & Hawkins,
      1990, p. 17).
77. Three or more authors

For works with more than two authors, give the last name of the first author followed by "et al.":
      The results indicate that alcohol use rose during the period of the study (Dominic et al., 2021, p. 16).

78. Authors with the same last name

      When authors of different sources have the same last name, include their initials:
      Since the legalization of marijuana for recreational use, frequent use among adults has risen (J. T.
      Greene, 2019, p. 21; M. Greene, 2020, p. 30).
When authors of the same source have the same name, do not include their initials: (Kim & Kim, 2018, p. 47).
79. Organization, government, corporation, or association as author

When citing a well-known organization, government agency, corporation, or association, introduce an
abbreviation of the name in the first reference and use it in subsequent references:

      On multiple occasions, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA, 2018) reported that formal efforts to
      reintegrate combat veterans into civilian life were beneficial.
726 Handbook

       80. Unknown author

       When the author of a work is unknown, use the work's title in a signal phrase, or put the title in parentheses.
       Put quotation marks around article titles, and put book or journal titles in italics:

             In a pointed editorial, The New York Times argued that college athletic departments should support
             public health by canceling sports seasons until athletes and the public were vaccinated ("Don't Let the
             Games Begin," 2020).
             In its pointed editorial, "Don't Let the Games Begin" (2020), The New York Times argued that college
             athletic departments should support public health by canceling sports seasons until athletes and the
             public were vaccinated.
       81. Two or more works in the same citation

       When you cite more than one work in parentheses, put the works in the same order that they appear in your
       list of references, and use a semicolon between them:

             Americans who resisted or ignored civil defense were later cast as heroic people who chose not to
             build fallout shelters or as marginalized people who could not afford them (Garrison, 2006; Mechling
             & Mechling, 1991).
       82. Work with no page numbers

       If the work you are citing has no page numbers, help readers find the quotation by providing a heading, a
       section name, and/or a paragraph number (using the abbreviation para. or paras.):

             According to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH, 2019), research on PTSD includes gene
             research and brain imaging technologies (Next Steps for PTSD Research section, para. 6).
       For audio or visual works, give the time stamp of the beginning of the source: (Wong, 2020, 34:16).
       83. Source quoted in another source (indirect quotation)

       When a quotation or any information in your source is originally from another source, try to track down the
       original source. If you cannot find the original, use the words "as cited in":

             The research collective, which has studied global health including access to food, sounded the alarm
             about a potential "worldwide food crisis" in the early 2000s (as cited in Sing, 2018, p. 32).
       84. Entire work

       When you cite an entire work, you do not need to give a page number. See Models 79 and 80. When you
       mention an entire website, link to the website directly or give the URL. You do not need to include the website
       in the references list:

             The Department of Veterans Affairs maintains a website for PTSD, which contains resources and help
             for families and healthcare providers as well as veterans (https://www.ptsd.va.gov/).
       85. Personal communication

       Because personal communications such as emails, letters, personal interviews, and the like cannot be found
       by other researchers, cite them in the text only:

             During our interview, Morales explained that she had quit her job to help her children with their
             schooling (personal communication, January 4, 2021).

     APA References

       Each source cited in the text of your paper refers readers to the list of references, a complete list of all the
       sources you quoted, paraphrased, or summarized. Every source cited in the text of your paper must be

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 727

included in the references list, and every source in the references list must be cited in the text of your paper.

Format of the References List (APA)

After the last page of your paper, start a new page with the centered, boldfaced title References at the top.
Create an entry for each source using the following guidelines and examples.

  · Begin each entry at the left margin, and indent subsequent lines one-half inch. (In Microsoft Word, you
      can also highlight the entire page when you are finished and select "Hanging" from the Special options on
      the Indentation section of the Paragraph menu.)

  · Alphabetize the entries according to authors' last names. If two or more authors have the same last name,
      alphabetize by the initials of their first and middle names. Alphabetize sources with unknown authors by
     the first word of the title, excluding a, an, or the.

  · Double-space the entire page.

Core Elements (APA)

Each entry in the list of references consists of core elements:

  · Author. Who is responsible for the work?
  · Date of publication. When was the work published?
  · Title. What is the work called?
  · Publication information. Where can the work be found so that others can consult it?

Sometimes core elements are unknown or missing. In such cases, the entry in the reference list entry must be
adapted:

  · No author? If the source has no known author, cite it by the title. See Models 90 and 98.
  · No date of publication? If the source has no publication date, write n.d. instead of the publication date.

      See Model 110.
  · No title? If the work has no title, put a brief description in square brackets.
  · No publication information? If the source is a personal communication that only you have a record of,

      cite the source in your text, not in the references, because it cannot be retrieved by other readers. See
      "Personal communication" above.

A note on retrieval dates: APA recommends adding a retrieval date for sources that are not archived or are
likely to change over time, such as a developing news story. If you add a retrieval date, place it at the end of the
references entry in this format: "Retrieved April 4, 2020, from https://www.nytimes.com." Ask your instructors
if they require retrieval dates.

Authors (APA)

Give the author's last name, comma, and first and middle initials if available. For works with more than one
author, put a comma and an ampersand (&) before the final author's name, even when there are two authors.

86. One author

Milanovic, B. (2016). Global inequality: A new approach for the age of globalization. Harvard UP.

87. Two authors

Kristoff, N. D., & WuDunn, S. (2009). Half the sky: Turning oppression into opportunity for women worldwide.
    Alfred A. Knopf.

88. Three to twenty authors

Provide last names and initials for up to and including 20 authors.

Barlow, D. H., Durand, V. M., & Hofmann, S. G. (2017). Abnormal psychology: An integrative approach. Cengage
728 Handbook

           Learning.

       For more than 20 authors, include the first 19 authors' names, insert an ellipsis, and then add the final author's
       name.
       89. Work by an organization, a government, a corporation, or an association

       Works published by organizations often have the same author and publisher, which is frequently the title of a
       website. When the author and publisher are not the same, give the author and the title of the website:
       National Institute of Mental Health. (2020). Post-traumatic stress disorder. U.S. Department of Health and

           Human Services, National Institutes of Health. https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/post-
           traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd/index.shtml.
       When the author and the publisher or title of the website are the same, omit the latter:

       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021, February 17). Variants of the virus. https://www.cdc.gov/
           coronavirus/2019-ncov/variants/index.html.

       90. Unknown author

       If no author is given, start with the title:
       The most beautiful battalion in the army. (1968). Grunt magazine, 12-15.
       91. Two or more works by the same author

       List two or more works by the same author (or the same author team listed in the same order) chronologically
       by year in the reference list, with the earliest first. Arrange works published in the same year alphabetically by
       title, placing lowercase letters after the publication dates:
       Bandura, A. (1969). Principles of behavior modification. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
       Bandura, A. (1977a). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84,

           191-215.
       Bandura, A. (1977b). Social learning theory. Prentice Hall.

      Articles in Journals, Magazines, and Newspapers (APA)

       Articles, reviews, editorials, and other short works are published in journals, newspapers, and magazines, and
       they appear in print, on databases, and on websites (though often through a paywall). As a student, you are
       likely to access many articles and other short research sources primarily through databases available through
       your library.
       92. Basic format for an article in an academic journal

       Author's Last Name, Initials. (Date of Publication). Title of article. Title of Journal, Volume (number), Pages. DOI
       or URL.

         · Author. Give the last name, a comma, and the initials of the first name and middle name (if available). Do
             not list an author's professional title, such as Dr. or PhD. End with a period.

         · Date of Publication. In parentheses, give the year of publication, a comma, and the month or season of
             publication. End with a period outside the closing parentheses.

         · Title of the article. Give the full title and any subtitle, separating them with a colon. For articles and book
             chapters, do not use quotation marks or italicize the title. Capitalize only the first word of the title and the
             first word of a subtitle and any proper nouns.

         · Title of the journal. Put the journal title in italics. Capitalize all significant words in the title. End the title
             with a comma.

         · Volume and issue numbers. Italicize the volume number, and follow it with the issue number in

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 729

      parentheses (not italicized). End with a comma.
  · Page numbers. Give inclusive page numbers without p. or pp. End with a period.
  · DOI or URL. Provide a DOI (if available) or a URL. Include "http://," and do not add a period at the end. The

      preferred format for a DOI is "https://doi.org/" followed by the number. You may encounter older formats
      for DOI; if so, change them to this format. If the article is online and does not have a DOI, give the URL
      instead.
93. Article in an academic journal

  · With DOI
     Gawande, A. A. (2017, April). It's time to adopt electronic prescriptions for opioids. Annals of Surgery,
         265(4), 693-94. https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000002133

  · With URL
     Squires, S. (2019). Do generations differ when it comes to green values and products? Electronic Green
         Journal, 42. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/6f91213q
      The online journal in the example numbers issues only, so no volume number or page numbers are given.

  · Without DOI or URL
     Lowther, M. A. (1977, Winter). Career change in mid-life: Its impact on education. Innovator, 8(7), 9-11.

An older journal article you consult in print may not have a DOI. In that case, end with the page numbers.
94. Article in a magazine

For a magazine article you read on a database or online, give the DOI if the article has one; otherwise give the
URL. For a magazine article you consulted in print, end the entry after the page number unless a DOI is
provided.

  · Database
     Sneed, A. (2017, September 19). Giant shape-shifters. Scientific American, 317(4), 20. https://doi.org/
          10.1038/scientificamerican1017-20

  · Print
     Sneed, A. (2017, September 19). Giant shape-shifters. Scientific American, 317(4), 20.

  · Online
     Myszkowski, S. (2018, October 10). On the trail of missing American Indian women. The Atlantic.
          https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2018/10/trail-missing-american-indian-women/571657/

95. Article in a newspaper

For a newspaper article that you read on a database or in print, end the entry after the page numbers. For a
newspaper article that you read online, give the URL instead of page numbers.

  · Database or print
     Krueger, A. (2019, November 27). When mom knows best, on Instagram. The New York Times, B1-B4.

  · Online
      Healy, J. (2021, January 12). Tribal elders are dying from the pandemic, causing a cultural crisis for
         American Indians. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/12/us/tribal-elders-native-
          americans-coronavirus.html
730 Handbook

       96. Blog post

       Blazich, F. A. (2021, February 5). The cold morning of the day after. Smithsonian Voices.
           https://www.smithsonianmag.com/blogs/national-museum-american-history/2021/02/05/cold-morning-
           day-after/

       97. Published interview

       Beard, A. (2013, May). Life's work: An interview with Maya Angelou. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/
           2013/05/maya-angelou

       98. Editorial or letter to the editor

       An editorial may or may not have an author's name attached to it. If it does, give the author's name first. If it
       does not, start with the title. In both situations, add Editorial or Letter to the Editor in square brackets after the
       title.
       For better elections, copy the neighbors [Editorial]. (2021, February 16). The Wall Street Journal.

           https://www.wsj.com/articles/for-better-elections-copy-the-neighbors-11613518448
       99. Review

       To cite a review of a book, film, television show, or other work, begin with the reviewer's last name, followed by
       the first and middle (if any) initials. In parentheses, add the year, followed by the title, month, and day of the
       review. Then in square brackets, add Review of the and the type of work being reviewed, followed by the title
       and the name of the author, director, or creator and their role. Then give the publication in which the review
       appeared, ending with a period, and the URL:
       Girish, D. (2021, February 18). Refocusing the lens on race and gender [Review of the film Test Pattern, by S. M.

           Ford, Dir.]. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/18/movies/test-pattern-review.html

      Books and Parts of Books (APA)

       Use the following guidelines for books and parts of books, such as a selection from an anthology, a chapter in a
       collection, a published conference paper, and so on.
       100. Basic entry for a book

       Author's Last Name, Initials. (Year of Publication). Title of book. Publisher.
         · Author. Give the last name, a comma, and the initials of the first name and middle name (if available). Do
             not list an author's professional title, such as Dr. or PhD. End with a period.
         · Year of publication. In parentheses, give the year of publication, ending with a period outside the closing
             parentheses.
         · Title of the book. Put the book's title in italics. Give the full title and any subtitle, separating them with a
             colon. Capitalize only the first word of the title and the first word of a subtitle and any proper nouns.
         · Publisher. Give the publisher's name as shown on the work, omitting words such as Inc. or Company.

       101. Print book or e-book

       Aronson, L. (2019). Elderhood: Redefining aging, transforming medicine, reimagining life. Bloomsbury
           Publishing.

       Use the same format for an e-book when the content is the same. If you consult a book that has a DOI, provide it
       after the publisher, using the format "https://doi.org/" followed by the number. (If you encounter older formats
       for DOI, change them to this format.) If you read a book online, give the URL.
       102. Book, anthology, or collection with an editor

       Schaefer, C. E., & Reid, S. E. (Eds.). (2001). Game play: Therapeutic use of childhood games (2nd ed.). Wiley.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 731

103. Article or chapter in an edited book, an anthology, or a collection

Burks, H. F. (2001). Using the imagine game as a projective technique. In C. E. Schaefer & S. E. Reid (Eds.),
   Game play: Therapeutic use of childhood games (2nd ed., pp. 39-66). Wiley.

104. Translated or reprinted book

Freud, S. (1950). The interpretation of dreams (A. A. Brill, Trans.). Modern Library. (Original work published
    1900)

105. Revised edition

Strunk, W., Jr., & White, E. B. (2019). The elements of style (4th ed.). Pearson.
106. One volume of a multivolume work

Waldrep, T. (Ed.). (1988). Writers on writing (Vol. 2). Random House.
107. Report or publication by a government agency or other organization

National Institute of Mental Health. (2020). Post-traumatic stress disorder. U.S. Department of Health and
    Human Service, National Institutes of Health.

If you consulted the publication online, include the URL after the publisher. See Model 89.
108. Conference paper

Killi, S., & Morrison, A. (2021). Could the food market pull 3D printing appetites further? In J.D. da Silva
   Bartolo, F. M. da Silva, S. Jaradat, & H. Bartolo (Eds.), Industry 4.0--shaping the future of the digital world:
   Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Sustainable & Smart Manufacturing (pp. 197-203). CRC
    Press.

Web Sources (APA)

Use the following guidelines for works published only online that do not have an overarching publication, such
as a journal, newspaper, or magazine.
109. Basic format for a page or work on a website

Author's Last Name, Initials. (Publication Date). Title of work. Title of website. URL.

  · Author. Give the last name, a comma, and the initials of the first name and middle name (if available). Do
     not list an author's professional title, such as Dr. or PhD. End with a period.

  · Date of publication. In parentheses, give the year of publication and a comma, followed by the month and
      the day. End with a period outside the closing parentheses.

  · Title of the work. Put the title of the work in italics. Give the full title and any subtitle, separating them
      with a colon. Capitalize only the first word of the title and the first word of a subtitle and any proper nouns.

  · Title of the website. Give the title of the website and end with a period. If the author and the website title
      are the same, you can omit the title of the site.

  · URL. Copy and paste the URL from your browser window.
110. Page or work on a website

Shetterly, M. L. (2020, February 24). Katherine Johnson biography. NASA. https://www.nasa.gov/content/
    katherine-johnson-biography

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (n.d.). What is PTSD? National Center for PTSD. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/
    understand/what/index.asp

If the source you are citing has no author listed, start with the title. See Model 90.
732 Handbook

       111. Wiki
       Coronavirus. (2021, February 22). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coronavirus

      Social Media (APA)

       When you cite a social media post as a source, use labels in square brackets to indicate the type of post and
       whether images were attached to it.
       112. Social media post
       Holler, J. [@holleratcha]. (2020, November 2). Everyone get out and vote tomorrow! [Tweet]. Twitter.

           http://twitter.com/holleratcha/status/1270432672544784384
       Death Valley National Park. (2021, February 23). What does it mean to protect something you love? [Images

           attached] [Status update]. Facebook. www.facebook.com/DeathValleyNPS/posts/4108808255810092.
       113. Online forum post
       National Aeronautics and Space Administration [NASA]. (2020, November 14). We're engineers, astronaut

           trainers, and other specialists working to launch humans on commercial spacecraft from U.S. soil! Ask us
           anything about the NASA SpaceX Crew-1 mission! [Online forum post]. Reddit. https://www.reddit.com/r/
           space/comments/jsx91g/were_engineers_astronaut_trainers_and_other/

      Video, Audio, and Other Media Sources (APA)

       When you cite nonprint sources, such as visual and multimedia sources, use labels in square brackets to
       indicate the type of source, such as a film, a TV episode, a song, a painting, a photograph, and so on.
       114. Film
       When you cite a film that you saw in a theater or streamed, you do not need to specify how you watched it.
       Jenkins, B. (Director). (2016). Moonlight [Film]. A24.
       115. Online video
       For an online video, give the name of the person or organization that uploaded it as the author:
       TED. (2017, February 27). Sue Klebold: My son was a Columbine shooter. This is my story [Video]. YouTube.

           https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BXlnrFpCu0c
       116. Television program

         · TV series
             Schur, M., Miner, D., Sackett, M., & Goddard, D. (Executive Producers). (2016-20). The good place [TV
                 series]. Fremulon; 3 Arts Entertainment; Universal Television; NBC.

         · TV episode
             Mande, J. (Writer), & Benz, P. (Director). (2016, September 29). Jason Mendoza (Season 1, Episode 4) [TV
                 series episode]. In M Schur, D. Miner, M. Sackett, & D. Goddard (Executive Producers), The good place.
                 Fremulon; 3 Arts Entertainment; Universal Television; NBC.

       117. Music recording
       For an artist whose music is available only through a website, include the URL. If the artist's music is available
       on multiple platforms, you do not need to specify how you accessed it.

         · Album
             Prince. (1984). Purple rain [Album]. Warner Brothers.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                                                                                                                              Handbook 733

  · Song

     The Supremes. (1964). Baby love [Song]. On Where did our love go. Motown.

118. Radio

Overby, J. (Host). (2021, January 9). The road to higher ground: World music with African roots and more.
    WPR.

119. Podcast

McEvers, K. (Host). (2019, November 7). This is not a joke (Season 9, Episode 9) [Audio podcast episode]. In
   Embedded. NPR.

120. Painting or other visual artwork

For a work of visual art, give the location of the museum or gallery. If you saw the work online, add the URL
after the location:

Rivera, D. (1932-33). Detroit industry murals [Painting]. Detroit Institute of Art, Detroit, MI, United States.

Basquiat, J-M. (1983). Untitled [Painting]. Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, United States.
    https://www.moma.org/collection/works/63997?artist_id=370&page=1&sov_referrer=artist

121. Map, photograph, infographic, or other visual

If the work you consulted names an author, start with the author. If there is no author, start with the title and a
description of the work in square brackets, such as [Map], [Photograph], [Infographic], [Diagram], or another
appropriate descriptor:

Expedition of Lewis and Clark [Map]. (2018). National Park Service. http://nps.gov/subjects/
    travellewisandclark/map.htm

122. Video game, software, or app

Benzies, L., & Sarwar, I. (2017). Grand theft auto V [Video game]. Rockstar Games.
    https://www.rockstargames.com/games/V

APA Paper Format

Follow your instructor's formatting guidelines or those indicated here. For sample papers showing APA paper
format, see this site (https://openstax.org/r/this-site2).

  · Title page. Give the title of the paper in bold, centered. Then, on separate lines and not boldfaced, give
      your name, academic department, name of your college or university, course number and name,
      instructor's name, and the due date, all centered. Repeat only the title on the first page of the text of your
      paper.

  · Margins. Use one-inch margins on all sides.
  · Spacing. Double-space throughout the paper, including the references page.
  · Paragraph format. Indent paragraphs one-half inch.
  · Headings. Give headings for the major sections of your paper, such as Method, Results or Findings, and

     Discussion. Put the headings in bold and center them on the page. Put the next level of headings in bold
      and place them flush left.
  · Page numbers. Start numbering on the title page of your paper and continue to the end of the references
      page. Place page numbers in the upper-right corner.
  · Long quotations. See Quotations for how to cite long quotations.

H 15. Further Reading

MLA Handbook, 8th ed., Modern Language Association of America, 2016.
734 Handbook

       MLA Handbook, 9th ed., Modern Language Association of America, 2020.
       Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association, 7th ed., American Psychological Association,

           2020.

    H 16. Works Cited

       Addams, Jane. Twenty Years at Hull-House. Digital Public Library of America, 1910, dp.la/primary-source-
           sets/theodore-dreiser-s-sister-carrie-and-the-urbanization-of-chicago/.

       Becker, Jo. Forcing the Spring: Inside the Fight for Marriage Equality. Penguin Press, 2014.
       Behn, Aphra. "The Character." The Works of Aphra Behn. Edited by Montague Summers, vol. 6, Project

           Gutenberg, 2014, www.gutenberg.org/files/45777/45777-h/45777-h.htm#Page_113.
       Behn, Aphra. "Love's Power." The Works of Aphra Behn. Edited by Montague Summers, vol. 6, Project

           Gutenberg, 2014, www.gutenberg.org/files/45777/45777-h/45777-h.htm#Page_113.
       Brooks, Gwendolyn. "We Real Cool." Blacks, Third World Press, 1994.
       Da 5 Bloods. Directed by Spike Lee. Netflix, 2020.
       Eisenberg, Richard. "How to Fix Social Security for Vulnerable Americans." Forbes, 5 July 2018,

           www.forbes.com/sites/nextavenue/2018/07/05/how-to-fix-social-security-for-vulnerable-americans/.
       "Environmental Impacts of Natural Gas." Union of Concerned Scientists, 19 June 2014, www.ucsusa.org/

           resources/environmental-impacts-natural-gas.
       Garrison, Dee. Bracing for Armageddon: Why Civil Defense Never Worked. Oxford UP, 2006.
       Hollar-Zwick, Carol. Me, Hemorrhage: Recovery from a Ruptured Arteriovenous Malformation. Amazon, 2020.
       The King James Bible. Project Gutenberg, 1989, www.gutenberg.org/files/10/10-h/

           10-h.htm#The_Gospel_According_to_Saint_Matthew.
       Konish, Lorie. "Some Retirees Get by on Just Social Security. Experts Disagree on How Many." CNBC, 10 Feb.

           2020, www.cnbc.com/2020/02/10/some-retirees-live-on-social-security-experts-disagree-on-how-
           many.html.
       Kristoff, Nicholas D., and Sheryl WuDunn. Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women
           Worldwide. Alfred A. Knopf, 2009.
       Mechling, Elizabeth Walker, and Jay Mechling. "The Campaign for Civil Defense and the Struggle to Naturalize
           the Bomb." Western Journal of Speech Communication, vol. 55, no. 2, Spring 1991, pp. 105-33.
       Myers, David. "The Funds, Friends, and Faith of Happy People." American Psychologist, vol. 55, no. 1, Jan.
           2000, pp. 56-67.
       "This Is Who We Are." U.S. Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Mar. 2019,
           http://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/files/This-is-Who-We-Are.pdf.
       Thomas, Lewis. Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology Watcher. Penguin Books, 1978.
       Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. Project Gutenberg, 1995, http://www.gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/
           205-h.htm.
       University of Agder. "Sorry (not sorry)." YouTube, 6 Feb. 2021, http://www.youtube.com/
           watch?v=Mi3JQa1ynDw.
       Wilkerson, Isabel. Caste: The Origins of Our Discontents. Random House, 2020.

         Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                   Index 735

INDEX

A                                analogy 340, 347, 348, 349,       Between the World and Me 107
                                 353, 365                          bias 43, 110, 169, 173, 235,
AAVE 56, 57                      Analysis 16, 191, 209, 254, 448,  241, 405, 451, 452
ableism 624                      452, 472, 656                     bibliography 240, 438, 453
Abrams 135                       analytical bibliography 464       Bicêtre Hospital 474
Abstract 173, 240, 444           analytical report 233             Biodiversity Institute of Ontario
academia 32, 102                 analyze 238, 540, 552             346
Academic article databases 447   Anaphora 637                      Biographical dictionaries 415
Academic OneFile from Gale       anecdotes 104, 105, 110, 136,     BIOSCAN 346
416                              321                               Black Classic Press 106
Academic Search Complete         angle 133, 136                    Black English Vernacular 56
416, 417                         annotated bibliography 437,       Black Leopard, Red Wolf 208
Academy of Motion Picture Arts   438, 449, 451                     Black Lives Matter 229, 309,
and Sciences 230                 Annotations 438, 452              540, 544
Access Is Love 624               antecedent 667, 695               Black Panther 229, 270
Accurate Quotation 401           Anti-racist 44                    Black Panther Party 106
Achebe 59                        Appearance 646                    BlackLivesMatter 57
Acknowledgments 240              Appendix 240                      Blaut 59
action 654                       applied linguistics 496           blogs 585, 613
active voice 264, 678            argument 23, 304, 452             Blow 304, 306, 317, 321
Ad hominem 269, 276              Aristotle 303, 319, 618, 618      Body 173, 224, 241, 621, 626
Adams 133                        arrangement 540, 552              Bolatagici 582
adjectives 670                   articles 702                      boldface 121
African American Vernacular      Articulation 643                  Boolean operators 448, 453
English (AAVE) 56                Atlantic 105, 106, 107            Borges 549
Agenda 452                       Atlases 415                       Boseman 229
agents 10                        Auburtin 476                      Bouillaud 476
Ain't I a Woman 504              audience 173, 238, 241, 329,      brainstorming 631
Ain't I a Woman: Black Women     348, 357, 378, 584, 618, 626      Brigham Young University 68
and Feminism 504                 Audio 580                         British Grand Slam 25
Alberto 496                      Authority 16                      Broadway 51
Ali 229                          Avengers 206, 229                 Broca 473
allegory 358                                                       Brooks 517, 518
Allusion 309                     B                                 Brownlee 211
Ally 44                                                            Burke 59
Almanacs 415                     Bâ 59                             Burns 570
American Museum of Natural       background 240                    Byrd 152
History 563                      Background information 136,
American Notes for General       621                               C
Circulation 51                   Bait and switch 276
American Psychological           Bandwagon 269, 276, 323, 323      Caesar 103
Association (APA) 450            Bangladesh 551                    Call of the Wild 335
American Rhetoric 637            Bar Charts 484                    caption 602
Americans with Disabilities Act  Beautiful Struggle 107            Case for Reparations 107
624                              Beckett 128                       case study 468
Amplification 332                Best-first order 35               Catalog of U.S. Government
736 Index

Publications 417                  Community Reading Room in         cultural considerations 645
catharsis 104                     Melbourne, Australia 582          cultural critic 271
Causal fallacy 269, 276           Compare and contrast 238,         cultural lens 40
Cause-and-effect 238, 332,        255, 332, 342, 347, 350, 355      cultural system 40
341, 347, 349, 354, 366, 633      Comparison and Contrast 367       culture 11, 16, 38, 45, 64, 105,
causes and effects 255            complex sentence 681              305, 329, 348, 378, 582, 622
Centre for Biodiversity           Composition 552                   Current Biography 415
Genomics 345                      Compound objects 697
Chambers 133, 134                 compound sentence 681             D
channels 581                      Compound subjects 697
Characters 110                    compound-complex sentence         Dance Dance Revolution:
Chavez 135                        682                               Poems 41
Checklist Manifesto: How to Get   Concession or agreement 332       dash 702
Things Right 172                  Conclusion 110, 173, 240, 241,    Data 444, 472
Cherokee 37                       444, 621, 626, 677                databases 413
Chicago 450                       conclusion statement 635          Dawkins 15
Chief Joseph 637                  concrete nouns 678                Deakin University 582
Chopin 508, 508, 510              conditions 10, 10                 Death of Truth: Notes on
Chronemics 646                    Confederacy 544                   Falsehood in the Age of Trump
Chronological order 34, 136,      Conference on College             208
332, 633                          Composition and                   debatable issue 304, 378
Chronos 110                       Communication (CCCC) 56           decolonized self 58
circular argument 323             confirmation bias 170, 235        deductive reasoning 323
Cisneros 128, 653                 Conflict 110, 116                 Definition 189, 251, 321, 343,
Citation 173, 224, 241, 309,      connotations 209, 343             347, 351, 357, 368
383, 438, 453, 626                consequences 341                  delayed-thesis 324
City University of New York 107   Contemporary Authors 415          Demographics 622
Civil Disobedience 521            context 11, 16, 50, 136, 209,     Demonstrative pronouns 669
Civil War 24, 544, 570            378, 621, 656                     DeMuro 211
claim 23, 383, 594                contraction 492                   Demuth 553
clarification 332                 Contrast 355                      Denotation 209, 343
clarity 667                       conventions 579                   Description 321, 347, 357, 438,
classification 342, 347, 350,     coordinating conjunction 681      656
354, 366                          copyright 545                     descriptive annotations 464
Clean Water Act 546               Counterclaim (dissenting          descriptive language 121
climax 109, 110                   opinion) 309                      Desmond 277, 277
Clinton 171, 508, 509, 510        counterclaims 174, 307, 383       Detail 332
CNN 270, 623                      Country Music 570                 Devil You Know: A Black Power
Coates 106, 106, 107              CQ Researcher 417                 Manifesto 307
Code-switching 56                 Crazy Ex-Girlfriend 216           dialects 55, 685
cognitive bias 170, 235           creative nonfiction 104           dialogue 121
College Composition and           credible sources 146              Dickens 51, 120
Communication 56                  CripTheVote 624                   Dictionaries 415
colon 701                         criteria 206, 209                 differences 342
colonized self 58                 Critical race theory 45           Digital Archive of Literacy
color 540, 552                    Critical thinking 174, 241, 309,  Narratives 91, 97
Columbia Encyclopedia 416         620                               digital deserts 610
Comey 208                         criticism 208                     Direct quotation 224, 431
comma splice 683                  Critics 206, 209                  Disability Visibility Project
common knowledge 434              Cultural appropriation 45         (DVP) 624
                                                                    Disability Visibility: First-Person

Access for free at openstax.org.
Stories from the Twenty-First    exclamation point 702                                                   Index 737
Century 624                      execution 30
discrimination 38                executive summary 173, 240       G
Discussion 240                   exigency 149
Distorted Quotation 401          Expert opinion 189, 251, 321     Gale in Context 417
division 342, 347, 350, 355,     exposition 109, 110              Galilei 135
366                              Eye contact 644                  Gandhi 135, 522
doubling 108, 110                                                 Garner 540
Douglass 72                      F                                Gawande 171
Drafting 182, 246                                                 Gender 667
Du Bois 38                       Facebook 343                     General American English 55
Dupree 21                        facial expressions 644           general-interest database 416
Dupuytren 475, 476               Fact 189, 251, 321               Generic nouns 696
                                 Factiva 417                      genre 10, 64, 69, 104, 183, 209,
E                                Facts 169, 174, 233, 234, 241,   233, 272, 304, 378, 505, 579,
                                 407                              618
Ebert 230                        Facts on File World News         genre elements 136
Ebonics 56, 57                   Digest 415                       gerund 697
Educated: A Memoir 68            Factual information 136          Gestural 581
Effect 238, 354                  Fallacies 323                    gestures 644
Ehrenreich 237                   falling action 109, 110          Gianini 27
ellipsis 704                     false consensus effect 235       Giles 545
Ellison 59                       Fandom 209                       Glamour 135
Emancipation Proclamation 24     Farrelly 230                     Glaucon 358, 360
Emotional tax 45                 fear 323                         Goddard 27
empathy 105, 305                 Field notes 136, 143             Golden Globe Awards 230
Emphasis 332                     field observations 136, 472      Gomez 12
Encyclopedias 415                Field research 383, 420          Goodall 549
Endeavour 233                    fieldwork 420                    Goodwin 321
English variety 157              Figurative language 276          Google 417
entertain 620                    film reviews 205                 Google Scholar 417, 444
Environmental Protection         findings 472                     Gore 171
Agency 546, 590                  Fire Shut Up in My Bones 307     Grambling State University 306
epigraph 135                     first-person narrator 124        Gratiolet 476
epistrophe 637                   first-person point of view 104,  Great Lakes Institute at
Equestrian Statue of Theodore    118                              Windsor 345
Roosevelt 559                    Flashback 110                    Great Society 304, 311
Essential information 259, 698   flipbook 613                     Green Book 229
Ethnocentrism 45, 585            Floyd 309, 540                   Grudge 217
ethos 173, 174, 239, 241, 269,   Fluency 644
275, 303, 304, 309, 320, 585,    Focused subject 208              H
589, 619, 626                    Foreshadowing 110, 570
Evaluation 16, 206, 209, 438,    formal 239                       Hamer 135
451, 460, 656                    Format 453                       Hammond World Atlas 415
Evidence 16, 23, 174, 189, 191,  Forster 59                       happening 654
233, 241, 254, 304, 305, 309,    fragmented sentences 120         Harper's Magazine 105
378, 383, 620, 626               Franzen 208                      Hart 11
Ex Libris: 100+ Books to Read    Fraser 559                       Hartsell 162
and Reread 208                   freewrite 22, 35, 50             Harvard Medical School 171
Example 189, 251, 254, 321,      Freud 434                        hasty generalization 323
332                              Fuller 549                       Haunted Mind 125
                                                                  Hawthorne 125
                                                                  Hayden 138
                                                                  headline 602
738 Index                         intention 30, 332                L
                                  Interesting lead 224
Hebert 345, 346                   internal monologue 662           labyrinthine sentences 120
Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies, and  International Barcode of Life    Lahiri 128
Leadership 208                    346                              language 38
Hill 267                          internment camps 162             language acquisition theory
Historical Text Archive 439       interpret 538, 540               496
Hollywood 229                     interpretive communities 506     Language and Linguistics
Hollywood Foreign Press           intersection 38                  Student Conference 489
Association 230                   intersectionality 38, 45         Language bias 405
Homer 618                         Interview 189, 251, 321, 472     Leborgne 473
Homographs 490                    Into the Wild 516                Letter of transmittal 240
Homonyms 490                      Into Thin Air 104                Lewis 138
Homophones 490                    Introduction 174, 221, 240,      Library of Congress 439
Hong 38, 41                       241, 309, 444, 621, 626          Life on the Mississippi 119, 124
House of My Own: Stories from     Iron Man 229                     Light 552
My Life 653                       irregular 694                    limited point of view 125
House on Mango Street 653         Isotonic 370                     Line 552
Howard University 106                                              Line Graphs 484
Huerta 135                        J                                Linguistic text 580, 606
Hyperbole 269, 276                                                 literacy 64
hypertonic 370                    Jackson 508, 509, 509, 510       literacy narrative 64
hypothesis 323                    James 208                        literary allegory 358
hypotonic 370                     Japan 620                        literature review 472
                                  Jefferson 672                    Location 136, 332
I                                 Jemison 233                      logic 323, 340
                                  Jim Crow laws 50, 544            logical fallacies 269
I Am Malala: The Girl Who Stood   Joan of Arc 135                  Logos 241, 269, 275, 303, 304,
Up for Education and Was Shot     Joe 545                          310, 320, 585, 620, 626
by the Taliban 71                 John F. Kennedy Library          London 335
I Have a Dream 621                Foundation 133                   Loyola University 653
Identity 38, 64                   Johnson 304, 311, 321            Lucas 211
idiolect 65                       Journalism, behind Barbed        Ludy 548
imagery 111                       Wire 162
imperative mood 694               journalist's questions 248       M
In Its Immensely Satisfying       Judgment 209
Season Finale, Game of Thrones    Junger 104                       Mailer 208
Became the Show It Had Always     Juxtaposition 540, 552, 570      main clause 681
Tried Not to Be. 206                                               Make It Messy 134
inciting incident 110             K                                Makeba 135
indefinite pronouns 669, 696                                       Mama's Girl 134
Indiana University 623            Kairos 110, 269, 275, 303, 304,  Mandela 135
indicative mood 694               310, 320                         Martin 106, 309
inductive reasoning 323           Kakutani 207                     Marvel Cinematic Universe
Inferences 407                    Keller 59, 83                    (MCU) 229
infinitive 697                    Kennedy 132, 637                 Marvel Comics 270
infographic 560                   Kerlin 352                       Matisse 566
inform 620                        Kinesics 645                     McClure 235
informal 239                      King 121, 522, 621               Media literacy 16
information 538                   Kinkaid 59                       Medium 209, 221
informational text 24             Knocked Up 219                   Meme 16
intellectual property 336         Krakauer 104, 516                memoir 104, 105
Intellectual property laws 545

Access for free at openstax.org.
metaphors 341, 357                 New Republic 41, 270                                                   Index 739
Methods 240, 444, 472              New York Times 208
Microaggression 45                 New York Times Magazine 135     Paraphrase 17, 395, 432, 452,
Microsoft Word 301                 New Yorker 104, 132             453
Midlands Technical College 480     Newsweek 135                    parentheses 702
Midwest American English 55        Nez Percé 637                   participant observer 421
Milgram 469                        Ngozi-Adichie 128               participants 472
Milgram Experiment 468             Nickel and Dimed: On (Not)      Paskin 206, 207
Miller 508, 510, 510               Getting By in America 237       passive voice 264, 678
Minor Feelings: An Asian           non-rhotic 55                   Past tense 119, 158
American Reckoning 41              Nonessential information 259,   Pathos 269, 275, 303, 304, 310,
Minority Achievement               698                             320, 585, 620, 626
Committee (MAC) 270                nonparticipant 421              pattern 542
MIT 107                            nonstandard dialects 56         Pearl Harbor 161, 620
mixed sentence 684                 Nosrat 381, 381                 peer review 194, 444
Möbius strip 542                   Numerical data 276              Peer-reviewed source 453
mockup 596                                                         Pennsylvania Academy of Fine
Mode 209, 595                      O                               Arts 553
Modern Language Association                                        Perfect Storm 104
(MLA) 444, 450                     O'Brien 8                       period 701
modes 580                          O'Keeffe 549, 553               Persona 123
Monthly Catalog of United          Obama 40, 59, 106, 298, 622,    personal narrative 104, 105
States 417                         623                             personal pronouns 668
mood 110, 122, 694                 Oberlin College 41              Personification 269, 276
Mortensen 229                      object distinction 669          perspective 304, 378, 553
Mother Jones 106                   object of the preposition 669   persuade 620
MSNBC 270                          object personal pronoun 669     persuasive arguments 540
MTV News 270                       object personal pronouns 668    Pie Charts 485
multimodal 541, 552, 577, 656      Objections 174                  Pitch 643
                                   objective case 234, 667, 697    plagiarism 173
N                                  Objective stance 174, 241       plagiarize 336
                                   objects 667                     Plain Writing Act of 2010 298,
Naked Raygun 539                   Observation 656                 301
narration 347, 357                 observation environment 472     planning 21, 182, 246
Narrative structure 136            omniscient 125                  Plato 358, 358, 361, 361
National Association for the       On Rhetoric 618                 Plot 110
Advancement of Colored People      Opinions 169, 234               point 191, 254, 357
(NAACP) 46                         Opposing Viewpoints in Context  Point of view 110, 118, 540,
National Council on Disability     from Gale 417                   553, 689
623                                oppression 42                   Politico 50 277
National Geographic Atlas of the   Organization 182, 246, 587      Pollution Prevention (P2) Act
World 415                          Oscars 229                      590
National Public Radio 230          outline 632                     Pop Culture Happy Hour 230
Natural Causes: An Epidemic of                                     position arguments 304, 305
Wellness, the Certainty of Dying,  P                               possessive case 667
and Killing Ourselves to Live                                      possessive pronouns 667
Longer 237                         Paine 672                       predicament 343
Natural History Museum 345         Panisse 381                     premise 323
Neurodiversity 45                  paperwork reduction 298         present tense 119, 158
New Encyclopædia Britannica        Paralanguage 645                preview statement 635
416                                Parallel structure 276          prewriting 21
                                   Parallelism 626, 637, 680       primary data sources 379
740 Index

primary research 144              310, 316, 368, 448, 600, 630,      Rolling Stone 105, 270
primary sources 439, 453          651                                Roosevelt 560, 620
Primary Sources 209               Reed College 237                   Rorick 321
Princeton University 277          References 240                     Royal Shakespeare Company
Problem 174, 356                  Reflect 460, 540, 551              352
Problem-and-solution 343,         reflection 452, 654                run-on sentence 684
347, 350, 367, 633                Reflective writing 654             Rutgers University 41
professional email 143            Reflexive pronouns 669
profile writing 131, 136          refrain 121                        S
Profiles in Courage 133           Refuge 104
Pronouns 667, 670, 695            Refutation of counterclaims        Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat: Mastering
Pronovost 171                     621                                the Elements of Good Cooking
propaganda 323                    regional dialect 56                381
proposal 168                      regular 693                        Samuelsson 134
prototype 599                     remedy 343                         Sarah Lawrence College 41
Proxemics 646                     Repetition 276, 626, 637           Scandal 617
Pugh 545                          reporters' questions 318, 322      Schindler 135
Pulitzer Prize 208                Reporting structure 136            Scholarly journal articles 416
purpose 11, 116, 168, 172, 174,   research 377                       School of Art and Design,
238, 241, 310, 329, 347, 357,     research behaviors 378             University of New South Wales
378, 594, 618, 626, 656           research log 421, 425              582
purpose statement 632             research plan 412                  School of the Art Institute of
                                  Research question 383, 472         Chicago 548
Q                                 Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary    Schumann 496
                                  People Who Rose Up against         script writing 617
qualitative research 468, 472     Tyranny and Injustice 133          Second Life 549
quantitative research 468, 472    resolution 109, 110, 110           second-person narration 125
Queen's University 345            Results 240, 444, 472              second-person point of view
question mark 701                 revelation 110, 110                125, 125
quick write 35                    Reverse chronological order 34     secondary research 146
Quintanilla-Perez 12              Review 182, 209, 246, 444          secondary sources 209, 380,
Quotation 189, 251, 321, 703      review genre 206                   441, 453
                                  revising 123, 182, 246, 329,       segregation 50
R                                 399                                semicolon 701
                                  rhetoric 10, 17, 268, 303, 618     Sensory language 269
Rablin 235                        Rhetorical analysis 272            Sentence combining 92
Rachel Maddow Show 270            Rhetorical appeals 310, 626        sentence fragment 682
Raisin in the Sun 219             Rhetorical devices 626             sequencing 347, 357
Ramachandran 470                  Rhetorical question 276, 310       Sequoyah 37, 50
Random House Encyclopedia         rhetorical situation 10, 17, 67,   Setting 110
416                               77, 183, 246, 272, 347, 378, 578,  sexist language 405
Ratargul 551                      620                                Shakespeare 352
Rate of speech 643                Rhodes Scholarship 171             Shining 587
reasoning 23, 304, 310, 383,      rhotic 55                          Shirley 230
626                               rigorous 444, 453                  Show and tell 136
reasoning strategies 340          Ripert 134                         signal phrase 225, 399, 692
reasons 341                       rising action 109, 110             Signpost language 626
Recap 209, 220                    Roanoke College 617                signposts 635
recommendation 173, 241           Robinson 570                       similarities 342
Recommendations 240               Rockefeller University 237         similes 341, 357
Reconstruction 544                                                   simple sentence 681
recursive 52, 76, 147, 182, 246,

Access for free at openstax.org.
                                                                 Index 741

Siskel 230                      Survey 189, 252, 422, 472        310, 331, 681
slang 685                       Sydney University 345            transitions 117, 606, 621, 635
Slippery slope 269              symbol 540, 552                  Translating Mo'um 41
Smith 270, 617                  Syntax 40                        Truman 24, 25
social dialect 56               Synthesis 174, 241, 425, 453     Trump 509
social justice 311              synthesize 146, 439              Truth 504
Social media 17                                                  Turabian Style 450
Société d'Anthropologie de      T                                Turner 510
Paris 476                                                        Twain 104, 111, 116, 118, 119,
Society of Professional         Table of contents 240            119, 121, 122, 122, 124, 124,
Journalists 271                 Tables 485                       566
Socrates 358, 360, 360, 618     Taft 133                         Twitter 343
Solution 174, 356               Target 498
Sorensen 132                    technical manipulations 545      U
Souls of Black Folk 46          TED Talks 97, 471
Southeastern Conference         Teichner 108                     U.S. Army 637
athletics organization 545      Teigen 508, 509, 510             U.S. Department of
Spatial 580                     tense 119, 692                   Transportation 627
Spatial structure 136           Tertiary sources 443, 453        UCLA 496
Specific details 224            Texas Chainsaw Massacre 217      Unconscious bias 45
Specific evidence 209           textual analysis 502, 503        Underground Railroad 107
Specific topic 224              the personal vs. the universal   Understatement 276
Spectrum 490                    570                              Union 545
Speculation 656                 The Washington Post 207          United Nations 445
Sports Illustrated 105          theme 25, 104, 110, 116          United Shades of America 623
stage directions 646            Thesis 174, 190, 206, 224, 241,  University of Alberta 490
stance 11, 378, 392             310, 348, 357, 383, 453, 621,    University of California 352,
Standard dialect 56             626                              381, 470, 623
Stanford University 171, 504,   thesis statement 190, 241, 252,  University of Cambridge 345,
510                             282, 557, 676                    470
statistics 169, 174, 189, 234,  thesis-first organization 324    University of Central Oklahoma
241, 251, 321                   Thick description 137, 143,      489
storyboard 596                  145                              University of Guelph 345
StoryCorps 624                  Things They Carried 8            University of North Carolina
Style 453                       Third-person narration 124       498
style guide 150                 third-person point of view 196   University of Oxford 171
Subgenre 209                    Thirty two (32) Yolks 134        University of Pennsylvania 270
subject 197, 669, 670           Thomas 323                       University of Windsor 345
subject personal pronouns 668,  Thoreau 516, 521                 USNS Comfort 242
669                             Thunberg 21
subject-verb agreement 196      Time 106, 208                    V
subjective case 667, 697        Times Atlas of the World 415
subjectivity 234                Title page 240                   Vallelonga 230
subjects 667                    Tone 17, 40, 136, 137, 149,      Vaughan 545
subjunctive mood 694            209, 545, 584, 621, 636          verb 197
Subordinate clauses 682         Topic 310, 329, 383, 626         verb tenses 158
Sugarhill Gang 343              Topic sentence 174, 254, 676     verbal fillers 644
Sullivan 83                     Topical structure 137            video 613
Summary 17, 332, 432, 451,      transatlantic slave trade 42     Vietnam War 8, 570
453, 460                        transition statements 635        Viewpoint 40
                                Transitional words or phrases    Visuals 190, 252, 322, 580
                                                                 Vivid details 111
742 Index                         Analytics 417                   World War I 324, 633
                                  Westover 68                     World War II 25, 620, 633
vlog 586                          Who's Who in America 415        Writers' Workshop 41, 653
Vocabulary 40                     Williams 104                    writing process 76
voice 40, 111, 121                Wizards of Waverly Place 12
Volume 643                        Woman's Rights Convention       Y
vulnerability 35                  504
                                  Wong 618, 623                   Yale University 207, 468
W                                 Wordsworth 343                  yearbooks 415
                                  working thesis statement 316    Yes, Chef 134
Walden 516, 521                   Working topic sentence 365      Yousafzai 71
Wall Street Journal 105           Works Cited or References 444   YouTube 643
Wallis 25                         World Almanac and Book of
Washington Monthly 106            Facts 415                       Z
Water Dancer 107                  World Health Organization 171,
Waters 381                        445                             Zapata 135
Watkins 504
We Real Cool 517
Web of Science from Clarivate

Access for free at openstax.org.
