Criminology 1st Edition
CRIMINOLOGY 1ST
EDITION

JEFF BRY
Criminology 1st Edition Copyright © by Jeff Bry is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

Criminology                               ix

Jeff Bry

Part I. one

1. Ch. 1 What is Crime?                   1

Jeff Bry and Brandon Hamann

2. Ch. 2 Criminological Research          26

Jeff Bry

3. Ch. 3 Crime and Punishment - Law and   45

Classical and Neoclassical Schools

Lore Rutz-Burri; Brandon Hamann; and
Jeff Bry

4. Ch. 4 Biological Foundations of Crime  75

Dr. Shereen Hassan; Dan Lett, MA; and
Jeff Bry

5. Ch. 5 Psychological Theories of Crime  115

Curt Sobolewski and Jeff Bry
6. Ch. 6 Social Structure Theories           161

Curt Sobolewski and Jeff Bry

7. Ch. 7 Social Process Theories             190

Dr. Sean Ashley; Curt Sobolewski; Dr.
Zachary Rowan; Brandon Hamann; and
Jeff Bry

8. Ch. 8 Conflict and Feminist Theory        217

Kevin Walby; Kelly Gorkoff; Dr. Rochelle
Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara
Lyons; Dr. Sheri Fabian; and Jeff Bry

9. Ch. 9 Control/Developmental Theories      271

Brian Fedorek and Jeff Bry

10. Ch. 10 The Nature and Extent of Crime    296

Shanell Sanchez and Jeff Bry

11. Ch. 11 Crimes against Persons            318

Jeff Bry

12. Ch. 12 Crimes against Property and Vice  357

Crimes

Jennifer Moreno and Jeff Bry

13. Ch. 13 Cybercrime, White-Collar Crime,   395

Organized Crime

Jennifer Moreno and Jeff Bry
14. Ch.14 Terrorism and Massive Impact  435

Crimes

Curt Sobolewski and Jeff Bry

15. Ch. 15 Treatment and Prevention of  479

Crime

Jeff Bry

Sources                                 517
             CRIMINOLOGY | IX

CRIMINOLOGY

   Jeff Bry

                   Criminology OER Textbook
                               Jeff Bry

     Minnesota State Community and Technical College
   This textbook is designed as a free, open-source textbook to
be used, shared, and changed as the user sees fit. Many outside
OER sources and authors have been cited in this textbook,
these resources are also open-source resources. Based on the
different sources used, some chapters may be formatted
somewhat differently from others. The "voice" of each chapter
may be somewhat different also because of different authors
being used. Personally, I think this adds to the textbook and
provides a more open perspective on the material.
   To add insight and substance to this text I have included
"In a Student's Own Words" which will provide student
perspectives to the content. My hope and intent are to add
detail and examples to other students, using my students from
prior semesters as a resource. No attributions have been given
to the students, course or semester to avoid identifying
individual students. The two prompts below will let the reader
know the content is student created.
X | CRIMINOLOGY

   My educational background is in sociology, criminal justice/
criminology and psychology. I teach full-time at Minnesota
State Community and Technical College in Moorhead
Minnesota. I have been teaching criminology for over 20 years.
Criminology is one of my favorite subjects to teach, discuss
and consider.

   I have been teaching full-time since 2004 and teaching at the
college and university level since 2000. My professional work
experience includes working as a juvenile probation officer,
also work in management level positions in non-profits and
county government, before taking a full-time teaching
position. From my experience in research and professionally,
I will occasionally add comments "from the author's
                                                                    CRIMINOLOGY | XI

perspective" to provide examples, insight and discussion. The
prompt below will let the reader know the material is from my
perspective.

   Please feel free to use the textbook as you see fit. Any
thoughts for updates, comments or discussions can be shared
with me at jeff.bry@minnesota.edu.
XII | CRIMINOLOGY
                                                          CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 1

1.

CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

   Jeff Bry and Brandon Hamann

                     Criminology and Crime
                   Nature of Crime and Deviance
   Introduction
   What is crime? Crime is a phenomenon most people find
compelling, however most possibly repugnant and
disconcerting. To understand crime, one must understand
social norms. Social norms are the behaviors and standards
that are "acceptable" in society. Social norms are taught and
learned at the societal level, they are taught in a variety of ways
and in a variety of societal levels (interpersonally, peer groups,
parents, television, etc.).
   Violations of social norms are generally minor, receiving
minor responses from others. An example of a violation of
a social norm may be a young child picking his or her nose.
As they are doing so, their parents, siblings or other people
around the child may admonish them for this behavior; telling
them it is "gross", "rude" or inappropriate. By learning about
social norms one becomes able to predict which behaviors are
acceptable and which may receive a negative consequence. As
2 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

social norms are learned, the perspective of socialization also
becomes important. Socialization refers to the term
sociologists use to describe life-long learning for humans. We
are socialized from birth until death, being shown and told
about the environment and world around us. For example,
in some cultures people are taught to eat their meals with
their hands, in other cultures eating with your hands is taboo.
Learning by watching others, also by being told what is
appropriate or inappropriate is how we develop as human
beings.

   As we are taught social norms, we learn some behaviors that
may be viewed as deviant. Deviant behaviors are behaviors
that violate social norms, although not all violations of social
norms will necessarily be considered deviant. The example of
a young child picking his or her nose may be excused because
of their age; the same act by a teenager or adult may be viewed
as deviant. Underage drinking may be viewed as deviant by
many adults, but it may be accepted by many teenagers and
those young adults who are not quite of legal drinking age. In
much of the world prostitution is viewed as deviant, but it is
not illegal in all nations or even states in the United States.

   Some social norms become more substantial as things one
should not do, for example taking someone else's property,
drinking and driving, or extreme cases such as murder. While
these behaviors may be viewed negatively as norms, they are
examples of behaviors that have evolved in society to be
criminalized. The process of criminalizing something
                                                          CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 3

essentially makes the act illegal in that society. What is
criminalized with vary from nation to nation, even state to
state in the United States. While recreational marijuana may
be legal in the state of Minnesota, it is illegal in the states of
North Dakota and Wisconsin. As these states share a border,
this may cause concern/issues as a substance may be viewed
and responded to very differently in each state.

   Picture Sourced from pixabay https://pixabay.com/vectors/
search/

   As behavior becomes criminalized, we shift in focus from
social norms to crime. A crime is an act that violates a legal
statute or statutory law. Statues are a formal written
response by a legal authority, such as a state legislature or the
United States Congress. Statutory law is the actual language
of a law written by a governing body with the power to make
and enforce a law. Crime and deviance are related but are very
4 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

different terms. A crime is a violation of a law, deviance is a
violation of a social norm. While a person who commits crimes
will more than likely be viewed as deviant, violating most social
norms is not necessarily a crime.

   Picture souce pixabay.com
   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What is crime? How would you describe crime,
how much an issue/problem is crime?
   "So, I like the sociological perspective of separating
out law and anti-social behavior, and I personally tend
to think about crime in a more philosophical sense than
purely legal one, which is largely why am taking
criminology instead of criminal justice--I didn't want to
take the theoretical underpinnings of crime for granted.
I believe, as well, that a large portion of what is deemed
"criminal" in the United States, is political as well:
                                                          CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 5

mandatory minimums and petty drug laws supplying
laborers for the prison industrial complex, for example."

   What is Criminology?
   Criminology is the study and scientific pursuit of the
nature, extent, cause and control of criminal behavior.
Criminology is a diverse, multi-discipline approach to
understanding the nature of crime. Criminal behavior is a
complex term, it may evolve and change as society and social
norms change. An example of work a Criminologist may
conduct includes researching change in offending behavior
after some societal or legal action or change. For example, have
certain crimes increased or decreased as marijuana has been
legalized in certain states? Or have there been increases in
drunk driving and assault cases as certain municipalities have
extended bar closure times from 1 am to 2 am? Or do states
that allow open carry or conceal and carry gun laws have more
accidental shootings? More murders by guns? Is our criminal
justice system biased against the poor, against racial and ethnic
minorities? These and a multitude of other questions and
issues are examined and addressed by Criminologists.
   Social and Public Policy are programs or plans generally
enacted by a government, to address and/or alleviate problems
in society. There are a variety of social and public policy
programs designed to address or reduce a social problem. For
example, homelessness is a chronic problem facing our society.
Drug use and abuse is a chronic problem facing our society.
Crime is a chronic problem facing our society. As decision
6 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

makers deal with the consequences of a variety of social
problems, social and public policy steps are taken to address
those issues. Examples include the "War on Drugs", "War on
Terrorism" and a variety of programmatic and policy steps that
are designed to reduce (or address) some issue in society.

   Criminology as Theory
   One important aspect of criminology is criminological
theory. Criminologists produce and conduct research from a
theoretical perspective. Theory is a clearly stated proposition
that identifies and posits relationships in a causal manner
regarding events and aspects under study. What this means in
real world terms varies, but generally theory is conducted to
better understand phenomena in the natural world.
   The study of human beings is very complex; people may
be somewhat predictable but generally not as straight forward
to study as other items in the natural world. Water boils at
a temperature of 212 degrees Fahrenheit, water freezes at a
temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit, this happens
consistently in the natural world. People are not this
consistent, what may motivate one person's behavior may or
may not motivate other people's behavior. As an example, I
am fearful of snakes. If someone brought a large snake into
my presence, I would be fearful and recoil as it was brought
closer to me. Other people would respond in a similar way to
me, but many would be happy to see the snake, perhaps even
want to handle/hold the snake! This is a simple (and somewhat
silly) example, but it demonstrates issues with prediction of
                                                          CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 7

behavior in people. Guessing who is or is not afraid of snakes
would be difficult, although one could ask people how they
feel about snakes and how they would respond to interactions
with snakes.

   Many criminologists search for a general theory to explain
crime and criminal behavior. General theories are theories that
can be applied to large swaths of society/humanity and are
generalized regarding crime. As human behavior and responses
are difficult to predict, a general theory of crime seems to be
a challenging undertaking. However various theorists attempt
to identify some general characteristics that results in higher
risk of crime. An example is Gottfredson and Hirchi's Low
Self-Control Theory (1990), which takes the perspective
that people with low self-control commit more crime because
of a master trait of low self-control. This theory is often
referred to as the general theory of crime, as it approaches
crime from a master trait or characteristic that increases the
probability of crime.

   One other approach to theory is to integrate theory.
Integrated theories are argued to be more complete, as
theorists take a multi-disciplinary approach to studying
behavior and specifically crime. In opposition to a general
theory, integrated theories attempt to blend or incorporate a
variety of approaches or disciplines into their study. For
example, a promising area in the study of crime is a biological
approach to crime. Researching how genetics,
neurotransmitter functioning, brain development etc. may
8 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

affect aspects of behavior and crime. One other promising area
includes developmental psychology approaches, especially
prenatally and in early development to predict behavior and
possibly future crime. Sociological theories have long been
dominant in criminology, having good explanatory power
regarding crime and behavior. The issue with integrated
theories is to blend or integrate each of these distinct
disciplines and approaches into one clearly defined and
designed theory. As you can imagine this is difficult, especially
blending all the different approaches and variables one must
consider. Integration of theory seems to be a promising
approach to criminological theory.

   Schools of Criminology
   Criminology is housed in two primary schools, the
Classical School and the Positivist School. The positivist
school branches out to into the Chicago School and Conflict
Criminology.
   The Classical School (18th Century) is the earlier of the
two schools, founding fathers include Jeremy Bentham and
Cesare Beccaria. The philosophy of the Classical School
includes the perspective of rationality in terms of crime and
punishments. From a Classical School perspective, people
(including offenders) are rational players that make decisions
based upon pain and pleasure principles. The Classical School
also takes a position of utilitarianism, or the assumption that
people respond better to fairness, equity and balance. If the
punishment for a crime is excessive and/or is too severe for
                                                          CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 9

the crime committed, people will not accept that punishment
or that law. In that perspective, putting someone to death for
speeding would more than likely seem very excessive to most
people, so people would not see the utility in that law. Giving
someone a ticket and a fine for speeding may be reasonable,
certainly more reasonable than giving someone the death
penalty.

   Classical theorists take the position that crime control
occurs when the penalty for crime makes crime unreasonable,
or by minimizing the reward for completing a crime. If you
make an item more difficult to take or steal or minimize the
reward or gain for taking the item, this approach should reduce
crime. Classical School also takes the position of free will, or
the belief that people have the freedom to make a choice
regarding situations. An example of free will is the perspective
of deterrence. Deterrence is the perspective that people will
not commit an act because the risk is too great, or the reward is
too low. A modern-day example of deterrence may be drinking
and driving. As drinking and driving laws and sanctions have
become more strict and severe, less people (potentially) make
the choice to drink and drive. It is far more common for young
people today to take a taxi or Uber when they are out
consuming alcohol, arguably because of the potential
consequences of getting caught drinking and driving.

   The Positivist School takes the position that crime can
be studied and "solved" using the scientific method. So, in
essence, positivism takes the position that crime is something
10 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

to be studied, much like any other phenomenon in the natural
world. The Positivist School takes two approaches to crime:

   Human behavior is a function of internal and external
forces (such as war, famine, social class, wealth, biological,
environmental, psychological).

   Use of the scientific method to solve social problems.
Utilization of research methods, hypothesis testing, etc.
Problems can be examined and addressed using empirical
research.

   Early Positivist School research was not very scientific, valid
or empirically sound. They are mentioned and discussed as
examples of where we have come versus where we are going as
a discipline. Early approaches to the Positivist School include:

   Physiognomists: The study of facial features of criminals
to determine if their facial features lead to antisocial/criminal
behavior. Examples include distance between nose, eyes, ears,
etc.

   Phrenologists: The study of the human skull, including
bumps and indentations in the skull. Meaning was derived
from these bumps and indentations, perception that there was
behavioral meaning in these bumps and indentations.
                                                         CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 11

   0

   Picture source pixabay https://pixabay.com/vectors/search/
   Both of these early Positivist School attempts were
discredited, especially as the biological sciences improved in
explanatory power and consistency. However, people may still
assume there is "something" to each of these approaches, they
have been soundly discredited by modern science.
   Biological Determinism (Cesare Lombroso) is a concept
utilized by Lombroso and others to determine who may be
a criminal. Lombroso was a medical doctor, he completed
12 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

research on cadavers of executed criminals and of people who
were mentally ill. He came to believe these people were
"atavists", or biological throwbacks in human evolution.
These atavists were more "animal like" than other humans,
they were also Born Criminals in Lombroso's estimation. This
assumption led Lombroso to believe criminality and mental
illness was inherited, especially since these atavists were less
intelligent and more impulsive and aggressive than non-
Atavist humans.

   The claims of Lombroso (and others) are no longer taken
very seriously, especially the perspective that all humans are not
equally and/or biologically the same. Modern criminologists
also point out the potential racial and ethnic discrimination
that may result from perspectives of atavism. Disciplines such
as sociology have been utilized to demonstrate the power of the
environment and social structure versus individual biology.

   Social Positivism or more commonly known as the
Sociological Perspective began to gain power in the mid
1700's to late 1800's. This was during a time of great
population increase, growth of cities and examinations of
social problems that arose from these changes. As cities such
as Paris, London, New York and Philadelphia began to
industrialize and grow, there were new issues to address as
towns turned into large cities.

   Early contributors to social positivism include Adolphe
Quetelet, who began the Cartographic school of
criminology. He used basic and rudimentary statistics to
                                                        CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 13

uncover trends in crime, many of which are still examined
today. For example, seasons of the year, climate, population
and the poverty level of a neighborhood may be predictors of
an increase or decrease in crime. There are generally increases
in certain types of crime during warmer or colder seasons,
also crime tends to increase as population of a city or town
increases.

   Emile Durkheim is a substantial contributor to the field
of sociology, he also made contributions to the study of crime
and criminal behavior. Durkheim believed crime is a normal
phenomenon, crime has always existed since the beginning of
civilization. As people began to live in close proximity, some
people would potentially victimize other people. Durkheim
felt there would always be something considered a "crime", as
society grows and evolved different behaviors may be viewed as
criminal. Durkheim also argued people's differing "wants and
need" created opportunities for crime. He also believed crime
may bring out needed change in society (civil and women's
rights movements) and may also demonstrate the "Ills" or
problems in a society.

   The Chicago School (Park and Burgess) started a new
perspective on studying crime in society. The Chicago School
concentrated on urbanization and so called "natural
influences" which may increase or decrease crime in certain
areas of a city. Proponents of The Chicago School believed
crime is a function of neighborhoods and environments, not
about the individuals living in those neighborhoods and
14 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

environments. Below is a piece on The Chicago School and

social ecology perspectives from Brandon Hamonn's Criminal

Justice  textbook.         https://louis.pressbooks.pub/

criminaljustice/chapter/2-7-the-chicago-school-of-

criminological-theory/

The Biological Positivists looked at criminality through the

lens of scientific experimentation, attempting to explain

causation through physical traits. The Psychological Positivists

tried to explain criminality as a product of mental illness and

looked at individual and group personality traits as possible

causes. The Chicago School, however, took things to a

different level. They saw criminal behavior as a product of

one's environment, developing the concept of human ecology

- the study of the relationship between humans and their

environment. The Chicago School was so named because the

theorists who produced the groundbreaking research into how

humans interacted with their surroundings and how that

interaction affected behavior came from the University of

Chicago in the 1920s and 1930s (Fedorek, 2019).
                                                        CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 15

                                            Figure 2.7: Dr. Robert
E. Park

   Robert E. Park[1] (1864-1944), an American urban
sociologist, spent his professional career studying human
behavior as it pertained to human ecology, race relations,
assimilation, migratory patterns, and social structure. Along
with his colleagues, noted sociologists Ernest W. Burgess, and
R. D. McKenzie, Robert Park published the book The City
(1925), which conceptualized a city much like a living
organism, with interactions between humans and their natural
environments acting in both a shared and conflicting manner
depending on where a group lived within the city.

   It was Burgess, however, who proposed the Concentric
Zone Theory, which stated that a city's design was conducive
to criminal behavior within its "Zone of Transition" between
16 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

the areas where people worked and where they lived (Burgess,
1925). In simpler terms, a city could be seen much like a target
board, with multiple concentric circles surrounding a central
hub (see Figure 2.8). Each inner and outer circle was specific
to its municipal function (manufacturing, city business,
residential, etc.).

                                                       Figure 3.8:
Burgess's Concentric Zone Model Source: Burgess, E. W.
(1925). The Growth of the City: An Introduction to a
Research Project. In R. E. Park, E. W. Burgess, & R. D.
McKenzie, The City (pp. 47-62). Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.

   Two students of Burgess and Park at the University of
Chicago expanded on the concept of the Concentric Zone
Model and developed their own theory. Clifford Shaw and
                                                         CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 17

Henry McKay (1942) noticed that within the different zones
of transition, there were inequalities between them. Some had
infrastructure that was in disrepair, some had differing
demographics, and some had socioeconomic differences
(Fedorek, 2019). What all this meant was that not every
residential zone was the same, had the same type of people
living in them, or had the same level of income, education,
or employment opportunities. Those zones that were more
educated, had higher levels of income, and fewer buildings in
bad shape, were more organized than those zones with less
educated people of color, higher unemployment, lower
income, and more "broken windows" (more on this later).

   What does all this have to do with crime? According to
Shaw and McKay, a great deal. If one community is
experiencing a high level of "social disorganization" due to
inequalities experienced because of low employment, or low
education opportunities, or even the inability to communicate
within its own neighborhoods because the population is
unable to understand each other, then there can theoretically
be a higher chance for criminality within that specific zone
of transition. Likewise, the opposite is also theoretically true:
If a zone of transition is highly organized, the population is
cohesive and stable with higher levels of income, education,
and a low unemployment rate, the chances of there being a
high crime rate is relatively low.
18 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

             Figure 2.9: Dr. Edwin Sutherland
   Dr. Edwin Sutherland[2] (1883-1950) was an American
Sociologist considered to be one of the most influential
criminologists of his time. He is credited with the development
and definition of Differential Association Theory of
Criminality and coined the term "White-Collar Crime" in
1939. Dr. Sutherland earned his PhD in Sociology from the
University of Chicago in 1913 and went on to establish the
Bloomington School of Criminology at Indiana University.
According to Dr. Sutherland's Differential Association
Theory, criminality was a learned behavior, commonly
brought on by groups of individuals who had splintered from
the main group and had deviated in their behaviors from the
accepted norms (see Section 2.10.3 for further analysis).
Sutherland also was instrumental in combating the established
notion that criminal behavior was relegated to only the poor
and lower class of society. He famously theorized that the
upper classes were more than capable of criminal behavior and
were not immune to the deviance of criminality just because
of their social status. Furthermore, Dr. Sutherland's "White-
Collar Crime" theory purported that businesses frequently
engaged in criminal activity for the benefit of their practice as
an expression of their business (Sutherland, 1940).
                                                        CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 19

Robert E. Park (1864-1944) - American urban sociologist
who studied human ecology. 

   Dr. Edwin Sutherland (1883-1950) - American Sociologist
who is credited with the development of Differential
Association Theory and "White-Collar Crime" theory. 

   Psychological Positivism examines the psychological
aspects of crime and criminal behavior. Early pioneers include
Sigmund Freud who examined behavior from the perspective
of psychoanalysis. Freud proposed that maladjustments in the
individual psychological state may stem from personal
experiences, especially during childhood. Freud also argued
that criminal behavior was a form of mental illness.
https://louis.pressbooks.pub/criminaljustice/chapter/
2-6-the-positivist-school-of-criminological-theory/
20 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

   Figure 2.5: Dr. Sigmund Freud (1856-1939)
   Best known for his work in the psychological field of
personality disorders, Austrian neurologist and psychoanalyst
Sigmund Freud[3] (1856-1939) postulated that the human
mind was separated into three distinct psychoanalytical types:
the Id, the Ego, and the Superego. Through his studies,
Freud theorized that criminal behavior was a product of
mental illness, motivated by unconscious psychosexual
conflict (Fitzpatrick, 1976). The Id, according to Freud, was
the part of the human mind that controlled basic animalistic
urges (fear, anger, compulsion, etc.) and was the most basic
and earliest to develop, usually in childhood. The Ego helped
to control the Id and began to mature as the child matured
and learned from its surroundings and its parents what was
good behavior and what was bad behavior. The Superego kept
everything from going bonkers, hopefully.
                                                         CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 21

   Figure 2.6: Drs. Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck
   Then there were those who wanted to study personality
traits of criminals. Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck[4] (1950),
Polish-American criminologists, determined that there was no
such thing as a criminal personality, but that there were some
personality traits that were clustered together (Fedorek, 2019).
Their work included a longitudinal study - a type of
experiment that takes a long time to complete, usually decades
- of 1000 teenage juvenile delinquent and non-delinquent
boys to try and understand the causes of criminal behavior in
youths. Their findings resulted in no explanations as to the
causation of delinquent behavior. However, there were
correlations in certain personality types and criminal behavior:
22 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

low self-control, low empathy, and an inability to learn from
punishment (Fedorek, 2019).

Charles Darwin (1809-1882) - British naturalist who is
considered the founder of evolutionary science. 

   Cesare Lombroso (1835-1909) - Italian phrenologist,
physician, and founder of the Italian School of Criminology.


   Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) - Austrian neurologist who
developed psychoanalysis. 

   Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck - Polish-American
criminologists who studied personality traits in criminals. 

   Conflict Criminology developed out of the writings of
Karl Marx. Karl Marx didn't discuss crime in substantial detail,
but he was fairly clear crime is result of oppressive labor
conditions, alienation and misery resulting from capitalism.
Marx argued capitalism and the concentration on economics
created conflict in society, as what is good for the owner is
generally not good for the workers. Workers and owners are in
a state of class conflict according to Marx, which in a capitalist
system generally benefits the owners (capitalists).

   Viewpoints of Crime
   There are competing perspectives or viewpoints of crime in
the fields of criminal justice and criminology. Each of these
perspectives views and treats crime a bit differently, with
                                                        CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 23

different perspectives on causation, responses and so forth. We
will discuss each of these viewpoints of crime.

   The Consensus View of Crime views crime as acts that
are viewed negatively to most people in society. From this
perspective, substantive criminal law (written law) is created
to define what is a crime and what the sanctions will be for
specific crimes. These laws should reflect the wants and needs
of society; however not all laws will be agreed upon or accepted
by all groups in society.

   The Conflict View of Crime views crime and criminal
law as being created to protect the interests of the wealthy and
powerful. From this perspective, the law and development of
crime is created to protect and advance the interests of societies
elite and to advance their social status. The law protects the
"haves" from the "have-nots", the law and criminal justice
system is generally viewed as targeting the lower classes.

   The Interactionists View of Crime uses the sociological
concepts of Symbolic Interactionism to describe and explain
the law and crime. From this perspective people will act and
react in accordance with their perception of reality and
meaning. People observe the manner in which people react to
behaviors and learn to interpret symbols and meanings. For
example, underage drinking is an offense, but it is viewed as
normal to most people and is supported by teenagers and
college age students. On the other hand, sex offenders (even
minor sex offenders) are assigned a label that may make life
more difficult for them in terms of finding employment, a
24 | CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME?

place to live, acceptance by others and so forth. The labels
assigned to people may matter depending on what they are
caught doing, but also whether or not they get caught in the
first place. Symbolic interactionists would also argue crime has
no meaning UNLESS meaning is assigned to the behavior.

   Summary
   As you can see from Ch. 1, criminology is a complex and
detailed discipline with many parts working together. There
are many aspects of criminology to discuss and share,
including research, the legal system, nature and extent of
crime, theory and prevention and treatment. We will discuss
these topics and others through the accompanying chapters.
   References
   2.6 The Positivist School of Criminological Theory
Copyright © 2024 by Brandon Hamann is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
   2.7 The Chicago School of Criminological Theory
Copyright © 2024 by Brandon Hamann is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
   Lombroso, Cesare. Criminal Man. Translated by Mary
Gibson and Nicole Hahn Rafter, Duke University Press, 2006.
   Durkheim, Émile. The Division of Labor in Society.
Translated by W. D. Halls, Free Press, 1984.
   Durkheim, Émile. Rules of Sociological Method.
Translated by W. D. Halls, Free Press, 1982.
                                                        CH. 1 WHAT IS CRIME? | 25

   Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A General
Theory of Crime. Stanford University Press.
26 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

2.

CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL
RESEARCH

   Jeff Bry

                                Ch. 2
                      Criminological Research
   This chapter will examine aspects of criminological research
and a discussion of the United States legal system. This
discussion will concentrate on an overview of research
approaches and methods, also some of the steps a
criminologist may take in conducting research. The discussion
of the legal system will also provide an overview of the system,
including various important components.
   Criminological Research
   Criminological research is very similar to research
conducted in other social science arenas; however, the focus
is generally on crime and related issues. The use of research
methods and the scientific method are the same, with some
variation based upon topics and questions to be asked/
answered.
   Most research begins with a hypothesis, or a testable
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 27

"educated guess" about predicted outcomes concerning two
or more variables. A very common hypothesis I hear about
juvenile delinquency is a negative or dysfunctional home
environment of the juvenile. While this answer may sound
like a good one (or a possibility) it does not make it true. As
a professor once stated to me "that sounds like an empirical
question!" I think what he meant was that is a good thought,
but we need to research the question to draw empirical
conclusions about the topic.

   Empirical evidence is the evidence your gain from direct
experience, scientifically gathered data, and/or
experimentation. Empirical evidence is something you can
experience, not a matter of a "gut instinct" or a hunch. So, if
you are interested in researching a topic such as why a young
person becomes delinquent, you would first need to develop a
hypothesis, then conduct research to support (or refute) your
hypothesis.

   An important aspect of any empirical research is the use of
the scientific method. As studying people is a very complex
due to the nature of aspects of environment, age, culture, race,
religion and a multitude of other variables that make up
human beings, special care needs to be given in research design.
The scientific method includes scholarly research involving
asking questions, researching existing sources, forming a
hypothesis, designing and conducting a study and drawing
conclusion.
28 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

   Picture from Openstax Sociology 3e Attribution 4.0
International (CC BY 4.0).

   Step one of the scientific method is to ask questions.
Questions should be focused and narrow enough to study
within a specific setting or environment, such as a specific time
frame or location. The questions should also be broad enough
to have value for others outside of the study participants or can
inform people outside of the study environments. Most of us
ask many questions in the course of our daily lives, we probably
also wonder about a variety of topics issues around us. I am
guessing there are issues you wonder about in terms of human
behavior, why do (or don't) people do certain things.

   Step two of the scientific method is to research existing
sources, called a literature review. The internet age has made
this step far more accessible to more people, but also has
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 29

blurred many lines regarding what a quality source is and/or
research. If one were to google search almost any topic, there
are plenty of material that is either not what you are looking
for, or potentially not a credible source. Credible sources
include published sources, such as peer reviewed journals,
government or official statistics. There may be other quality
sources of information, but it is important to be wary of
opinion or bias in online sources.

Picture source pixabay https://pixabay.com/vectors/search/
   Step three of the scientific method is to form a hypothesis.

A hypothesis is a testable educated guess about predicted
outcomes between two or more variables. In the 1950's and
1960's researchers began to question the health effects of
30 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

smoking cigarettes. As a hypothesis, researchers made an
educated guess (hypothesis) smoking cigarettes increases
certain health deficits such as cancer, heart disease and stroke.

   In creating a hypothesis, two distinct types of variables are
used, independent and dependent variables. Independent
variables are the variables that cause change in the dependent
variables. For example, smoking cigarettes regarding health
risks, or perhaps poor school outcomes and attendance as
independent variables of juvenile delinquency. Dependent
variables are the outcome variables, or the variables effected or
changed by the independent variables. Examples of dependent
variables could be health effects (heart disease, stroke and
certain forms of cancer) from smoking; or factors such as
juvenile delinquency which could be affected by a variety of
independent variables (poor school performance, poor school
attendance, negative home environment, etc.). Keep in mind
these variables are used to test your hypothesis, they may not
provide sufficient evidence to support your hypothesis.
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 31

   Picture source pixabay https://pixabay.com/vectors/search/
   Step four of the scientific method is to design and
conduct a study. Research design is generally complex; taking
into account various aspects of the study you would like to
conduct, including the population you would like to study
and the methods to study them. Various methods can be
employed in criminological research; surveys, interviews, focus
groups, content analysis and secondary data analysis. Deciding
which method would best fit your research focus, also viability
of the method (can you get access to your population, for
example people that are incarcerated?) are important
considerations in conducting research.
   When beginning a research project it is important to begin
with an Operational definition. An operational definition
allows the researcher to develop concrete steps to define the
concept and steps needed to objectively measure it. An
32 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

important consideration in this process is how you will
approach the research. A high percentage of research is
conducted as cross-sectional research, which is research
conducted at one time and place. For example, providing a
survey to measure how effective substance abusers feel a
treatment approach is. Longitudinal research is conducted
over periods of time to measure the long-term effectiveness or
outcome of a program, issue or treatment.

   As smoking may take years to see the effects and most early
research was cross-sectional (short, one time and one place
research), findings did not support the hypothesis smoking
increases health risks or deficits. As researchers began to study
smoking longitudinally (studied the same smokers for 5, 10,
15, 20 years) they began to see more negative effects of
smoking.

   In conducting research, it is important to design a study
with high reliability and validity. Reliability is how likely the
results of a research study will be replicated if the study is
reproduced. Validity refers to how well the study measures
what it was designed to measure.

   Step five is to draw conclusions. As you conduct your study
and tabulate and analyze results, you are then able to draw
conclusions about your study. Does your research support
your hypothesis, or does the research not support your
hypothesis? If your research does not support your hypothesis,
there are certain issues to consider.

   -Could your hypothesis be wrong?
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 33

   -Did your study have a faulty design?
   -Did something occur you didn't account for in your study
design?
   If your study does not support your hypothesis, this is not
necessarily a failure. As in the example of research of smokers,
a failed study may provide the researcher with insight about
what to do next time. Or other researchers may gain insight
and ideas from the study, which may result in additional
research with a slightly different research design which may
find support for the initial hypothesis.
   Step six is to report your findings. Generally, the goal for
most researchers is to be published in a peer-reviewed journal.
However, some researchers will conduct research for
government agencies or other groups that would like to learn
more about a topic or issue.
   Methods and Tools of Research:
   Primary Source Collection involves the researchers
gaining data directly, including methods such as surveys,
interviews, observations, etc. Primary source collection is
literally going to the "source" to learn more about issues
directly. Examples could be interviewing people in certain
types of treatment programs to ask about effectiveness.
Observational research could be used to measure
environmental or procedural issues. For example, in
researching drug courts, part of the research is to observe the
procedures of the drug court itself and how it operates.
   Secondary Source Collection involves analyzing existing
34 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

data collected by others but applying new interpretations. This
approach may include conducting secondary data analysis of
existing data such as the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports
(UCR). https://www.fbi.gov/how-we-can-help-you/more-
fbi-services-and-information/ucr

   Tools and perspectives of research include the following
definitions, explaining some of the concepts mentioned in the
previous paragraphs.

   Picture source is pixabay https://pixabay.com/vectors/
search/

   Surveys collect data from subjects who respond to a series
of questions about behaviors and opinions, often in the form
of a questionnaire.

   Population is a defined group serving as the subject of a
study.
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 35

   Samples are small, manageable number of subjects that
represent the population.

   A Random Sample is a study's participants being
randomly selected to serve as a representation of a larger
population.

   Quantitative Data represents research collected in
numerical form that can be counted.

   Qualitative Data comprises information that is subjective
and often based on what is seen in a natural setting.

   An Interview is a one-on-one conversation between the
researcher and the subject.

   A Focus Group is a small group interview between the
researcher and a small group of subjects.

   Observational Research is research conducted in an
environment, with the intention of gaining insight into the
workings of the environment.
36 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

   Picture source is pixabay https://pixabay.com/vectors/
search/

   Picture from pixabay.com
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 37

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: How would a researcher minimize bias?
   "I feel like most researchers would pick a research topic
that they have a genuine interest in solving, which you
would think would result in them choosing a general
population to conduct their experiments or researching
in an unbiased form. Bias is a common thing that is
in every aspect of life, especially among scientists and
scholars conducting experiments or journals. Overalla
way to reduce bias in criminological research is just fact-
checking a peer's work. Also, only recording the results as
is on your own work is important."
   Field Research is a form of primary data collection. The
researcher gathers data from the natural environment, without
the need for a lab experiment or survey. Examples of field
research in criminology may include spending time in
locations with known criminal elements or high levels of
criminal behavior. It may also include spending time in
treatment facilities, jails, prisons or other facilities and/or
institutions to understand the working of the environment.
Field research generally does have a plan or objective, the
researcher does not just "wander" or walk into a facility or
institution without a plan. However, in field research the
approach may be less formal, also lacking certain elements of
control.
   A method of field research is participant observation. In
this approach, the researcher becomes a part of the group to
38 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

gain an "insider" perspective from the viewpoint of a
participant. This allows the researcher to see the issue from the
vantage point of the subject.

   Storyfrom Author Jeff Bry:
   "My first experience with field research was a study
I conducted at a juvenile correctional facility. I was a
23 year old graduate student, fairly inexperienced with
facilities and their rules My intention was to observe
behavior of the staff and students in the facility, in an
attempt to measure how therapeutic the interactions and
environment were. My intention was to spend a day in
each of the four cottages of the facility. I was briefed
by the facility director before I began my research; he
informed me if there was an altercation between students
or a student attempted to abscond from the facility, I
would be expected to assist the staff. This was shocking
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 39

to me but was a part of the culture and expectations of
the facility. Thank goodness nothing happened!"

   Secondary data analysis uses data collected by others but
allows new interpretations to this data. An example of
secondary data analysis includes nonreactive research.
Nonreactive research does not include direct contact with
subjects and will not alter or influence the subject's behavior.
Content analysis is another form of secondary data analysis.
Content analysis applies a systematic approach to record and
value information taken from secondary data as it relates to
the study at hand. An example of content analysis could be
reviewing anti-gang literature to analyze the message and
intention of the program or approach.

   In terms of conducting criminological research, much of
what we can share and discuss comes in terms of correlations.
Correlations are when a change in one variable coincides with
a change in another variable, but does not necessarily indicate
causation. For example, there is a correlation between cigarette
smoking and certain types of illness and disease. If every
cigarette smoker got cancer, that would be causation. For most
criminological research, we speak mainly in correlations. There
is a correlation between school performance and delinquency,
but that does not imply every student who struggles in school
becomes delinquent.

   Sociologist Max Weber discussed the importance of being
neutral in conducting your research. Any bias brought into
a research study will skew the results of the study. The
40 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

perspective of value neutrality and remaining objective is

extremely important in any type of research. Value neutrality

is to remain impartial while collecting, analyzing and reporting

results. This can be difficult, especially if your area of research

is one that is very important to you or you have a personal

connection to. Often researchers will conduct research in

teams to minimize the risk of bias in research.

Aspects of ethical considerations in research is borrowed

from Openstax sociology 3e, https://openstax.org/details/

books/introduction-sociology-3e         Attribution  4.0

International (CC BY 4.0).

Ethical Considerations in Research:

When conducting research, there are ethical considerations

to your research. Each social science discipline has similar

ethical standards, below are the American Sociological

Associations (ASA) standards.

Maintain objectivity and integrity in research.

Respect subjects' rights to privacy and dignity.

Protect subject from personal harm.

Preserve confidentially.

Seek informed consent.

Acknowledge collaboration and assistance.

Disclose sources of financial support.

The Tuskegee Experiment, were ethics considered?
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 41

   Study included 600 African American men, including 399
diagnosed with syphilis who were never informed of their
diagnosis.

   Penicillin was distributed in the 1940s as the cure for the
disease, but the men were not given the treatment because the
objective of the study was to see "how untreated syphilis would
affect the African American male" (Caplan, 2007). They were
told the study would last 6 months; it lasted 40 years.

   As a result, dozens of the men died directly of syphilis,
dozens also infected their significant others, and at leas 19
children were born with congenital syphilis.

   Stanford Prison Experiment, were ethics considered?
42 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

   Stanford Prison Experiment: Students played roles of
incarcerated people and correctional officers. Some played
their roles too well. Several later admitted they were coached or
weren't acting authentically.

   Milgram's experiment, were ethics considered?

   Students believed they were administering pain to subjects,
                                      CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH | 43

and were pressured to keep administering the pain. This led to
extreme distress among some of the research subjects.

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: How do you view criminological research?
   "There are numerous research methods/designs that
one can choose regardless of what field one is conducting
the research in. Criminology, sociology, psychology,
economics are all roots that branch into each other and
in some ways, your research will include pieces from each
discipline. I don't believe that one can truly study the
behavior of an individual without each of these
disciplines playing a role as our subject is the totality of
his or her past and present life experiences.
   Prior to beginning any research projectone must
determine what method will theyuse to collect the data
needed to address the question they are asking. Will they
base their research on a qualitative, quantitative or a
combination of both? What is the question they want
44 | CH. 2 CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH

addressed? What is the theory? What is the hypothesis

that will form the foundation of the study?

Below are the steps that I would follow when preparing

to conduct research.

Define the research question. What is the topic iam

interested in? What is the question or problem that I

want to address?

I would beingby conducting a review of literature to

determine what the current knowledge base is on my

topic? Do I notice gaps in the information? In the

statistic reviewed?This step can help when I develop my

hypothesis."

Summary:

This chapter gives a snapshot of some of the important

aspects of criminological research. As research can be

complicated (and perhaps uninteresting) for many students,

my hope and intention is to provide a digestible amount of

content which will allow the student to better understand how

and why research is conducted.

References

Aspects of ethical considerations in research is borrowed

from Openstax sociology 3e, https://openstax.org/details/

books/introduction-sociology-3e     Attribution  4.0

International (CC BY 4.0).

Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A General

Theory of Crime. Stanford University Press.
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 45

3.

CH. 3 CRIME AND
PUNISHMENT - LAW
AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL
SCHOOLS

   Lore Rutz-Burri; Brandon Hamann; and Jeff
   Bry

                                Ch. 3
                 Classical and Neoclassical Schools

                            Lore Ritz-Burri
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
8-1-functions-and-limitations-of-law/.
   3.1. Functions and Limitations of Law Copyright © 2019
by Lore Rutz-Burri is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.
   Law is a formal means of social control. Society uses laws
(rules designed to control citizen's behaviors) so that these
behaviors will conform to societal norms, cultures, mores,
46 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

traditions, and expectations. Because courts must interpret
and enforce these rules, laws differ from many other forms of
social control. Both formal and informal social control have
the capacity to change behavior. Informal social control, such
as social media (including Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter)
has a tremendous impact on what people wear, how they
think, how they speak, what people value, and perhaps how
they vote. Social media's impact on human behavior cannot
be overstated, but because these informal controls are largely
unenforceable through the courts as they are not considered
the law.

   Laws and legal rules promote social control by resolving
basic value conflicts, settling individual disputes, and making
rules that even our rulers must follow. Kerper (1979)
recognized the advantages of law in fostering social control and
identified four major limitations of the law. First, she noted,
the law often cannot gain community support without
support of other social institutions. [1] (Consider, for example,
the United States Supreme Court (Court) case of Brown v.
Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 347 U.S. 483 (1954),
which declared racially segregated schools unconstitutional.
The decision was largely unpopular in the southern states,
and many had decided to not follow the Court's holding.
Ultimately, the Court had to call in the National Guard to
enforce its decision requiring schools to be integrated.)
Second, even with community support, the law cannot compel
certain types of conduct contrary to human nature. Third, the
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 47

law's resolution of disputes is dependent upon a complicated
and expensive fact-finding process. Finally, the law changes
slowly. [2]

   Lippman (2015) also noted that the law does not always
achieve its purposes of social control, dispute resolution, and
social change, but rather can harm society. He refers to this as
the "dysfunctions of law."

   "Law does not always protect individuals and result in
beneficial social progress. Law can be used to repress
individuals and limit their rights. The respect that is accorded
to the legal system can mask the dysfunctional role of the law.
Dysfunctional means that the law is promoting inequality or
serving the interests of a small number of individuals rather
than promoting the welfare of society or is impeding the
enjoyment of human rights." [3]
48 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

   Similarly, Lawrence Friedman has identified several
dysfunctions of law: legal actions may be used to harass
individuals or to gain revenge rather than redress a legal wrong;
the law may reflect biases and prejudices or reflect the interest
of powerful economic interests; the law may be used by
totalitarian regimes as an instrument of repression; the law can
be too rigid because it is based on a clear set of rules that don't
always fit neatly (for example, Friedman notes that the rules
of self-defense do not apply in situations in which battered
women use force to repel consistent abuse because of the law's
requirement that the threat be immediate); the law may be
slow to change because of its reliance on precedent (he also
notes that judges are also concerned about maintaining respect
for the law and hesitate to introduce change that society is
not ready to accept); that the law denies equal access to justice
because of inability to pay for legal services; that courts are
reluctant to second-guess the decisions of political decision-
makers, particularly in times of war and crisis; that reliance
on law and courts can discourage democratic political activism
because Individuals and groups, when they look to courts to
decide issues, divert energy from lobbying the legislature and
from building political coalitions for elections; and finally, that
law may impede social change because it may limit the ability
of individuals to use the law to vindicate their rights and
liberties. [4]

   Kerper, H. B. (1979). Introduction to the criminal justice
system (2nd ed.). West Publishing Company. 
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 49

   Kerper, H. B. (1979). Introduction to the criminal justice
system (2nd ed., pp. 11). West Publishing Company. 

   Lippman, M. R. (2015). Law and society (pp. 11).
Thousand Oaks, CA : SAGE Publications. 

   Lippman, M. R. (2015). Law and society (pp. 25).
Thousand Oaks, CA : SAGE Publications. 

   History of Law
   The Code of Hammurabi (1755-1750 BC) is one of the
earliest written legal codes. This code defined crimes and
sanctions for crimes. Sanctions were often quite punitive, an
"eye for an eye" types of sanctions. Punishments were often
very severe, with retribution and "revenge" seeking of the
victims being a focal concern. There was an attempt to control
and regulate outcomes, especially to keep the victims and/or
their family from taking the law into their own hands.
Sanctions varied by societal position, the elite received lessor
sanctions, a low-born person could be killed.
   Mosaic Code were the laws given to the Israelites by God.
Includes and begins with the Ten Commandments, shall not
steal, kill, commit adulty etc. Evidence these were folkways that
became laws.
   Twelve Tables were the laws of ancient Rome. Laws were
created under pressure of lower classes to stop injustice of
upper classes. Laws dealt with personal debt, property and
family issues, mainly everyday issues.
   Many laws were lost during the "dark ages" (500 - 1000
AD). Informal laws took the place of formal laws in Europe.
50 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

Development of the Wergild system, which means "man's
price." This system defined what the offender would owe the
victim or victim's family. Guilt in this system was determined
using:

   Compurgation - The accused would swear an oath of
innocence, backed by a credible group of "oathhelpers."
Powerful people could use their wealth and power to find
suitable oathhelpers.

   Ordeal - Based upon "divine intervention," the accused
would be drowned, dunked in boiling water or lead, or
burned. If they were innocent, divine forces would intervene.

   Trial by combat was often used as well, either the accused
would fight or a "champion" would fight in their place.
Benefitted those with military training, wealth and power.

   Law in Feudal England (1066) was an attempt to bring
about formal law. This law was still fairly informal, still
mainly benefitted the powerful.

   Contributions included dividing counties into shires,
which were overseen by a Shire Reeve (Sherrif).

   Shire Reeve enforced the laws but also protected nobility
and their property.

   A court system was developed; which included a court to
hear petty cases (Hundred-Gemot), a court to hear more
serious cases that was usually held by local landholders (Shire-
Gemot) and a court to hear cases of a religious nature.

   English Common Law was an attempt to create a legal
system "common" to all citizens. This system made substantial
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 51

improvements and increased consistency in court hearings and
outcomes. Common law was not perfect but gave more rights
and a sense of justice to "common" people. Much like the
modern legal system, wealth and power can make a difference
in dispositional outcomes of defendants.

   Present English system of laws. Came into existence during
the reign of Henry II (1154 - 1189).

   Referred to as "common" because the law applied to all
subjects.

   Centralized power to king, weakened local court systems in
favor of formal "unbiased" court systems.

   Developed traveling or "circuit judges", hearing cases
previously heard by local courts.

   Use of "juries", or local landholders to decide facts in cases,
investigate crimes, give testimony, accuse offenders.

   Eventually turned to "Royal Prosecutors" to present
evidence and bring forward witnesses to the trial.

   The Magna Carta was enacted on June 15th, 1215 by King
John of England. The Magna Carta began as a means to ensure
feudal rights, in essence to ensure the king would not encroach
on landowner's rights. The Magna Carta also was initially
written to provide guarantees for the freedom of the church.

   In 1613 the Magna Carta was interpreted to support
individual rights and trials by jury. It was decreed the Magna
Carta ensured basic liberties to all English citizens and found
the English Parliament could not retract these rights. The
Magna Carta also evolved the concept of due process
52 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

protection for all citizens, not just for royalty or elites. From
this perspective the Magna Carta has been viewed as the
"foundation stone" of our current rights and liberties.

   Modern law in the United States has borrowed heavily from
English Common Law. The work of the Enlightenment (Age
of Reason) during the 17th and 18th centuries were
instrumental to modern rights and protections (due process,
etc.) of modern United States law.

   Classical School
   Mauri Matsuda
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/criminologyintro/
chapter/3-4-classical-school-of-criminology/
   "Classic School of Criminology" by Mauri Matsuda is
licensed under CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 3.3 Elevation, section and plan of Jeremy Bentham's
Panopticon prison, executed by Reveley, 1791 is in the Public
domain.
   During the Age of Enlightenment, many philosophers
argued that humans were rational, thinking agents who
possessed free will. In this manner, they went against the
church that claimed crime was often the result of demonic
possession. This new approach brought about a significant
paradigm shift in the way people looked at criminal behavior.
If crime was the result of rational decision making, it would
not be solved through religious intervention or sham trials in
which the offender could feel confident the jury would not
convict them. A better, more reliable system needed to be
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 53

developed. It is in this setting the classical school of
criminology was established.

   The classical school of criminology is not a physical place,
but instead refers to the roots of criminological thought in the
writings of the philosophers and social reformers who became
prominent during the Age of Enlightenment. This was when
western societies were revolutionized by the emergence of new
institutions of governance and old traditions were replaced by
modern values and ideals. These theorists shared the belief
that humans were reasoning beings who engaged in conscious
deliberation--in other words, their decision-making was
guided by self-interest, rationality (weighing the costs and
benefits of various courses of action), and hedonism (the desire
to maximize pleasure and minimize pain). The classical school
of criminology also focused on methods of making the
administration of justice, including criminal sanctions, more
rational, effective, and efficient.

   One of the most important concepts to arise from the Age
of Enlightenment was the notion of the social contract. The
social contract is the voluntary relinquishment of some
freedoms in exchange for order and safety provided by a
sovereign, or ruler. It is the social contract that allows the state
to govern over individuals. Simply put, we agree to follow laws
(giving up our freedom to do whatever we want) for the overall
benefit of society. When someone breaks one of the agreed
upon laws, they are essentially breaking the social contract.

   Cesare Beccaria
54 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

   One of the most well-known writers from the era of classical
criminology is Cesare Beccaria. Beccaria was an Italian
nobleman who belonged to an academic salon, or literary
society, that debated issues of the day and sought to bring
about legal reforms. In 1764, Beccaria published his treatise On
Crimes and Punishments, in which he advocated for reform
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 55

of the criminal justice system, including the elimination of
torture, secret accusations, and the death penalty. One of
Beccaria's most important contributions to criminology,
however, was his argument that punishment should be
utilitarian--in other words, that punishment should serve the
greater good rather than simply exact revenge or administer
justice.

   More specifically, Beccaria believed that the purpose of
punishment was to deter crime, an argument that forms the
foundation of deterrence theory. Deterrence relies on the fear
of punishment to prevent individuals from engaging in
criminal behavior. It is one of several utilitarian purposes of
punishment, along with rehabilitation (reforming the
offender) and incapacitation (physically preventing an
offender from committing further offenses by isolating them
from society). Utilitarian purposes of punishment contrast
with symbolic purposes such as retributive justice (revenge),
or the idea that punishment should be inflicted in service of
vengeance, often referred to as an "eye for an eye", or someone
getting their "just desserts."

   Beccaria begins by describing the social contract. He
claimed punishments are necessary to restrain the innate
passions of all individuals, who would otherwise commit
crimes to serve their own interests. Punishment, therefore, was
necessary to defend the social contract. Any punishment
inflicted without a clear utilitarian purpose, however, was
considered by Beccaria to be tyrannical.
56 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

   Beccaria also highlighted the importance of a system of
checks and balances. He argued for the separation of powers
between executive, legislative, and judicial branches of
government. He stressed that the role of judges should be to
determine guilt or innocence and apply sentences within the
penalties established by the law. Furthermore, he emphasized
the importance of codifying laws into written statutes and
ensuring the general population could read and comprehend
the laws in order to follow them. Ultimately, Beccaria believed
that the surest way to prevent crimes was through educating
the population. He claimed that as societies increased the
literacy and education of their citizens, punishments would
naturally become less severe, as more educated citizens would
require lesser punishments to be deterred from crime.

   The core of Beccaria's arguments about deterrence is that
punishment should be (1) swift, (2) certain, and (3)
proportionate to the crime. The immediate nature of
punishment (the swiftness) was important for at least two
reasons. First, Beccaria believed that deterrence would be more
likely if the punishment was paired more closely in time with
the commission of crime. Second, Beccaria believed that the
anticipation of punishment was nearly as painful as the
punishment itself. Thus, a long drawn-out trial period was
considered cruel (or as stated by former United Kingdom
Prime Minister William E. Gladstone, "Justice delayed is
justice denied."). Beccaria also considered the certainty of
punishment the most important element of deterrence--far
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 57

more important than the severity of punishment. Someone
had to believe they really would be punished if they were
caught, and that there was no longer a chance the jury would
let them off the hook to prove a point. Several research studies
show that the actual or perceived certainty of punishment is
a greater deterrent to crime than the actual or perceived
severity of punishment.

   Finally, Beccaria believed that the severity of punishment
should be scaled to the severity of the crime. To make the
punishment proportionate to the crime, one must consider
the level of harm, or injury, to society. In other words, the
punishment should "fit" the crime. At the same time, Beccaria
also believed that a punishment should only be as severe as
necessary to achieve the purpose of deterring crime. Anything
beyond that was considered cruel.

   Beccaria made many other arguments and his treatise was
widely influential to the founding fathers of the United States.
He is credited with helping to rationalize systems of justice and
law and eliminating barbaric practices. His most important
ideas can be condensed with the final entry in his treatise:

   That a punishment may not be an act of violence, of one,
or of many against a private member of society, it should be
public, immediate and necessary; the least possible in the case
given; proportioned to the crime, and determined by the laws.

   Like other classical thinkers of the Enlightenment era,
Beccaria assumed individuals had free will. He also believed
that humans were rational, self-interested actors who sought
58 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

to maximize their pleasure and minimize their pain. These
assumptions imply that Beccaria held a specific theory of
human (and criminal) behavior. However, Beccaria's goal was
to advocate change, specifically social and legal reforms rather
than develop a theory of human behavior.

   Jeremy Bentham
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 59

   Following the popularity of Beccaria's work in 1764,
English philosopher Jeremy Bentham published his own
proposal for how to address crime and punishment based on
the new perspective promoted by Beccaria. In An Introduction
to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1789), Bentham
outlined his own utilitarian philosophy, arguing that "nature
has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign
masters, pain and pleasure." According to Bentham, humans
were indulgent and self-interested, but also rational. In other
words, they would seek whatever promoted their pleasure and
prevented their pain. The sources of

   pleasure/pain were broad; they could be physical (e.g.,
violence), political (e.g., legal sanctions), moral (e.g.,
reputation), or religious (e.g., damnation). These ideas would
form the basis for Bentham's theory to understand and explain
human behavior.

   Bentham's ideas of people choosing actions based on
pleasure and pain principles.
60 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

   The purpose of law is to promote and produce happiness in
the community it serves.

   Punishment is potentially harmful, it is justified according
to Bentham if it prevents more harm than it causes. (Social
Contract)

   Main objectives of punishment
   1. To prevent all criminal offenses
   2. When it cannot prevent a crime, to convince the offender
to commit a less serious crime.
   3. To ensure that a criminal uses no more force than is
necessary.
   4. To prevent crime as cheaply as possible (deterrence).
   Torture and Cruel and Unusual punishment are
problematic.
   Elimination of torture, use of "loss of liberty" as an
appropriate sanction

   Picture source from pixabay.com
   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: Describe and discuss the classical school and its
foundations and principles.
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 61

   Some of the major tenets of the Classical School were
punishment, due process, human rights, and rationality.
Two people who had big impacts on the Classical School
and had large inputs on it as well were Cesare Beccaria
and Jeremy Bentham. Cesare came up with the idea that
punishment was to deter people from committing
crimes, he was huge on crime prevention, and believed
that punishment for a crime should happened right after
the crime is committed in order for it to have it's effect
and that their punishment should be equivalent to the
crime they committed (stealing should be punished by
paying a fine for example). Then there was Jeremy
Bentham who believed that humans are fundamentally
rational and that criminals will weigh in their minds
the difference of pain and pleasure before committing
the crime and the only way to prevent crime it for the
punishment to outweigh the pleasure. The Classical
School has definitely set so many precedents for our
modern society and how criminology works today. For
example it created due process of law so that each citizen
has a right to a fair trial and is innocent till proven
guilty and it put in place a code of ethics (that has most
likely been revised) that our judicial system still uses.
Without the classical school our judicial system and how
criminology works today would be far behind compared
to were we are now.

   The Classical School has been a significant driving force
62 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

in criminology and criminological theory. The legacy of the
Classical School includes the following five principles.

   People are rational. As humans have free will, the actions
that take are a matter of choice.

   People are motivated by pleasure and pain and reward and
punishment as determinants of choice. People are hedonistic.

   Punishment is a deterrent to unwanted and/or unlawful
behavior and deterrence is the best justification for
punishment.

   Cooperation of people is what makes society possible.
Therefore, society is obligated to respect the rights of citizens
and their autonomy. Human rights are expected and
individual rights are crucial, as long these rights do not
endanger others or the common good.

   Due Process. A person accused of a crime should be viewed
as innocent until proven guilty. The person should not be
punished until proven guilty.
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 63

   Neoclassical School
   Brandon Hamon
   https://louis.pressbooks.pub/criminaljustice/chapter/
2-8-the-neoclassical-school-of-criminological-theory/
   2.8 The Neoclassical School of Criminological Theory
Copyright © 2024 by Brandon Hamann is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
   Classical ideology was the dominant paradigm for over a
century, but it was eventually replaced by positivist approaches
that seek to identify causes of criminal behavior. However,
classical ideology had a resurgence during the 1970s in the
United States. Neoclassical theory recognizes people
64 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

experience punishments differently, and a person's
environment, psychology, and other conditions can contribute
to crime as well (age, sex, race, etc.). Therefore, crime is a choice
based on context. Many crime-prevention efforts used classical
and neoclassical premises to focus on "what works" in
preventing crime instead of focusing on why people commit
criminal acts. While the Classical School saw punishment as
a means to an end regarding criminal behavior, Neoclassical
theory saw punishment more as a deterrent to future crime,
using it to prevent more than to punish. Through the
development of specific policies - which will be covered in a
later section - Neoclassical theorists sought to change behavior
through laws and sanctions (Fedorek, 2019).

                         Figure

2.10: Dr. Derek Cornish
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 65

                                    Figure 2.11: Dr. Ronald
Clarke

   Drs. Cornish and Clarke[1] (1986) proposed a theory of
causation that took a risk/reward approach to criminal
behavior. They claimed that offenders "rationally" calculated
the costs and benefits of their actions, and if the rewards
outweigh the risk, then a crime would most certainly be
committed. They didn't propose that all criminals were
thinking rationally or that they were at all rational individuals
outright - criminals aren't having philosophical debates over
the moral and ethical complexities of their actions - but if
the situation presented itself, and the circumstances were right,
then the probability of a criminal act were much higher.

   Cohen and Felson[2](1979) claimed that changes in
modern society and environment made it easier for crime to
take place. Since the conclusion of World War II, more people
had entered the workforce, and more people spent time away
from home. This meant that more and more people became
accustomed to the routine of their lives doing menial tasks
66 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

in the view of the public eye (running errands, paying bills,
making groceries, fueling the car, etc.). Cohen and Felson
stated that three things must converge in time and space for
a crime to be committed - a motivated offender, a suitable
target, and the absence of a capable guardian. In theory, the
activities of our routines make us more prone to being the
victim of a criminal act.

Cornish and Clarke (1986) - proposed a theory of causation
based on Rational Choice and risk/reward. 

   Cohen and Felson (1979) - proposed a theory of causation
based on the routine of people as changes in modern society
forced them out of their private lives and into the public view.


   Rational choice theory is consistent with deterrence
theory and deals more explicitly with the various factors that
govern human decision-making. Specifically, it is the idea that
people will think through a cost-benefit analysis (weighing the
pros and cons) to determine whether a particular option is
right for them. Legal consequences are only one of many
considerations that individuals might think about as they
decide whether or not to consider committing a crime. The
potential benefits--or pleasures--of crime might outweigh
any potential legal consequences, especially if the risk of
getting caught is low.
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 67

   Rational choice theory is, therefore, a broader framework
than the notion of deterrence because it emphasizes the
negative consequences (both formal and informal) of crime as
well as the potential benefits. For example, if someone is very
hungry and has no money to buy food, they may see a chance
to steal from a market when no one is looking. They weigh
the options of remaining hungry versus committing theft with
only a small chance of getting caught. In this case, they
rationally determine the benefits are worth the minimal risk
for potential negative consequences.

   Critiques of rational choice theory include an
assumption that crime may be situational, as in some people
may not really have a "choice" in their decision to commit
a crime. Examples could include people who are under the
influence of chemicals (drugs or alcohol for example), or
people who are in a heightened state of emotions, angst or
anger. While a rational choice theorist may argue people still
make a decision to commit an act (and a crime), these are
limitations to this theory and perspective. Other social factors
such as poverty, environmental issues and poor socialization
are also not considered in detail with rational choice theory.
68 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

   Picture is sourced from pixabay.com

   Picture sourced from Pixabay.com
   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What do you think of the "rationality" aspect of
crime and rational choice theory?
   Rational choice theory, just as with all other theories,
will have its weak spots and criticism. Kitteringham and
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 69

Fennelly (2020) noted that one of the criticisms of this
theory is the..."assumption that criminals are rational in
their decision-making" (para. 1). However, as Mr. Bry
noted in his video what if someone were under the
influence of a substance, whether legal or illegal? These
individuals may not have the same ability to make
rational choices as someone whose thinking and decision
making abilities have not been impacted.

   In addition to laying out this theory of human behavior,
Bentham is well-known for a model of prison design referred
to as the Panopticon (figure 3.3). The term "panopticon"
literally translates to "all seeing" and is a bit of a mind trick
devised by Bentham to keep people in order. Afterall, if the
hungry person believes someone is watching them, they will
not steal any food.
70 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

The Panopticon created by Bentham is a prison that is built on
this very notion. It was designed so that a central tower was
surrounded by a larger circle of cells. The central tower would
house correctional authorities from where they see into every
cell at all times and view residents of the prison constantly. The
trick was that the people in the cells could not see into the
tower, so they never actually knew whether they were being
watched. They simply assumed they were being monitored at
all times and behaved accordingly.

   Bentham believed that this kind of design would lower the
likelihood of misbehavior in prisons because residents would
always feel under surveillance. This is consistent with his
emphasis on rational choice. By raising the risk of
apprehension, the design of the Panopticon could affect the
decision-making of inmates.

   Figure 3.3 Elevation, section and plan of Jeremy Bentham's
Panopticon prison, executed by Reveley, 1791.

   Although the philosophers who belong to the classical
school of criminology made many assumptions about human
nature and criminal behavior--for example, that humans had
free will, were rational and hedonistic--their ideas preceded
modern social scientific methods for testing these ideas. In
addition, these texts were published as philosophical treatises
focused on legal and social reform, and included no attempt
at scientific explanation. Thus, the ideas in Beccaria's and
Bentham's writings were not considered actual criminological
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 71

theories until nearly 200 years later when researchers began
testing them empirically.

   Punishment and Neoclassical School
   Punishment is a central element of classical and neoclassical
perspectives. Punishment is valued for its deterrent effects in
classical school, while neoclassical thought includes aspects of
retribution and in some cases the utility of punishment as
revenge.
   From a neoclassical perspective, if someone makes a rational
decision to violate the law they then deserve to be punished.
This logic stems from the belief that the offender knowingly
acted and committed the crime, even though they were well
aware of the consequences for the crime prior to committing
the act. While there are certainly criticisms to each of these
perspectives, the neoclassical school tends to view punishment
as being retribution or revenge for an offender's actions. Keep
in mind the punishment should fit the crime, so for minor
offenses an apology or a minor punishment is sufficient. For
more significant offenses, from a neoclassical perspective there
should be more significant punishment.
   The just desserts model takes the perspective of the sayings
"an eye for an eye" or "he or she got what they deserved." Just
desserts takes the position offenders get when they deserve.
The more severe and egregious the offense, the more severe
the punishment. The just desserts model is cited back to the
Old Testament of the bible, in terms of "an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth." From this perspective punishment (even
72 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

the death penalty, or life in prison) is what the offender
deserves based upon the crimes they have committed.
Certainly, the punishment must meet the offense, so less severe
offenses receive a less stringent punishment.

   The deterrence model is also a foundation of modern
neoclassical perspectives. In modern times, deterrence has been
separated into specific and general deterrence. Specific
deterrence is deterrence designed to influence or affect an
offender from conducting repeat crime. General deterrence
is deterrence designed to influence or affect the general public
from committing the same offense as a specific offender who
is being punished. For deterrence to be effective, it is generally
believed it needs to be swift, certain and severe to counteract
the draw of committing crimes. As the criminal justice and
court systems appear to be overwhelmed, this process is rarely
as swift as advocates would hope. According to advocates of
deterrence theory, this reduces the effectiveness of
punishment.

   Capital Punishment uses aspects of deterrence, just
        CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
                                                  NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS | 73

desserts and retribution to make its case for crime control.
As the individual's life is the most precious item they possess,
the argument is the potential to lose this life will make them
reconsider committing serious crimes. As the punishment
needs to fit the crime, advocates of the death penalty generally
argue the death penalty be reserved for the most serious
offenses. Opponents to the death penalty make the argument
that the death penalty is unfair and unjust, the poor and racial
minorities are more likely to receive the death penalty.
Opponents also argue the death penalty does not deter crime
and that human life is sacred and should not be taken away by
governmental entities.

   The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU, 2012)
https://www.aclu.org/documents/case-against-death-penalty
takes the position the death penalty is not effective as a
deterrent, also it is cost prohibitive. The ACLU cites the cost
to put someone to death far exceeds the cost to pay for life in
prison. The argument is also made that life in prison is a more
severe sentence than the death penalty. The ACLU also argues
too often innocent people are put to death. The ACLU points
out that since 1973 to 2012, 156 people have been released
from death row in 26 states as evidence was found to prove
they were innocent.

   Chapter Summary
   This chapter examines the rule of law as well as classical and
neoclassical viewpoints of crime control. As crime control is
a constant issue debated and discussed in the United States,
74 | CH. 3 CRIME AND PUNISHMENT - LAW AND CLASSICAL AND
NEOCLASSICAL SCHOOLS

this chapter provides insight into the design of crime control
policies and laws that are concerned with reducing or limiting
offenses. While some of these approaches seem sensible and
logical, other situational and social variables may play a hand
in their effectiveness (mental health issues, addiction,
environmental issues, etc).

   References
   3.1. Functions and Limitations of Law Copyright © 2019
by Lore Rutz-Burri is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.
   2.8 The Neoclassical School of Criminological Theory
Copyright © 2024 by Brandon Hamann is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
   The American Civil Liberties Union.
https://www.aclu.org/documents/case-against-death-penalty
   Beccaria, C. (1764). On Crimes and Punishments.
Translated by Henry Paolucci. Hackett Publishing Company,
1986.
   Bentham, J. (1789). An Introduction to the Principles of
Morals and Legislation. Clarendon Press.
                         CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 75

4.

CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF
CRIME

   Dr. Shereen Hassan; Dan Lett, MA; and Jeff
   Bry

                                Ch. 4
           Biological Foundations of Criminal Behavior
   Dr. Shereen Hassan and Dan Lett, MA
   https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/introcrim/part/6-biological-
influences-on-criminal-behaviour/
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © 2023 by Dr.
Shereen Hassan and Dan Lett, MA is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.
   Genetics
   It is a common misconception that the link between biology
and crime is primarily genetic, yet there is much more to
biology than the study of genes. However, our genes do have
a profound influence on us, and a great deal of research has
been conducted on the genetics of behavior. As behavior is
76 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

highly complex, in almost all cases, any behavioral trait will be
influenced by a large number of genes, not just two or three.
Therefore, "a gene for crime" or for any complex behavior
cannot exist. Most behavior is governed by thousands of genes,
with each contributing a small amount towards a person
exhibiting that behavior.

   Most behaviors are not criminogenic on their own, but
under the right circumstances could lead to a person
offending. For example, impulsivity is a behavior that could
potentially lead to a criminal event, such as not considering
the consequences of stealing a car for a joy ride. Of course,
impulsivity could equally result in buying way too many red
shoes! How such a behavior is enacted is greatly influenced
by many other factors including socioeconomic status (SES),
education, and peers. Therefore, any relationship between
genes and behavior is modulated by myriad genes and the
number of genes a person has that influences that behavior will
increase their likelihood of exhibiting that behavior.

   Heritability Studies
   A great deal of genetic and environmental research has been
conducted using twin and adoption studies. These studies
compare the impacts of genes and the environment on
behavior.
                         CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 77

   Twins are a perfect study group as there are two types of
twins: monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ). MZ
("identical") twins began as a single zygote (one egg and one
sperm) that, very shortly after fertilization, divide into two,
resulting in two genetically identical babies, aside from small
early mutations that may occur (Jonsson et al., 2021). DZ
twins result from two zygotes and only share 50% of their
genes (actually, we share 99% of our DNA with every other
human being, but of the 1% that is different between all
people, siblings share 50%). DZ twins in general share 100%
of their environment and 50% of their genes, whereas MZ
twins, in general, share 100% of both their environment and
genes. Comparing behaviors between DZ and MZ twins helps
us understand whether environment or genes has a greater
influence on a behavioral trait. As both types of twins share
the same environment, any differences relate to genetics. A
78 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

great many twin studies have been conducted globally over the
last 100 years and have consistently shown both a heritable
component to criminogenic behavior and an environmental
component (e.g., Anderson, 2020a; Kendler et al., 2015).

   One problem with twin studies is the assumption that each
set of twins share the same environment, but MZ twins, who
look identical, may share more of their environment than DZ
twins, who look less similar and may be different sexes. Such
factors would impact the results (Burt & Simons, 2014).
Adoption studies offer a much more powerful method of
separating the effects of genes and the environment by
comparing adopted children with their adopted and biological
families. In such situations, biological parents can only
contribute biological effects, and adoptive parents can only
contribute environmental effects on the behavior of adopted
children, as the studies focus on children adopted by non-
relatives, neatly separating biological and environmental
effects. Many large studies conducted worldwide have shown
that a child is much more likely to offend if their biological
rather than adoptive parents were offenders, and even more
likely if both are offenders (Mednick et al., 1987). These
findings show both a heritable relationship and the impact of
the environment.

   https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/identical-twins
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 79

   From author Jeff Bry:
   Take a look at the material for the documentary Three
Identical Strangers. This documentary explored three
identical triplets who (in a designed study) were
80 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

separated at birth and raised in three distinct
environments, one upper class, one middle class, one
working class. While this is an interesting piece of
research and documentary, the moral and ethical
violations are evident. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Three_Identical_Strangers

   Gene X Environment Interactions (GxE)
   People with different genetic backgrounds may react
differently to the same environment. We know many risk
factors influence the likelihood of committing a crime--such
as child abuse, low SES, and peer pressure, but most people
who experience these environmental factors do not turn to
crime and may be exemplary members of society. Likewise,
privileged, wealthy people with supportive peers and abuse-
free childhoods may still commit many crimes. We now
understand that persons with certain genetic backgrounds are
more sensitive to specific environmental triggers than others
(Mullineaux & DiLalla, 2015). Someone without a
predisposition for criminal behavior may never offend,
irrespective of an adverse environment, and a person with a
predisposition for criminal behavior may never offend if they
do not experience adversity. Adversity may be any form of
hardship, which includes trauma, physical, sexual or emotional
abuse, starvation, or any form of severe suffering. For example,
as we will discuss later, males with a certain form of a gene
for a neurotransmitter or chemical messenger have a higher
predisposition for aggressive behavior only if they are severely
                         CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 81

physically abused as a child. If they are not abused, that is,
they are never exposed to this trigger, they are no more likely
to be aggressive than any other male (Caspi et al., 2002). A
predisposition together with an adverse environment increases
risk but still does not guarantee a criminal outcome because
gradients in each either increase or decrease risk (Gajos et al.,
2016). Several models predict these variations, such as the
diathesis stress model, which suggests that a genotype has a
number of different alleles or different gene variants, and each
adds a tiny bit of risk (Bersted & DiLalla, 2016). If the person
is exposed to a bad environment, then they are very likely to
be antisocial, but if they are exposed to a good environment,
they may not show any antisocial behavior at all. So, this model
predicts that the basic causes of antisocial behavior are triggers
in the environment interacting with the person's genotype
(Boardman et al., 2014). For example, it has been shown that
children with certain risk factors are at greater risk of antisocial
behavior if they experience parental conflict (Feinberg et al.,
2007). These findings help identify not only environmental
triggers but protective factors that can ameliorate or even
eliminate risk.

   Epigenetics
   The genome is a person's complete set of genetic
instructions or blueprint (the DNA sequence), and it is
controlled by the epigenome, an array of chemicals that tell
the genome which genes should be turned on (expressed) and
which should be turned off. The epigenome can also change
82 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

in response to experiences, altering the way a gene is
expressed--that is, what the gene actually does--without
changing the DNA sequence. Therefore, a person's genome
remains the same, but its functions may change in response to
experiences (DeLisi & Vaughn, 2015). For example, astronauts
Scott and Mark Kelly are MZ twins, but only Scott spent a
year in space. See the NASA twins study revealing that space
flight can cause genetic changes. Studies of their DNA before
and after the space travel showed that, although their DNA
remained identical, stressors experienced on the flight had
changed Scott's DNA expression (Garrett-Bakelman et al.,
2019).

   Interestingly, although only the expression of the genes
changes and not the DNA sequence, these epigenetic changes
can be passed on to the next generation, so they are heritable
(National Human Genome Research Institute, 2016). This
very exciting new area is only just being explored, primarily
as it relates to healthcare, but some work has been done on
criminogenic behavior that helps explain GxE interactions.
The epigenome is changed by the environment to allow the
body to respond; changes may occur in neural development
or in neurotransmitter or hormonal function, which could
impact behavior. Studies on rodents show that maternal care
could result in gene expression changes in the first week of
life, with increased maternal care resulting in calmer offspring
that exhibit less stress to new environments than those with
low maternal care (Weaver et al., 2004). When rat pups were
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 83

abused for 30 minutes a day during their first week of life, the
brain changes lasted a lifetime, resulting in rats that abused
their own offspring (Roth & Sweatt, 2011). In both studies,
the changes could be reversed with medication.

   Image of transfer of neurotransmitters between the neurons
source pixabay.com

   Many studies on children have shown that early life
adversity and parenting decisions have an epigenetic effect on a
child's developing brain that can impact their future behavior,
mental abilities, reaction to stress, and resilience to further
adversity, making them less able to cope, and such changes
84 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

can be transgenerational (DeLisi & Vaughn, 2015). This is a
very new understanding and means that the experiences of
your parents can epigenetically affect their DNA, which will
impact the way your genes and even your children's genes will
be expressed. In other words, a person's ancestor's experiences
can genetically impact later generations. Studies show that this
epigenetic effect can increase antisocial behavior and callous
unemotional aggression, reduce empathy, increase depression
and reduce normal stress responses, resulting in a lack of fear
of danger or consequences (DeLisi & Vaughn, 2015; Rutter,
2012).

   When the communist government of Romania fell in 1989,
the world was horrified to see images of hundreds of thousands
of children abandoned and warehoused in appalling
conditions, without the most basic necessities of life, and no
human contact except abuse. This lack of basic care and
human contact together with extreme deprivation and
institutionalization meant many of these children exhibited
cognitive problems. What 100,000+ Children Taught Us
About Neglect in Early Childhood describes some of these
issues. Imaging studies showed that these children had less
total grey and white matter in the brain and an enlarged
amygdala--a part of the brain responsible for dealing with
emotions (Mehta et al., 2009). These findings may be a result
of developing epigenetic coping mechanisms and reduced
responses to extreme institutionalization. See Romania's
Abandoned Children about the impacts of
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 85

institutionalization. In other studies of abused children,
epigenetic changes increased their likelihood of developing
post-traumatic stress disorder in response to adversity
experienced in their adult lives (Mehta et al., 2013). Kayla
Bourque is a Vancouver example of a high-risk violent offender
with a history of animal abuse who was adopted from a
Romanian orphanage. See B.C. animal killer called
`psychopathic' for more on Kayla Bourque.

   It has long been accepted that experiencing an abusive
childhood increases risk for later offending. These studies not
86 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

only show the environmental impacts of such abuse but now
also a major biological impact on a child's developing brain,
making them more susceptible to later environmental triggers,
potentially resulting in antisocial behavior, an inability to deal
with stressors, as well as a lack of parenting skills. Moreover,
these changes can be transgenerational.

   Residential Schools
   Epigenetic studies help us understand why atrocities such
as residential schools not only had major and long-lasting
impacts on the Indigenous children who were abused, but also
how the effect of this abuse is magnified as it is perpetuated
biologically through the next generations, as discussed in Can
Trauma Be Inherited?. Also, when child abuse causes a child
to shut down, become socially withdrawn, become unreactive
to normal pleasurable experiences and have reduced responses,
it has long-term effects on their own relationships with their
children, as a Residential school survivor explains the impact
on her family.
   These intergenerational impacts, although considered here
in a scientific context, clearly illustrate the connections
between the many aspects of knowledge, including the
cognitive, spiritual, emotional and physical elements, which
are all parts of Indigenous epistemologies (Doetzel, 2018;
Simpson, 2011; Smith, 2012). In many cases, the disruption
of these interconnections has also prevented the passage of
traditional, ancestral knowledge to subsequent generations
(Monchalin, 2016).
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 87

   Picture source pixabay.com
   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What do you think about biology and
inheritance when it comes to crime?
   While I think some people might be "born bad," I
don't think you can tell simply by looking at someone's
features. It's actually kind of humorous that someone
would think that is true. Although some features might
be caused by different illnesses or diseases, which may
play a factor. Contrary to Lombroso's beliefs, I don't
think criminal behavior can be predicted, unless the
person has offended previously, then maybe you could
predict what someone might do based on their past
offenses.
   Social Implications
   When considering any heritable factor that impacts a
physical characteristic with social implications, it must be
separated from the social effect. When certain heritable
88 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

characteristics such as skin color or ancestry put a person at a
social disadvantage--for example, by making them more likely
to experience poverty, a lack of education, starvation or
abuse--their lack of success, or increased risk, is blamed on
the inherited factor. In reality, this is a social construct and
a result of systemic discrimination. Possessing that heritable
characteristic greatly reduced that person's chances of success
in that particular society, and it is purely the environmental
disadvantages that caused the outcome, not genetics or
physical differences themselves. This discrimination, rather
than ancestry, in part explains the disproportionate number of
Indigenous persons who are incarcerated in Canada as well as
African-Americans incarcerated in the United States.

   Brain Chemistry
   Neurochemistry is not often covered in criminology texts as
it is highly specialized, yet some of the most exciting discoveries
within biosocial criminology result from our rapidly
increasing understanding of brain chemistry and its
interactions with the environment. The brain controls all
behavior, and we are beginning to understand how imbalances
in certain brain chemicals can affect health and behavior.
Neurotransmitters are chemicals involved in communication
between nerve cells. Neurotransmitters are synthesized by the
catalysis of an amino acid precursor. Once released, they bind
to a receptor cell to transmit a message, then break down into
their metabolites. Each of these stages is under genetic control
and involves many genes. Imbalances and interactions between
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 89

these neurotransmitters and our environment can have
profound effects on our behavior.

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Serotonin
   Low levels of serotonin, a behavioral inhibitor, have been
linked to impulsive-aggressive behavior in extensive research
conducted globally over six decades. A great deal of evidence
shows that serotonin plays a role in impulsive-aggressive
behavior, which makes sense because serotonin regulates the
90 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

stress response in the brain, meaning that it impacts the way we
handle and react to stress, in general having a calming effect.

   Many studies have shown that dysfunction at any stage of
the serotonergic system can reduce levels of serotonin, and
alleles have been linked to increased levels of suicide (Antypa et
al., 2013). For example, one such gene has two alleles referred
to as S and L. We all have two alleles for every gene, so a
person could have SS, SL or LL. The S allele makes a person
more sensitive to stress, and the L allele makes them more
resistant. In a seminal, long-term study of almost 900 people,
Caspi and colleagues looked at 21- to 26-year-olds who had
suffered multiple stressors (Caspi et al., 2003). They found
that almost half of those with SS developed depression, and
11% attempted suicide as opposed to only 17% of those with
LL who developed depression and 4% who attempted suicide
(Caspi et al., 2003). This early study has been repeated many
times around the world and again highlights the link between
a person's genetic background and their environment.
Numerous studies have also linked low serotonin levels with
aggressive behaviour (Brown et al., 1979; Glick, 2015),
psychopathy (Glenn, 2011), impulsivity (Linnoila et al., 1983),
and an inability to learn from negative experiences (Helmbold
et al., 2015).

   Overall, the studies on serotonin indicate that any sort of
dysfunction in the serotonergic system has an adverse effect on
behavior. However, in many cases, we can reverse the effects.
Neurotransmitters are synthesized from building blocks or
                         CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 91

precursors of basic amino acids, and the precursor for
serotonin is tryptophan. This amino acid can be obtained
through diet. Even people with perfectly normal serotonin
systems may get edgy or upset if their tryptophan levels drop.
In contrast, increasing a person's tryptophan levels often
results in a feeling of peace and general well-being. One source
of tryptophan is turkey, and this may account for the overall
general feeling of benevolence often felt after eating a large
turkey dinner. Therefore, such chemical imbalances may be
successfully treated, often with something as simple as a
change in diet.

   Dopamine
   Dopamine is often considered a pleasure or reward
neurotransmitter as it produces many positive feelings in
response to the normal pleasures in life, such as love, sex, and
food. Many drugs target the dopamine system, causing a rapid
increase in dopamine levels, resulting in euphoria (Volkow et
al., 2003). In some cases, increases in dopamine can increase
aggression, particularly in people with deficits in the normal
reward system who do not gain pleasure from normal
pleasurable activities and need greater stimulation (Blum et
al., 2015). This means that such people are not happy with
the usual simple pleasures like sex, chocolate or the company
of friends, for example, so they need to push for greater
excitement. A number of alleles within the dopamine system
have been linked to increased risk for anti-social behavior
(Blum et al., 2015; Young et al., 2002; Yun et al., 2015), but
92 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

remember again that each allele only contributes a very small
increased risk.

   Monoamine Oxidase (MAO)
   MAO is an enzyme responsible for breaking down several
neurotransmitters, including serotonin and dopamine, so
although not a neurotransmitter itself, it still impacts
neurotransmitter levels. Many studies have linked low MAO
levels to a variety of antisocial behaviors, including aggression
(Antypa et al., 2013); however, perhaps the most interesting
studies on MAO are those that show a distinct GxE
interaction. The two MAO enzymes, A and B, are the result
of two different genes on the X chromosome, making them
sex-linked. Sex-linked traits are mostly expressed by males, as
females have two X chromosomes. If one X has a deleterious
allele of a gene, it is usually masked by the presence of a normal
X. Males, however, only have a single X and a Y chromosome,
so any genes on the X chromosome will be expressed.
   The MAOA gene has several different alleles, with some
resulting in normal levels of MAOA (MAOA-H) and others
producing low levels (MAOA-L). In one of the first studies
to find a GxE interaction, Caspi and colleagues considered
a cohort of 442 male adults, identifying 154 who had been
abused as children, 33 severely (Caspi et al., 2002). Each was
evaluated for MAOA-H or MAOA-L and assessed for
antisocial behavior based on convictions for violent crime or
exhibited antisocial behavior. Only 12% of the entire cohort
had MAOA-L, yet they accounted for 44% of violent crime
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 93

convictions. A significant relationship was found between
MAOA-L, child abuse and criminal convictions. Of the
severely abused, 85% exhibited antisocial behavior. Men with
the normal MAOA-H alleles rarely exhibited violent behavior,
even if they had been severely abused as children (Caspi et al.,
2002). It is important to understand that the risk of violent
behavior only occurred when the genotype was combined with
child abuse (Caspi et al., 2002). This is fascinating as people
have often looked at a violent criminal and said, "Well, what
did you expect, when he had such a violent upbringing?"
Immediately, however, someone else will say, "My best friend
was brutally abused as a child, and he's not at all violent." This
seminal work was the first to demonstrate at least one pathway
to explain why an abusive childhood may lead some to violence
and not others, and it shows protective factors--a safe, stable
home life in childhood can ameliorate such risk factors.

   Brain Damage
   The brain is the seat of all behavior, so obviously damage
to the brain is likely to impact behavior, including, potentially,
antisocial behavior. By design, the brain physically changes
with experience and is another complicated mix of genetics
and environment.
   Head Injuries
   Most behaviors are controlled by complex connections
within the brain and not by one part alone. However, the
frontal lobe, found from the forehead region above the eyes
to the midway of the skull, is heavily involved in inhibiting
94 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

inappropriate behavior, aggression and impulsivity. This area
is at the front of the head so it is more likely to be injured
in an accident or assault. People with a frontal lobe injury
often lose their social graces, self-control, and patience, and
may experience personality changes, develop anxiety or
depression, demand instant gratification, or have poor
planning skills (Lane et al., 2017). In 1848, Phineas Gage was
a railroad construction supervisor when an accident drove a
metal bar through his cheek and up through the top of his
head, destroying his frontal lobe. Miraculously he survived,
but his kind, polite, gentle personality was gone, and he
became violent, irritable, and irresponsible. His friends said
he was "no longer Gage" (Damasio et al., 1994, p1102). His
memory and ability to do his job, however, had not changed.
Similar changes have been seen in modern patients with frontal
lobe damage (Damasio et al., 1994), and we are only just
beginning to understand the impacts of repeated concussions
in professional athletes, chronic traumatic encephalopathy and
the relationship to antisocial behavior (Stern et al., 2011).

   The brain is not fully developed at birth but continues to
develop for many years, influenced by experience. Most brain
development is completed around the mid-twenties, which is
important as the law considers an accused to be an "adult"
and entirely responsible for their actions by the age of eighteen
or even younger, yet the brain is still developing at this age.
In particular, the prefrontal region, the last to mature, is
especially important in developing social behavior,
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 95

appropriate responses, cognition, abstract thought, and
inhibiting inappropriate behavior (Arain et al., 2013). Damage
to the developing brain is, therefore, particularly harmful, as
children and youth have not yet developed the inner control
mechanisms or socially acceptable behavior of adulthood
(Anderson, 2020b).

   Child abuse commonly results in brain injury as even a
single blow can cause damage. Even a mild traumatic brain
injury (TBI) can have major effects, particularly on social and
emotional maturity and reduced cognition, which can lead to
poor social interactions and peer relationships and long-term
risk (Mychasiuk et al., 2014). Child abuse, therefore, not only
creates a dysfunctional social environment but may result in
lasting behavioral damage.

   Many studies have shown that incarcerated youth have
much higher rates of TBI than non-incarcerated youth
(Gordon et al., 2017; Hughes et al., 2015), recidivism is
increased in youth with TBIs (Williams et al., 2010), and in
most cases the TBI predates the offence (Lewis et al., 1988).
Not only can such an injury result in a youth being more likely
to commit a crime, but TBI-related cognitive impairment,
language deficits, comprehension, and social skills mean that
the youth is also at a greater disadvantage when trying to
navigate the highly complex legal system, which requires
excellent communication skills and a clear understanding of
all proceedings, rights, and legal advice, putting them at even
greater risk (Wszalek & Turkstra, 2015).
96 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

   TBI in adults has also been frequently linked with violence
and crime, with some TBI sufferers exhibiting a loss of control,
temper, increased physical and verbal violence, agitation and
frustration (Bannon et al., 2015). In a meta-analysis of studies
of incarcerated men and women in US prisons, 60% had
suffered at least one TBI (Shiroma et al., 2010), with one study
reporting 88% (Diamond et al., 2007). In a meta-analysis of
studies from the US, the UK and Australia, prevalence ranged
from 9.6 to 100%, with an average of 46% (Durand et al.,
2017). In Canada, the prevalence of TBIs was over 50% in
incarcerated men and 38% in incarcerated women, with many
reporting multiple TBIs (Colantonio et al., 2014). Higher
recidivism rates are also seen in adult offenders with TBIs as
well as an earlier age of first offence, faster re-arrests, greater
violence, increased sentences, and infractions while
incarcerated (Ramos et al., 2018; Ray & Richardson, 2017).

   Brain Disorders
   Brain damage can also result from disease or toxins. Stroke,
brain tumors, meningitis, alcoholism, and cannabis use can all
damage or cause changes in the brain (e.g., Arain et al., 2013;
Burns & Swerdlow, 2003). For example, a happily married,
middle-aged schoolteacher suddenly developed an obsession
with child pornography, was inappropriately sexual with
children, and eventually sexually assaulted his own young
stepdaughter. He was convicted and ordered to enter a
treatment program from which he was expelled due to
inappropriate sexual behavior towards other patients and the
                         CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 97

instructor. His inability to complete treatment resulted in an
order to serve time, but before being sent to prison he
complained of violent headaches and said he was scared he
might rape someone. An MRI scan showed a large tumor in
the orbito-frontal region of the frontal lobe of his brain, the
area responsible for judgement, appropriate social behavior
and self-control (Burns & Swerdlow, 2003). The tumor was
removed, and his behavior returned to normal. He successfully
completed treatment and returned home to his wife and
stepdaughter. Sometime later, he began secretly collecting
child pornography again. A scan revealed that the tumor had
returned; it was removed, and his behavior returned to normal.
This case indicates a major ethical dilemma--was he
responsible for his actions? It seems clear that his criminal
behavior was directly related to a medical condition over which
he had no control. However, he later stated that "somewhere
deep, deep, deep in the back of my head, there was a little
voice saying `you shouldn't do this'" (Glenn & Raine, 2014,
p.58). This indicates that even at his worst, he was still able
to form mens rea or the ability to understand that his actions
were criminal.
98 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Diet
   A healthy diet, with essential nutrients, vitamins, and
minerals, is vital for brain development, and an inadequate diet
in childhood can result in neural deficits leading to antisocial
behavior, including aggression and reduced self-control
(Jackson, 2016), and to many health issues. As many
neurotransmitter precursors come from diet, a poor-quality
diet may affect neural function simply by a lack of precursors.
   Low SES is a known risk factor for antisocial behavior, as
it includes many overall risk factors such as poverty, reduced
education and job opportunities, together with the
discrimination that often follows. Poverty in general reduces a
developing child's access to nutritious, fresh food, so the effects
of low SES are likely to be exacerbated by a poor diet, with
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 99

its resultant health issues, and also by its impact on neural
development.

   Supplementing diet has been understood as a way to
improve health and behavior since Lombroso (Bohannon,
2009), and many large-scale studies on dietary
supplementation for malnourished children have shown
extraordinary improvements in behavior (Liu, 2004; Raine et
al., 2003). A poor-quality diet does not necessarily mean
starvation. A large global study of approximately 200,000
children from forty-one countries showed a 123% increase in
bullying behavior in children eating poor-quality rather than
nutritious food (Jackson, 2017). Such information opens the
door to intervention strategies that can increase health and
reduce antisocial behaviour with supplementation and
education. A good example of such an intervention is the
Breakfast Club of Canada, which provides children with
nutritious breakfasts.
100 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

   We have seen that direct abuse has both sociological and
biological impacts on a child's well-being and behavior
throughout the life course and even transgenerationally. But
institutionalization and residential schools have other
insidious effects. As well as being physically, emotionally and
sexually abused, residential school children were underfed,
given poor-quality food, and frequently starved, as discussed
in Hunger experienced in residential schools linked to present-
day health problems. Aside from the obvious torture of such
treatment at the time, the effects of poor diet and starvation
can have long-lasting impacts on a person's biology, health,
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 101

and behavior. Colonization and residential schools deprived
Indigenous Peoples of their traditional food sources and their
knowledge of ways to harvest wild animals and plants to
maintain a healthy diet. Once lost, these skills cannot be passed
to future generations, leading to increased diet-related health
issues. These issues are not just historical but persist today as
many Indigenous Peoples have lost pre-colonial connections
to the land and suffer ongoing biological consequences
(Monchalin, 2016).

   Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) and Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder (FASD)

   Some clearly environmental factors that impact behavior
can also have biological effects. It is well known that alcohol
usage is involved in a vast number of crimes, as it increases
impulsivity and violence and reduces self-control. But alcohol
usage during pregnancy can have much more insidious
impacts on the developing child, resulting in a wide range of
health and behavior problems. Prenatal alcohol exposure
affects the developing brain as well as the serotonergic system,
the dopamine system, hormonal systems, the immune system,
and other aspects of neural development. These effects can
result in children developing cognition, attention,
communication, and perceptual deficits; hyperactivity; an
inability to understand consequences; and poor peer
relationships (CanFASD, 2018).

   Alcohol use and abuse, which relates to residential school
abuses and other systemic racism and discrimination, has
102 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

historically disproportionately affected Indigenous Peoples
(Johnson, 2016). Although such abuse is usually considered
in a sociological context, it also has a biological basis. The
effect of alcohol on an individual, such as how intoxicated they
become, and how fast they process the alcohol, depends on
many features such as whether they had eaten first, the speed
at which they consumed the drink, and the alcohol content
of the drink, but also the person's biology. Alcohol is broken
down by alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase
enzymes, which are controlled by several genes. Different
ancestral groups have different alleles for these genes,
impacting their alcohol metabolism and thus their ability to
tolerate the effects of alcohol (Wall et al., 2016).

   Colonialism, intergenerational abuse, and residential
schools have greatly increased maladaptive coping mechanisms
such as alcohol usage among Indigenous women, resulting in
much higher rates (38 times) of FASD than in the general
population (Popova et al., 2017). In Canada, youth with
FASD are 19-40 times more likely to be incarcerated than
non-FASD youth (Malbin, 2004; Popova et al., 2011). This
is a vicious circle as incarceration exacerbates the effects of
FASD as such people are highly suggestible, form poor peer
relationships and are frequently victimised, increasing their
recidivism (Brown et al., 2014).

   References
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © 2023 by Dr.
Shereen Hassan and Dan Lett, MA is licensed under a Creative
                       CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 103

Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

   Anderson, G. S. (2020a). Evidence for Genetic
Predispositions for Criminogenic Behaviour: Twin and
Adoption Studies. In Biological Influences on Criminal
Behaviour (pp. 83-110). CRC Press, Taylor Francis Group and
SFU Publications.

   Anderson, G. S. (2020b). Traumatic Brain Injury and
Neurocognitive Disorders. In Biological Influences on
Criminal Behaviour (pp. 213-240). CRC Press, Taylor Francis
Group and SFU Publications.

   Antypa, N., Serretti, A., & Rujescu, D. (2013). Serotonergic
genes and suicide: a systematic review. Eur.
Neuropsychopharmacol., 23(10), 1125-1142. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.03.013

   Arain, M., Haque, M., Johal, L., Mathur, P., Nel, W., Rais,
A., Sandhu, R., & Sharma, S. (2013). Maturation of the
adolescent brain. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat., 9, 449-461.
https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S39776

   Ataullahjan, S., Bernard, W. E. T., & Hartling, N. J. (2021).
Forced and Coerced Sterilization of Persons in Canada.
Standing Committee on Human Rights. Ottawa, ON. 33 p

   Bannon, S. M., Salis, K. L., & Daniel O'Leary, K. (2015).
Structural brain abnormalities in aggression and violent
behaviour. Aggress. Viol. Beh., 25, 323-331. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.avb.2015.09.016

   Baum, M. L. (2011). The monoamine oxidase A (MAOA)
104 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

genetic predisposition to impulsive violence: is it relevant to

criminal trials? Neuroethics, 6(2), 287-306. https://doi.org/

10.1007/s12152-011-9108-6

Bersted, K. A., & DiLalla, L. F. (2016). The influence of

DRD4 genotype and perinatal complications on preschoolers'

negative emotionality. J. Appl. Developmental Psychol., 42,

71-79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2015.12.001

Blum, K., Febo, M., Thanos, P. K., Baron, D., Fratantonio,

J., & Gold, M. (2015). Clinically combating Reward

Deficiency Syndrome (RDS) with dopamine agonist therapy

as a paradigm shift: dopamine for dinner? Mol. Neurobiol.,

52(3),    1862-1869.       https://doi.org/10.1007/

s12035-015-9110-9

Boardman, J. D., Menard, S., Roettger, M. E., Knight, K.

E., Boutwell, B. B., & Smolen, A. (2014). Genes in the

dopaminergic system and delinquent behaviours across the life

course: the role of social controls and risks. Crim. Justice

Behav., 41(6), 713-731. https://doi.org/10.1177/

0093854813514227

Bohannon, J. (2009). The Theory? Diet causes violence.

The Lab? Prison. Science, 325(5948), 1614-1616.

Brown, G. L., Goodwin, F. K., Ballenger, J. C., Goyer, P. F.,

& Major, L. F. (1979). Aggression in humnas correlates with

decerbrospinal fuild amine metabolites. Psychiatry Res., 1(2),

131-139.

Brown, J. M., Long-McGie, J., Wartnik, A., Oberoi, P.,

Wresh, J., Weinkauf, E., Falconer, G., & Kerr, A. (2014). Fetal
                       CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 105

Alcohol Spectrum Disorders in the criminal justice system: a
review. J. Law Enforce., 3(6), 1-10.

   Burns, J. M., & Swerdlow, R. H. (2003). Right
orbitofrontal tumor with pedophilia symptom and
constructional apraxia sign. Arch. Neurol., 60(3), 437-440.

   Burt, C. H., & Simons, R. L. (2014). Pulling back the
curtain on heritability studies: Biosocial criminology in the
postgenomic era. Criminology, 52(2), 223-262.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-9125.12036

   CanFASD. (2018). FASD Fact Sheet. Retrieved 27 June
from https://canfasd.ca/topics/basic-information/

   Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T. E., Mill, J., Martin, J.,
Craig, I. W., Taylor, A., & Poulton, R. (2002). Role of
genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children
[Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't Research Support, U.S.
Gov't, P.H.S.]. Science, 297(5582), 851-854. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1072290

   Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W.,
Harrington, H., McClay, J., Mill, J., Martin, J., Braithwaite,
A., & Poulton, R. (2003). Influence of life stress on depression:
moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene [Research
Support, Non-U.S. Gov't Research Support, U.S. Gov't,
P.H.S.]. Science, 301(5631), 386-389. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1083968

   Colantonio, A., Kim, H., Allen, S., Asbridge, M., Petgrave,
J., & Brochu, S. (2014). Traumatic brain injury and early life
experiences among men and women in a prison population.
106 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

J. Correct. Health Care, 20(4), 271-279. https://doi.org/

10.1177/1078345814541529

Damasio, H., Grabowski, T., Frank, R., Galaburda, A., &

Damasio, A. (1994). The return of Phineas Gage: clues about

the brain from the skull of a famous patient. Science,

264(5162),        1102-1105.    https://doi.org/10.1126/

science.8178168

DeLisi, M., & Vaughn, M. G. (2015). The Vindication of

Lamarck? Epigenetics at the Intersection of Law and Mental

Health. Behav. Sci. Law, 33(5), 607-628. https://doi.org/

10.1002/bsl.2206

Denno, D. W. (2011). Courts' increasing consideration of

behavioural genetics evidence in criminal cases: results of a

longitudinal study. Michigan St. Law Rev., 967-1047.

Diamond, P. M., Harske, A. J., Magaletta, P. R., Cummins,

A. G., & Frankowski, R. (2007). Screening for traumatic brain

injury in an offender sample: A first look at the reliability and

validity of the traumatic brain injury questionnaire. J. Head

Trauma Rehab., 22(6), 330-338.

Doetzel, N.-A. (2018). Cultivating Spiritual Intelligence:

Honoring Heart Wisdom and First Nations Indigenous Ways

of Knowing. Interchange, 49(4), 521-526. https://doi.org/

10.1007/s10780-018-9345-2

Durand, E., Chevignard, M., Ruet, A., Dereix, A., Jourdan,

C., & Pradat-Diehl, P. (2017). History of traumatic brain

injury in prison populations: A systematic review. Ann. Phys.
                       CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 107

Rehabil. Med., 60(2), 95-101. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rehab.2017.02.003

   Feinberg, M. E., Button, T. M. M., Neiderhiser, J. M., Reiss,
D., & Hetherington, E. M. (2007). Parenting and adolescent
antisocial behaviour and depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry,
4(64), 4.

   Gajos, J. M., Fagan, A. A., & Beaver, K. M. (2016). Use
of genetically informed evidence-based prevention science to
understand and prevent crime and related behavioural
disorders. Crim. Public Pol., 15(3), 683-701.

   Garrett-Bakelman, F. E., Darshi, M., Green, S. J., Gur, R.
C., Lin, L., Macias, B. R., McKenna, M. J., Meydan, C.,
Mishra, T., Nasrini, J., Piening, B. D., Rizzardi, L. F., Sharma,
K., Siamwala, J. H., Taylor, L., Vitaterna, M. H., Afkarian,
M., Afshinnekoo, E., Ahadi, S.,... Turek, F. W. (2019). The
NASA Twins Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-
long human spaceflight. Science, 364(6436). https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aau8650

   Glenn, A. L. (2011). The other allele: exploring the long
allele of the serotonin transporter gene as a potential risk factor
for psychopathy: a review of the parallels in findings. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev., 35(3), 612-620. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neubiorev.2010.07.005

   Glenn, A. L., & Raine, A. (2014). Neurocriminology:
implications for the punishment, prediction and prevention
of criminal behaviour. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 15(1), 54-63.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3640
108 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

   Glick, A. R. (2015). The role of serotonin in impulsive
aggression, suicide and homicide in adolescents and adults: a
literature review. Int. J. Adolesc. Med. Health, 27(2), 143-150.

   Gordon, W. A., Spielman, L. A., Hahn-Ketter, A. E., &
Sy, K. T. L. (2017). The relationship between traumatic brain
injury and criminality in juvenile offenders. J. Head Trauma
Rehabil., 32(6), 393-403. https://doi.org/10.1097/
HTR.0000000000000274

   Helmbold, K., Zvyagintsev, M., Dahmen, B., Bubenzer-
Busch, S., Gaber, T. J., Crockett, M. J., Klasen, M., Sanchez,
C. L., Eisert, A., Konrad, K., Habel, U., Herpertz-Dahlmann,
B., & Zepf, F. D. (2015). Effects of serotonin depletion on
punishment processing in the orbitofrontal and anterior
cingulate cortices of healthy women. Eur.
Neuropsychopharmacol., 25(6), 846-856. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.02.007

   Hughes, N., Williams, W. H., Chitsabesan, P., Walesby, R.
C., Mounce, L. T., & Clasby, B. (2015). The prevalence of
traumatic brain injury among young offenders in custody: a
systematic review. J. Head Trauma Rehabil., 30(2), 94-105.
https://doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0000000000000124

   Jackson, D. B. (2016). The link between poor quality
nutrition and childhood antisocial behaviour: A genetically
informative analysis. J. Crim. Justice, 44, 13-20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2015.11.007

   Jackson, D. B. (2017). Diet quality and bullying among
         CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 109

a cross-national sample of youth. Prev. Med., 105, 359-365.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2017.06.033

Johnson, H. R. (2016). Firewater. How Alcohol is Killing my

People (and Yours). Univ. Regina Press.

Jonsson, H., Magnusdottir, E., Eggertsson, H. P.,

Stefansson, O. A., Arnadottir, G. A., Eiriksson, O., Zink, F.,

Helgason, E. A., Jonsdottir, I., Gylfason, A., Jonasdottir, A.,

Jonasdottir, A., Beyter, D., Steingrimsdottir, T., Norddahl, G.

L., Magnusson, O. T., Masson, G., Halldorsson, B. V.,

Thorsteinsdottir, U., Helgason, A.,... Stefansson, K. (2021).

Differences between germline genomes of monozygotic twins.

Nat Genet, 53(1), 27-34. https://doi.org/10.1038/

s41588-020-00755-1

Kendler, K. S., Maes, H. H., Lonn, S. L., Morris, N. A.,

Lichtenstein, P., Sundquist, J., & Sundquist, K. (2015). A

Swedish national twin study of criminal behaviour and its

violent, white-collar and property subtypes. Psychol. Med.,

45(11),  2253-2262.  https://doi.org/10.1017/

S0033291714002098

Kupferman, I. (1991). Hypothalamus and limbic systems:

peptidergic neurons, homeostasis and emotional behaviour. In

E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwarz, & T. M. Jessell (Eds.), Principles

of Neural Science (pp. 735-749). Appleton and Lange.

Lane, K. S., St Pierre, M. E., Lauterbach, M. D., &

Koliatsos, V. E. (2017). Patient profiles of criminal behaviour

in the context of traumatic brain injury. J. Forensic Sci., 62(2),

545-548. https://doi.org/10.1111/1556-4029.13289
110 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

   Lewis, D. O., Pincus, J. H., Bard, B., Richardson, E.,
Prichep, L. S., Feldman, M., & Yeager, C. (1988).
Neuropsychiatric, psychoeducational, and family
characteristics of 14 juveniles condemned to death in the
United States. Am. J. Psychiatry, 145(5), 584-589.

   Linnoila, M., Virkkunen, M., Scheinin, M., Nuutila, A.,
Rimon, R., & Goodwin, F. K. (1983). Low cerebrospinal fluid
5-hydroxyindolacetic acid concentration differentiates
impulsive from non-impulsive violent behaviour. Life Sci., 33,
2609-2614.

   Liu, J. (2004). Malnutrition at age 3 years and externalizing
behaviour problems at ages 8, 11, and 17 years. Am. J.
Psychiatry, 161(11), 2005-2013.

   Malbin, D. V. (2004). Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
(FASD) and the role of family court judges in improving
outcomes for children and families. Juvenile Family Court J.,
55(2), 53-63.

   Mednick, S. A., Gabrielli, W. F. J., & Hutchings, B. (1987).
Genetic Factors in the Etiology of Criminal Behaviour. In S.
A. Mednick, T. E. Moffitt, & S. A. Stack (Eds.), The Causes
of Crime: New Biological Approaches (pp. 74-91). Cambridge
University Press.

   Mehta, D., Klengel, T., Conneely, K. N., Snith, A. K.,
Altmann, A., Pace, T. W., Rex-Haffner, M., Loeschner, A.,
Gonik, M., Mercer, K. B., Bradley, B., Muller-Myhsok, B.,
Ressler, K. J., & Binder, E. B. (2013). Childhood maltreatment
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 111

is associated with distinct genomic and epigenetic profiles in
posttraumatic stress disorder. PNAS, 110(20), 8302-8307.

   Mehta, M. A., Golembo, N. I., Nosarti, C., Colvert, E.,
Mota, A., Williams, S. C., Rutter, M., & Sonuga-Barke, E.
J. (2009). Amygdala, hippocampal and corpus callosum size
following severe early institutional deprivation: the English
and Romanian Adoptees study pilot. J. Child Psychol.
Psychiatry, 50(8), 943-951. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-7610.2009.02084.x

   Monchalin, L. (2016). The Colonial Problem: An
Indigenous Perspective on Crime and Injustice in Canada.
University of Toronto Press.

   Mullineaux, P. Y., & DiLalla, L. F. (2015). Genetic
influences on peer and family relationships across adolescent
development: Introduction to the special issue. J. Youth
Adolesc., 44(7), 1347-1359. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10964-015-0306-0

   Mychasiuk, R., Hehar, H., Farran, A., & Esser, M. J. (2014).
Mean girls: Sex differences in the effects of mild traumatic
brain injury on the social dynamics of juvenile rat play
behaviour. Behav. Brain Res., 259, 284-291. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bbr.2013.10.048

   National Human Genome Research Institute. (2016).
Epigenomics. Retrieved 13 October from
https://www.genome.gov/27532724/epigenomics-fact-sheet/

   Niehoff, D. (1999). Seeds of controversy. In D. Niehoff
(Ed.), Biology of Violence: How Understanding the Brain,
112 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

Behaviour and Environment Can Break the Vicious Circle of
Aggression (pp. 1-30). Free Press.

   Popova, S., Lange, S., Bekmuradov, D., Mihic, A., & Rehm,
J. (2011). Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder prevalence
estimates in correctional systems: a systematic literature review.
Can. J. Public Health, 102(5), 336-340.

   Popova, S., Lange, S., Probst, C., Parunashvili, N., & Rehm,
J. (2017). Prevalence of alcohol consumption during
pregnancy and Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders among the
general and Aboriginal populations in Canada and the United
States. Eur J Med Genet, 60(1), 32-48. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.09.010

   Raine, A., Mellingen, K., Liu, J., Venables, P., & Mednick,
S. A. (2003). Effects of environmental enrichment at age 3-5
years on schizotypal personality and antisocial behaviour at
ages 17-23 years. Am. J. Psychiatry, 160(9), 1-9.

   Ramos, S. D. S., Oddy, M., Liddement, J., & Fortescue, D.
(2018). Brain injury and offending: the development and field
testing of a Linkworker Intervention. Int. J. Offender Ther.
Comp. Criminol., 62(7), 1854-1868. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0306624X17708351

   Ray, B., & Richardson, N. J. (2017). Traumatic brain injury
and recidivism among returning inmates. Criminal Just.
Behav., 44(3), 472-486. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0093854816686631

   Roth, T. L., & Sweatt, J. D. (2011). Annual Research
Review: Epigenetic mechanisms and environmental shaping
                        CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME | 113

of the brain during sensitive periods of development. J. Child
Psychol. Psychiatry, 52(4), 398-408. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-7610.2010.02282.x

   Rutter, M. (2012). Achievements and challenges in the
biology of environmental effects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
109 (Suppl. 2), 17149-17153. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1121258109

   Shiroma, E. J., Ferguson, P. L., & Pickelsimer, E. E. (2010).
Prevalence of traumatic brain injury in an offender
population: a meta-analysis. J. Correct. Health Care, 16(2),
147-159. https://doi.org/10.1177/1078345809356538

   Simpson, L. B. (2011). Dancing on our Turtle's Back: Stories
of Nishnaabeg re-creation, Resurgence and a New Emergence.
Arbeiter Ring Pub.

   Smith, L. T. (2012). Decolonizing Methodologies: Research
and Indigenous peoples. Zed Books.

   Stern, R. A., Riley, D. O., Daneshvar, D. H., Nowinski,
C. J., Cantu, R. C., & McKee, A. C. (2011). Long-term
consequences of repetitive brain trauma: chronic traumatic
encephalopathy. PM R, 3(10 Suppl 2), S460-467.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.08.008

   Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., & Wang, G. J. (2003). Positron
emission tomography and single photon emission computed
tomography in substance abuse research. Sem. Nuclear Med.,
33(2), 114-128.

   Wall, T. L., Luczak, S. E., & Hiller-Sturmhofel, S. (2016).
Biology, Genetics, and Environment. Underlying Factors
114 | CH. 4 BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CRIME

Influencing Alcohol Metabolism. Alcohol Res. Current Rev.,
38(1), 59-68.

   Weaver, I. C. G., Cervoni, N., Champagne, F. A., D'Alessio,
A. C., Sharma, S., Seckl, J. R., Dymov, S., Szyf, M., & Meaney,
M. J. (2004). Epigenetic programming by maternal behaviour
[Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't]. Nat. Neurosci., 7(8),
847-854. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1276

   Williams, W. H., Cordan, G., Mewse, A. J., Tonks, J., &
Burgess, C. N. (2010). Self-reported traumatic brain injury
in male young offenders: a risk factor for re-offending, poor
mental health and violence? Neuropsychol. Rehabil., 20(6),
801-812. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2010.519613

   Young, S. E., Smolan, A., Corley, R. P., Krauter, K. S.,
DeFries, J. C., Crowley, T. J., & Hewitt, J. K. (2002).
Dopamine transporter polymorphism associated with
externalizing behaviour problems in children. Am. J. Med.
Genet., 114(2), 144-149.

   Yun, I., Lee, J., & Kim, S. G. (2015). Dopaminergic
polymorphisms, academic achievement, and violent
delinquency. Int. J. Offender Ther. Comp. Criminol., 59(13),
1409-1428. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306624X14554381
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 115

5.

CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL
THEORIES OF CRIME

   Curt Sobolewski and Jeff Bry

                      Ch. 5

           Psychological Theories of Crime

A special thank you to OpenOregon for use of their

material.             https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/

criminologyintro/chapter/5-1-chapter-overview-and-

learning-objectives/
116 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   Figure 5.1 Picture of primary school children in a
classroom.

   In 2018 in Texas, a 10 years old boy with autism was pinned
down and cuffed for being disruptive and swinging a
computer mouse near other students. In 2021 in Colorado, an
11 year old Hispanic boy with autism was cuffed and dragged
from the school to be thrown into the back of a police car
where he was left for hours for poking another student with
a pencil. In 2021 in Maryland, an officer handcuffed and
screamed at a 5 year old African American boy for wandering
away from his kindergarten class. In 2022 in North Carolina,
a police officer pinned down a 7 year old boy with autism
for 38 minutes, with a knee on the boy's neck while placing
handcuffs on his tiny wrists. This boy was accused of spitting
at a teacher. These are just a few of the many disturbing stories
about youth with disabilities and youth of color being
mistreated by those in positions of authority who are labeling
them as criminals.

   The juvenile justice system was designed to help kids living
in neglectful and poor conditions. As it has grown over the
years, it has gone from a system designed to get children off
the streets and stop them from committing petty crimes to a
system incarcerating startling numbers of kids with disabilities
and racial minority youth. Studies show as high as 85% of
incarcerated youth have disabilities and 70% are youth of color
(National Council on Disability, 2015; Southern Coalition for
Social Justice, 2014). This is a phenomenon seen previously
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 117

in our nation's history as well. As discussed in Chapter 3, the
positive school of criminology blamed criminality on physical
and mental characteristics or disabilities. Today, however,
children with disabilities, especially if they are also of a racial
minority, are being incarcerated for supposedly different
reasons.

   After the school shooting at Columbine High School in
1999 and continuing after more recent shootings like the one
at Sandy Hook Elementary School in 2012, schools have
instituted zero-tolerance policies and upped the presence of
police (school resource officers) on campuses. The intent was
to create a safer environment for all students, but the
unintended consequence is that school infractions have been
criminalized. For example, behaviors such as disorderly
conduct or anger control issues can be criminalized as assault.
The instances that occur in the classroom or on school
grounds can lead to arrest or detention by police officers. As a
result, kids with disabilities and BIPOC youth have been swept
up in a system of criminalization instead of protection. Even
though their behavior may be caused by a disability and not
actual defiance or dangerousness, it can be misunderstood, and
the child is treated like a threat.

   This act of punishing children for having disabilities is not
new. In fact, it is one in a long line of examples of trying to
figure out what is "wrong" with people and what to do about
it. Often, the answer has been to lock them away from the rest
118 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

of society so they can no longer be a problem. This chapter will
review some of the theories behind such actions.

   Figure 5.1 Picture of primary school children in a
classroom, US Department of Education, CC BY 2.0, via
Wikimedia Commons.

   Figure 5.3 Photo of American psychologist Henry Goddard
(1910s).

   Henry Goddard (figure 5.3), was a very popular American
psychologist, eugenicist, and segregationist. He began his
notorious work with the French Binet-Simon IQ test,
translated it, and modified it for his own purposes in the
United States in 1914. There are a couple of key points to keep
in mind as you read about Goddard's work. One is that his
work was read by Adolf Hilter and was used as justification
for many of the atrocities committed by Nazis in Germany.
The other important point is that Goddard himself later came
out to say his findings and recommendations were wrong.
Unfortunately, it was too little too late for millions of people.

   Goddard advocated colonizing (isolating, incarcerating, or
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 119

institutionalizing) and sterilizing people he deemed to be
"mental defectives." He provided "research" to support his
eugenic beliefs using his updated IQ test. In 1912, he
published the study titled The Kallikak Family: A Study in the
Heredity of Feeble-Mindedness that was discussed in Chapter
3. He later admitted his study was deeply flawed, but this was
after the results had already influenced future research and
even policy. Causing further harm, Goddard, having spent
time with youth offenders, claimed that at least half of
criminals are mentally defective. In this manner, he created the
supposed link between intelligence and crime.

   This claim was challenged in 1926 by criminologist Carl
Murchison, who maintained that intelligence was not a factor
in the causation of crime. Then in 1929, American psychiatrist
M.H. Erickson conducted a larger study and discovered a link
between IQ and crime, but his research showed that some
crimes require a greater IQ than others. What made Erickson's
study different was that he believed that the link between IQ
and crime was indirect and that intelligence did not appear to
be a causal factor in producing criminals in society.

   Then, in 1931, sociologist Edwin Sutherland published a
study that contradicted the possible connection between IQ
and crime. Sutherland compared the IQ scores of adult
offenders to those of army draftees and the two groups had
nearly identical IQ levels. The army draftees represented the
general population which is something the previous studies
failed to measure and then compare. Sutherland argued that
120 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

if the average IQ of the general population was not known,
then it would be impossible to claim it has any effect on human
behavior. He concluded that intelligence was not a generally
important cause of delinquency (Sutherland, 1931). In spite of
Sutherland's research, the debate over the link between IQ and
crime continued for the next forty years.

   Contemporary IQ-Crime Connection
   In 1961, psychologist Arthur Jensen divided intelligence
into two different categories: associative learning and
conceptual learning. Associative learning is the simple
retention of input or the memorization of facts and skills, for
example when you study for an exam and memorize facts you
know will be on the test. Conceptual learning is the ability
to manipulate and transform information input or problem-
solving, such as when that same test has open-ended questions
that ask you to think critically about a challenge and offer up
possible solutions.
   Jensen tested children of racial minority groups in the 1960s
and reached two conclusions. First, Jensen concluded that 80%
of intelligence is genetic and the remaining comes from the
environment. This finding looked directly at the "nature
versus nurture" debate, with Jensen arguing that nature
(genetics) had more influence on intelligence than
nurture (the environment in which a child is raised). Second,
he claimed that while all races were equal in terms of associative
learning, conceptual learning occurred with a significantly
higher frequency in White children compared to Black
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 121

children. This research led Jensen to problematically conclude
that Whites were inherently more able to engage in conceptual
learning than Blacks.

   In 1967, Nobel laureate and physicist William Shockley
stated that the difference between African American and
European American IQ scores was because of genetics. This
raised a question that has been present in society on the
connection between race and intelligence, which later led to
the believed connection between crime, race, and intelligence.
Shockley (1967) stated that genetics might also explain the
variable poverty and crime rates in society.

   Working off of Jensen's findings, sociologist Robert
Gordon saw a parallel between IQ scores and delinquency rates
revealed in juvenile court records and commitment data.
Without much supporting data, Gordon argued that a
connection existed between IQ and delinquency in
both African Americans and Whites (1976). He concluded
that the Black-White IQ difference was essential to address
when looking at crime in society and was more important than
links between IQ and socioeconomic status.

   In a review of research literature, sociologists Travis Hirschi
and Michael Hindelang found a small but consistent and
reliable difference between the IQs of delinquents and the IQs
of non-delinquents. In the studies they reviewed, it was
concluded that IQ was an important link to delinquency and
that it was more closely related to delinquency than to race
and social class. In other words, within social classes and racial
122 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

groups, persons with low IQs were more likely to be
delinquent compared to those with higher IQs. Hirschi and
Hindelang connected this finding to school experiences,
finding those with lower IQs had negative school experiences
and low performance making them more likely to commit
delinquent acts (Hirschi & Hindelang, 1977).

   The Bell Curve and the Question of Race
   In 1994, psychologist Richard Hernstein and political
scientist Charles Murray published what soon became a
controversial book called The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life. In the book, they concluded that
low IQ was a risk factor for criminal behavior. In particular,
they claimed the more experience White males had in the
criminal justice system, the lower their IQ. Hernstein and
Murray suggested that low intelligence could lead to criminal
behavior by being associated with the following experiences:
   lack of success in school and the job market
   lack of foresight and a desire for immediate gains
   unconventionality and insensitivity to pain or social
rejection
   failure to understand the moral reasons of law conformity
   They argued that it was cognitive disability rather than
economic or social disadvantage that created crime. Because
of this, they stated policy should focus on cognitive problems
instead of social problems such as unemployment and poverty.
   Hernstein and Murray's study received criticism because of
their outdated views of intelligence and the claim that it was
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 123

difficult to increase IQ scores despite contrary evidence. They
explained high crime among African Americans in terms of
inherited intellectual inferiority. What Hernstein and Murry
failed to consider were the alternative criminogenic risk factors
that could exist. By portraying offenders as criminals because
of cognitive disadvantage, their research justified repressive
crime policy that focused primarily on the individual and not
the environment.

   It is important to note the research and theories making
claims about intelligence and race have been determined to be
racist and misleading.

   Lifestyle Theory
   Forensic psychologist Glenn Walters formulated lifestyle
theory as a prison psychologist at the U.S. Penitentiary at
Leavenworth, Kansas. Lifestyle theory centers on the belief
that criminal behavior is a general criminal pattern of life that
is characterized by an individual's irresponsibility, self-
indulgence, negative interpersonal relationships,
impulsiveness, and the willingness to violate society's rules
(Walters, 2000). Lifestyle theory concentrates on the
development of criminal thinking patterns and was designed
to help human service professionals change criminal thinking
in their clients.
   The three concepts of lifestyle theory are conditions, choice,
and cognition. The assumption is that a criminal lifestyle is the
result of choices, which can be influenced by biological and/
or environmental conditions. Walters's theory emphasized
124 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

impulsiveness and a low IQ as the most important features
guiding choice and behavior. Further, he also described the
cognitive styles that people develop as a consequence of their
biological and/or environmental conditions as well as the
choices they make in response to them. According to the
theory, criminals display thinking errors, such as cutoff, where
they discount the suffering of the victim, and power
orientation, where they view the world in terms of strengths
and weaknesses.

   Walters asserted that criminality is the result of irrational
behavioral patterns that result in faulty thinking patterns
which begin from the consequences of choices made early in
life. The early behavioral patterns that exist can extend into
criminal behavior later in life because of faulty logic and
unrealistic rewards.

   Personality Theory
   German-British psychologist Hans Eysenck created
criminal personality theory to explain criminality by mixing
behaviorism, biology, and personality. His goal was to explain
the links between personality and crime. He suggested that
certain inherited characteristics make crime more likely, but he
did not believe that crime was an inherited trait.
   Eysenck argued that control of behavior was divided into
two categories: conditioning and inherited. Conditioning is
the category of personality traits and behavioral characteristics
people learn and inherited is the category of those that are
genetic. He believed that personality depends on four higher-
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 125

order factors: ability, extraversion, neuroticism, and
psychoticism.

   Ability is the innate intelligence everyone has at birth.
   Extraversion is an individual's energy levels that are
directed outside of themselves that can be manifested as
impulsive sociability.
   Neuroticism is a trait associated with depression, anxiety,
and other negative psychological states.
   Psychoticism can make the individual appear aggressive,
impersonal, impulsive, and lacking empathy for others.
   While he claimed ability was important in the
understanding of crime, Eysenck believed the other three
factors were more critical predictors. Eysenck's criminal
personality theory claimed that there were two personality
types that had the greatest tendency for criminal behavior:
neurotic extroverts and psychotic extroverts. Neurotic
extroverts require high stimulation levels from their
environments and their sympathetic nervous systems are quick
to respond. Psychotic extroverts are cruel, insensitive to
others, and unemotional. Most of Eysenck's work has since
been rejected, but that did not stop his influence on others.
   Licenses and Attributions for Crime and Intelligence
   "Crime and Intelligence" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 5.2 Image of IQ bell curve, Alessio Damato, Mikhail
Ryazanov, is in the public domain, CC BY-SA 3.0 via
Wikimedia Commons
126 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   Figure 5.3 Photo of American psychologist Henry Goddard
(1910s) is in the public domain, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia
Commons.

   In this section, we will examine social learning theory from
a psychological perspective. This involves also diving deeper
into what motivates a person to behave in a certain way. Crime
prevention practices tend to center more on rational thought
and the belief that people understand punishment is bad, so
they will not complete the act. However, when criminal
behavior occurs because the person committing the act thinks
of it more in terms of the positive reinforcement they receive
from committing the crime based on what they have seen
through observation and action during the course of their
lives, that goes against the way prevention had been planned.

   Psychological Social Learning Theory
   Canadian-American psychologist Albert Bandura (1974)
defined observational learning as the process by which
"people convert future consequences into motivations for
behavior." In other words, people learn by watching others
and observing the results of their actions. The unique part
of Bandura's theory was that he argued observational learning
did not require direct reinforcement. This is because humans
are capable of learning vicariously through the experiences of
others or even through their own imaginations.
   Bandura centered his research on learning aggression. His
famous Bobo Doll study involved children who watched an
adult attack a plastic clown punching bag named "Bobo," and
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 127

then they were rewarded with sweets and drinks for their
behavior. Later when the children were in the room with other
toys, they chose to attack the doll in a similar fashion as the
adults (figure 5.4).

   Figure 5.4 Albert Bandura's Bobo Doll Experiment.
   Bandura identified four steps in the process of observational
learning: attention, retention, reproduction,
and motivation. First, the learners observe what is happening
(attention) and then remember the actions they observed
(retention). Later they reproduce the model's behaviors
(reproduction) and comprehend and appreciate the possible
positive reinforcements that account for the modeled behavior
(motivation). When the children watched the adults attack
Bobo and then get rewarded, they saw and remembered, then
repeated the behavior to get the same result.
   Bandura saw family members, members of one's
subculture, and models provided by the mass media as primary
teachers in observational learning. Even though the research
128 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

has never produced a direct link between violence on television
and any long-term violent behavior in individuals, Bandura
was a frequent critic of the violence that appeared on television
and in movies. Although research has failed to produce a long-
term connection between exposure to violent material and
individual violence, there is a clear relationship that exists
when looking at the short-term effects among those
individuals who were already aggressive (Freedman, 1986).

   Bandura was one of the first theorists to see the direct link
between observation and aggressive behavior. His belief and
that of those who subscribe to his theory is that among
individuals who are already aggressive, observing aggression
will influence future aggressive behavior. Thus, as a society,
we should not be worried about all children when it comes
to watching or being exposed to violent behavior in the mass
media and popular culture, but rather focus on those children
who already have displayed aggressive tendencies.

   In today's society, we may be able to employ Bandura's
theory when it also comes down to verbal violence on social
media. The concept of an "internet troll"--an individual who
aggressively attacks someone verbally online--is fairly new in
our society. This behavior can be modeled and copied by
anyone since online anonymity can allow individuals to act in
antisocial manners they would never behave in during face-to-
face meetings. Whether it is in social media or online gaming,
the behavior that is exhibited by others isn't necessarily their
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 129

own unique behavior but rather behaviors they have observed
and adapted because they see others get away with it.

   5.4.2 Operant Conditioning

   Figure 5.5 Photo of Ivan Pavlov (1904).
   You may have heard of Pavlov's dogs. It is unusual for
someone's work from the 1900s to have been so popular that
it is still commonly referenced today. Nobel Prize winner Ivan
Pavlov (figure 5.5) conducted research that resulted in his
theory on classical conditioning. In fact, what he learned is
still used in dog training today (and in some human training).
130 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

Pavlov was studying behavior and how to control it
(behaviorism). If you have a dog, most likely you have
experienced the stimulus-response connection Pavlov found in
his research. The belief of classical conditioning is that certain
responses are natural and do not require learning. Dogs will
salivate when they see food, for example. However, Pavlov
discovered that these natural responses can be manipulated.
He got dogs to salivate in response to a neutral stimulus (the
ringing of a bell), which produced no response until the dog
learned to associate it with food. In other words, the bell is
rung, the dog is given food and this is repeated. After time,
when the bell is rung the dog associates a ringing bell with food
so they start to salivate even though no food is present (Figure
5.6).

   Pavlov's operant conditioning led to further research on
behavioral conditioning involving humans. In particular,
psychologist B.F. Skinner challenged Pavlov's findings with his
theory of operant conditioning. Skinner took the basics of
Pavlov's experiment of connecting a neutral stimulus (the bell)
to positive reinforcement (the food). He expanded to look at
both good and bad stimuli and also good and bad
reinforcements figure 5.7).

   Pavlov found this chain of events:
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 131

   Figure 5.6 Bell rings  dog salivates  dog gets food.
   Skinner looked specifically at a chain of events that involved
simply:

   Figure 5.7 Behavior  consequence.
   However, there are different types of consequences and
those can make the behavior more or less likely to occur.
   Let's first consider what could make a behavior more likely
to occur. The consequence for the behavior could be either
giving something (positive) or taking something away
(negative). For example, a parent could give a child an
allowance in exchange for them completing their chores
(positive). Conversely, the child could be required to do their
chores if they do not want to get grounded (negative). Either
132 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

way, the chores are more likely to get done because of the
presence of positive or negative reinforcements. A
reinforcement is a stimulus that increases the probability of a
given behavior, such as being paid for correctly performing a
job.

   The other layer to this scenario that Skinner proposed is
that consequences could make behaviors less likely to happen.
In this case, the consequence is still giving (positive) or
taking something away (negative), but this time what is being
given or taken is more of a punishment than a reinforcement.
For example, if a child stays out past curfew and their parent
grounds them when they get home, they are less likely to stay
out past curfew again. In this case, a punishment is given, so it
is considered a positive punishment. The consequence could
be that a child stays out past curfew so their cell phone is taken
away. Since something is being taken away that makes them
less likely to stay out past curfew again, this is called a negative
punishment.

   Operant conditioning involves the repeated presentation
or removal of a stimulus (consequence) following a behavior to
increase or decrease the probability of the behavior (Skinner,
1974). Skinner believed different results would occur through
the status of the stimulus (whether it was there or not) as
well as whether or not the behavior was punished (bad) or
reinforced (good). The table in figure 5.8 shows a matrix of
these different options.
           CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 133

Consequence Reinforcement             Punishment

Giving     Positive Reinforcement     Positive Punishment
something     (getting a reward)         (getting

Taking     Negative Reinforcement     something bad)
something     (taking away something
away                                  Negative
           bad, avoiding bad)         Punishment

                                         (removal of
                                      something good)

Figure 5.8 Matrix of behavior and consequence options in
operant conditioning.

   Studies have shown that behavioral conditioning is rarely
this straightforward and can easily backfire. For example,
research has shown that spanking can increase aggressive
behavior and that the more you spank a child the more likely
they are to defy you (Gershoff et al., 2016). Antisocial behavior
and aggression have been linked to excessive use of positive
punishment while also this type of punishment may
contribute to cognitive and mental health problems. It can
teach avoidance behavior and for many create a goal of simply
"not getting punished" but not have a replacement behavior
available.

   In summary, positive and negative punishment is used to
discourage inappropriate behaviors while positive and negative
reinforcement is used to encourage good behaviors. Some
students will study for a big exam not only to avoid a poor
grade but also to avoid any form of punishment while maybe
134 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

getting some reinforcement. The overall key is to replace
unwanted behaviors with more acceptable behaviors, which is
not always a straightforward process.

   The Hierarchy of Needs
   On a daily basis, what do you need? Think about how some
of your needs may distract you from realizing other needs.
For example, have you ever been studying for a big exam and
forgotten to eat? Have you prioritized your own education
or professional attainment over friendships and family?
However, if you are worried about your family then possibly
that preoccupation will take over your educational goals. In
our lives, immediate needs create immediate action. This is
the reason why, when personal issues overtake one's life, other
needs suffer.
   American psychologist Abraham Maslow looked at our
needs in connection with what motivates our behavior. He
published a paper in 1943 titled "A Theory of Human
Motivation" where he introduced the hierarchy of needs table
that is presented in figure 5.9.
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 135

   Figure 5.9 Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs.
   Maslow believed that humans are motivated by goal
accomplishment and that one's needs are mentally prioritized
in order of importance. However, the hierarchy is not designed
to be followed one after another, meaning our focus does not
move directly from food to security to friends. Rather, simply
put, a person's action focuses on satisfying their lower-priority
needs before reaching the higher-priority needs.
   Physiological needs must be satisfied first. We need food,
clothing, shelter, and sleep. These are basic needs and why
individuals who do not have these needs met can require social
services to help them meet these basic needs of survival. For
example, people experiencing homelessness do not have a basic
need met of shelter and often food and water, which affects
their motivations and behaviors until those needs are met.
136 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   Safety needs are usually environmental. These will include
the environment you are currently in whether it be home,
school, or any other location. If there are problems at home,
one may have issues paying attention to their education or
work because their safety needs have not been met. These
home issues could be discord in the house, addiction, no
parental structure, or even that the area they live in is
dangerous with possibly the noise of police cars and
helicopters keeping them up at night (thus interrupting their
physiological need of rest as well). Structure and predictability
are important when acquiring safety. Routines are important
and that was one of the reasons why the COVID-19 pandemic
was so difficult for many people because we all were forced to
discover new routines.

   Love and a sense of belonging apply to family and friend
relationships. This is sometimes difficult when you move to
a new city or school and away from family without having
friends yet. However, joining clubs, volunteering, or going to
group activities are great ways to create a new community.
Research has shown that we need face-to-face interactions to
accomplish a sense of love and belonging. One of the biggest
issues faced by individuals in prison is not the violence that
could be experienced in prison but rather the loss of freedom
and connection to family.

   Self-esteem centers on respect for others, confidence, respect
from others, and accomplishment. Most people are critical of
themselves because of the evaluation of their own
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 137

accomplishments and their potential. Self-esteem can be found
in our need to succeed but it also can be fostered by being
appreciated or acknowledged by others. When an individual's
self-esteem needs have been met then a person will feel capable
and worthy instead of incompetent and unimportant.

   The needs that have been discussed so far can be viewed as
deprivation needs. Basically, if these needs are not met then the
individual will not be motivated to focus on the highest needs
in the pyramid of self-actualization. This is a need that focuses
on the ability of an individual to realize their own potential.
The focus of this need is self-improvement and Maslow
suggests that very few individuals ever attain this level. These
are individuals who understand realistic goals with regard to
their ability and their own path in life. In other words, Maslow
claims we are rarely actually our ideal selves. To achieve this
highest level, individuals go to therapy, live in the present, and
understand what they need to gain a better sense of fulfillment.
Maslow would see society's addiction to social media and
technology as a barrier to achieving self-actualization because
it takes us out of the present and makes it impossible to be
satisfied and mindful in the moment.

   How is the hierarchy of needs part of the study of crime?
We can look at any undesirable behavior, including crime, as a
need that is not being met. Someone has found an alternative
route to meet a need that is not being met in a prosocial
manner. For example, if someone does not have consistent
reliable access to food, they may steal some. This is a basic
138 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

need that must be met. If someone does not have safe, reliable
housing, they may end up living in a homeless camp. Figure
5.10 addresses the issue of housing and whether or not illegal
homeless camps actually generate crime.

   In short, to decrease criminal behavior it is important for
basic individual needs to be met. This belief has been difficult
in some areas because it is seen as a "give out" or people being
"freeloaders" but in reality, making sure community members
have their basic needs met can actually be a strong way to
decrease crime in the given community. For example, low-
income affordable housing and legal homeless camps and pods
can help people obtain those basic needs and be able to move
on to meet other important needs in their lives in a legal,
prosocial manner.

   Activity: Do Homeless Camps Generate Crime?

   Figure 5.10 Homeless encampment along city street in
Portland, Oregon (2020).
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 139

   Do homeless camps generate crime? The answer may not be
as simple as some might think.

   During the COVID-19 pandemic, some cities' tolerance
policies let homeless camps enter more visible areas.
Subsequently, mayors of Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle,
and Portland have all promised to crack down on the camps.
But the question is why? Is it just because they are now more
visible? The stated concern is an increase in criminal behavior,
but are the camps actually generating crime?

   On average, just the increase in the number of temporary
structures in an area is not associated with an increase in
property crime. Even in areas where homeless camps have
grown in size, there is still no direct link to an increase in
property crime. However, camps are filled with individuals
who cannot meet their basic needs. When people are without
basic needs, they can turn to drugs to alleviate the discomfort,
which can make them addicted and in need of money to
support their addiction. This can increase property crime in
the area.

   If the basic needs are not being met among the population
of people experiencing homelessness and that can be linked to
crime, what should be done to lower crime or the potential for
crime in these areas?

   Licenses and Attributions for Social Learning and
Motivational Theories of Crime

   "Social Learning and Motivational Theories of Crime" by
Curt Sobolewski is licensed under CC BY 4.0.
140 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   Figure 5.4 Albert Bandura's Bobo Doll Experiment by
Creative Commons Attribution, CC BY-SA 4.0, via
Wikimedia Commons.

   Figure 5.5 Photo by unknown photographer is in the Public
Domain, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons

   Figure 5.6 Bell photo by rhoda alex on Unsplash; Dog
salivating photo by Mpho Mojapelo on Unsplash; Dog food
photo by Mathew Coulton on Unsplash

   Figure 5.7 Behavior  consequence
   Figure 5.8 Matrix of behavior and consequence options in
operant conditioning by Curt Sobolewski is licensed under
CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 5.9 Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs by Chiquo, CC
BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Figure 5.10 Homeless encampment along city street in
Portland, Oregon (2020) by Creative Commons Attribution,
CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Crime policy is based on the common belief that humans
have free will and "choose" to break the laws; and because of
this free will, they should be punished accordingly. But, what
if we are born with a propensity to offend? What policy could
be created for offenders who were born criminals?
   Psychodynamic Theory
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 141

   Figure 5.11 Sigmund Freud (1921).
   Austrian neurologist Sigmund Freud (figure 5.11)
developed psychodynamic theory (which is technically a
collection of theories) and psychoanalysis (the therapeutic
application of the theories) to explain the source of human
142 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

behavior. Psychodynamic theory is formed around the
following basic assumptions:

   Unconscious motives drive our feelings and behavior.
   Our feelings and behaviors as adults are rooted in our
childhood experiences.
   We have no control over our feelings and behaviors since
they are all caused by our unconscious that we cannot see.
   Personality is made up of the id (primitive and instinctive),
ego (decision-making), and superego (learned values and
morals).
   A classic example of Freud's psychoanalytic theory is the
Freudian slip or slip of the tongue. According to Freud, that is
a revelation from our unconscious and should be believed.
   Psychoanalysis applies psychodynamic theory in therapy by
examining one's childhood and trying to better understand
your unconscious. Freud believed the unconscious was able
to alter one's conscious values and emotions without the
individual being aware of this control. According to Freud,
individuals are not aware of what determines their behavior
and this is in contrast with the concept of "free will" that
was part of the classical criminological theories discussed in
Chapter 3.
   According to Freud, the unconscious is where unpleasant
memories and explosive emotions exist and these both are
accumulated as repressed memories and emotions. In other
words, what has happened to us in the past can guide our
behavior even if we aren't aware of the connection. We may
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 143

also be willing to use illegitimate means to get what we want,
much like in Merton's strain theory covered in Chapter 4.
According to Freud, in order to help someone change their
behavior, it is essential to access and understand their repressed
memories, which is again where psychoanalysis comes in.

   The Psychopath Test
   Are you a psychopath? Well, there is a test you can take to
determine if you are. Do not worry if you are because that
could just mean that you would become a good CEO of a
company. Research has shown that CEOs tend to score high
on the psychopath test (Wisniewski, Yekini, & Omar, 2017).
   Psychopathy has connections to the study of crime that go
back more than 100 years. Many people think of serial killers
and people who commit heinous crimes when they think of
psychopathy, although we now know it is also common in
people who are especially successful in business. Someone who
is a psychopath does not have feelings of remorse. Psychopathy
is a personality disorder characterized by narcissism and
manipulation. Psychopaths may be cold-blooded and violent,
but they also know how to use charm to attain their goals.
   Early researchers saw psychopathic behavior as moral
insanity. The term psychopathic was first used in 1894 by
German psychiatrist Julias Ludwig August Koch who studied
personality disorders. He viewed people who had emotional
and moral aberrations derived from congenital factors as
suffering from psychopathic inferiority. Research on
psychopathy has continued over the years and has seen several
144 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

iterations. German Psychiatrist Emile Kraepelin expanded
upon Koch's research in 1904 and created categories of
psychopathic personality while also bringing back a moral
component to psychopaths. His categories included born
criminals, pathological liars, querulous persons (someone who
always feels wronged), and persons driven by basic compulsion
(such as addicts).

   Another German psychiatrist Kurt Schneider continued the
work on psychopathy in 1923. He argued there are many types
of abnormal personalities that are not harmful. The important
distinction, according to Schneider, is that psychopathic
personalities suffer from their abnormal personality and cause
suffering to others because of it. He identified ten types of
psychopathic personalities such as fanatics, emotionally
unstable, explosive, insecure, attention-seeking, affectionless,
and more. Schneider's 10 types of psychopaths are the
foundation for the later developments over decades of
studying the human mind and the connection between what
we think and how we act.

   Contemporary classifications of psychopaths create a more
general vision of psychopathic behavior. Psychopathy in the
official psychiatry diagnosis manual (Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition; DSM-V) is
associated predominantly with boldness, meanness, and
disinhibition. The general notion of someone who is a
psychopath is one who is charming and makes a good first
impression, but actually has a complete lack of empathy and
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 145

will demonstrate aggression and behaviors that are harmful to
others.

   In 2011, John Ronson wrote the book The Psychopath Test:
A Journey Through the Madness Industry in which he explored
the idea that psychopaths may not only be criminals but
leaders of corporations and politicians in our society. Ronson
brings up a very interesting question when looking at behavior
in our society: "what is normal behavior?" The CEO of a
company who fires a group of workers right before a holiday
may be just doing their job and be seen as a strong leader, but
does this CEO feel any emotion for changing these workers'
lives? Any for ruining their holiday plans? If not, then could
this CEO be a psychopath? This type of behavior occurring in
a normalized setting of ruthless behavior does not change the
definition of the behavior itself, but rather shows how society
views the individual.

   Activity: A Forensic Psychologist Test for
Psychopathology

   Forensic psychologists work within the legal system to
translate medical psychological terminology into legal
language. They evaluate the current state of the individual
and provide treatment and sentencing recommendations. The
forensic psychologist will conduct psychological assessments
of the individual which include tools such as tests, interviews,
behavioral observations, and case studies. These tests can help
in understanding the psychological and mental health status
146 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

of the individual and focus on anything from depression to
psychopathy.

   Psychopathy can be tested through Forensic Assessment
Instruments (FAIs), Clinical Assessment Instruments (CAIs),
and The Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R) which is the
most frequently used tool in violence risk assessment, civil
commitments, and insanity evaluations.

   Vilijoen et al. (2010) surveyed 199 forensic clinicians about
the practices they used in assessing violence risk and found that
the use of risk assessment and psychopathy was common. Even
though the psychopathy measures were used more with respect
to adults, the researchers found that the majority of clinicians
(79%) used the measure with juveniles at least once. The issue
in this situation is the labeling of juveniles as psychopaths and
the long-term effects that would have on their lives. If a juvenile
is labeled as a psychopath then this could affect their length of
detention and if they are in the adult system then their chance
of early release becomes less likely with a label of "psychopath."

   If a person is labeled as a psychopath then can they be
helped through therapy or are they simply labeled a
psychopath for the rest of their lives?

   Antisocial Personality Disorder
   Antisocial Personality Disorder (ASPD) is a condition
where the subject has been poorly or ineffectively socialized
which leads to behavior which puts them in consistent and
constant conflict in society. Individuals with ASPD are self-
centered and selfish, impatient, impulsive, calloused and
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 147

noxious towards others, they also do not feel guilt or remorse
for their behavior. Individuals with ASPD do not learn from
experience and punishment, they are intolerant of others needs
and cannot handle frustration. Other characteristics of this
disorder include lacking in empathy towards others, very high
sense of self-worth or capability, many are able to replicate
superficial charm.

   An individual with ASPD may not necessarily choose to
commit crimes, but their personality and approach to life
makes their lives seemingly difficult. They have difficulty in
maintaining relationships including friendships and romantic
relationships, they also have a difficult time maintaining
employment and completing the basic tasks of life (bills,
meetings, being social, etc.). As these individuals are extremely
selfish and self-centered, they tend to mainly think of
themselves and not consider the wants and needs of others.
They may also see crime as an "easier" alternative to working
a full-time job, they also do not feel guilt or remorse for their
actions and behaviors. These attributes are what generally
results in a higher risk and propensity to be involved in crime.
148 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What are the characteristics of people with
antisocial personality disorder?
   "People diagnosed with Antisocial Personality
Disorder (ASPD) often show a consistent pattern of
behavior that includes a lack of concern for others,
impulsive actions, manipulation, and a disregard for
societal rules. These characteristics can increase the
likelihood of partaking in criminal behavior.
   One of the main features of ASPD is the absence of
empathy, which allows people to harm others without
feeling guilty. Most people are discouraged from harmful
actions due to their emotional connection with others.
However, people with ASPD do not experience this
emotional barrier, making it easier for them to commit
crimes without any internal conflict.
   Moreover, the impulsiveness associated with ASPD
can lead people to engage in criminal activities without
considering the legal consequences. Their inability to
think through the potential consequences of their
actions can result in impulsive acts of violence, theft, or
other criminal behaviors.
   The manipulative tendencies observed in people with
ASPD can also contribute to their involvement in
criminal activities. Their ability to deceive and
manipulate others can lead to fraudulent activities. They
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 149

may use the trust of others for personal gain,
disregarding the harm they cause in the process."

   The Psychotic Offender
   Some forms of crime and criminality may be the result of
some aspect of psychosis. Psychotic individuals generally have
psychological conditions and issues that put them out of touch
with reality. These individuals may experience delusions,
hallucinations and/or other significant breaks and
disjunctions with reality. While these conditions are not
necessarily related to crime, this disjointed thinking may
propel people into criminal acts based upon breaches of reality
that result in inappropriate and/or criminal behavior.
   An example of this breach in reality would include
schizophrenia. Schizophrenics have disordered and
disjointed thinking that puts them out of touch with reality.
Paranoid Schizophrenics possess disjointed thinking
INCULDING delusions and hallucinations. While these
conditions do not necessarily result in criminal behavior, a
schizophrenic may misinterpret situations and/or reality in
such a way as to commit crimes. This could be based on overt
actions, or reactions to people and situations their disorder
misconstrues or misinterprets, le
   The Lucifer Effect
   For centuries, researchers have been trying to understand
how people could commit deplorable acts and why they would
do so. After World War II, social psychologists tried to discover
why such a horrible event as mass genocide happened and how
150 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

so many people chose to participate. Psychologist Solomon
Asch conducted a study on conformity in the 1950s. His study
focused on a "vision test" where a group of students was asked
to look at three lines and decide which line matched the length
of the reference line. What he was really studying is whether
participants would change their answers to match (conform)
with others in the group. Asch found that 75% of the
participants conformed at least once, and 5% conformed every
time. Asch's study showed how conformity is over-trained in
our educational system. Think back to elementary school and
how conformity was rewarded. We are taught to conform and,
as a result, going against a group is difficult for most.

   Despite these findings, critics did not think that Asch's
study got at the core of Nazi Germany's genocide since it was
only looking at lines and the decision was not actually about
life or death. These critics were challenged by Stanley
Milgram's experiment on obedience (Figure 5.12). By far the
most famous conformity research, Milgram began his
experiments in 1961 and tried to answer the question of
whether or not many of the Nazis were just following orders
and being obedient.
                        CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 151

   Figure 5.12 Advertisement for the recruiting of the Milgram
experiment subjects (1961).
152 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   The experiment setup was simple. There was a teacher and
a learner. Unknown to the "teacher," the "learner" was a plant
in the study (an actor) and knew what was going on. The
teacher would read a list of words and the learner had to recall
a particular pair from a list of four possible choices. If the
learner missed an answer, the teacher was supposed to give him
an electric shock. When the teacher paused not wanting to
shock the learner (who previously revealed that he was checked
out for heart issues) the facilitator of the experiment would
say, "The experiment requires you to continue," and, "It is
absolutely essential that you continue," and finally, "You have
no other choice but to continue." Even after the learner
screamed, 65% of the participants in the teacher roles
continued to shock the learner up to the highest level (450
volts) and all of the participants in the teacher roles continued
administering shocks up to 300 volts. All the teachers shocked
the learner at least once.

   In his article "The Perils of Obedience," Milgram (1974)
wrote:

   The legal and philosophic aspects of obedience are of
enormous import, but they say very little about how most
people behave in concrete situations. I set up a simple
experiment at Yale University to test how much pain an
ordinary citizen would inflict on another person simply
because he was ordered to by an experimental scientist. Stark
authority was pitted against the subjects' [participants']
strongest moral imperatives against hurting others, and, with
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 153

the subjects' [participants'] ears ringing with the screams of
the victims, authority won more often than not. The extreme
willingness of adults to go to almost any length on the
command of an authority constitutes the chief finding of the
study and the fact most urgently demanding explanation.

   The willingness of adults to conform to authority could
only make a person wonder how much of their behavior is due
to the participant's belief that it is what they are supposed to
do in the situation they are in. Phillip Zimbardo's Stanford
Prison experiment showed perfectly how quickly individuals
would adapt to a given role based on this basic belief.

   In 1971, Phillip Zimbardo conducted the infamous
Stanford Prison Experiment in which college student
participants were randomly assigned the roles of either "guard"
or "prisoner." In this study, the guards quickly began using
their power to brutalize and humiliate the prisoners. The
experiment was designed to last two weeks, but because of the
trauma experienced by the participants, it was stopped after
only six days. What caused these normal college students to
commit unspeakable acts? Was that what they believed they
were supposed to do in that situation or were they themselves
evil?

   In his 2007 book The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How
Good People Turn Evil, Zimbardo sought to explain why
people who live "good" lives suddenly engage in "evil" actions.
His belief is that the worst criminal behavior could be because
an individual conforms to a specific ideology or narrative that
154 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

tells them those they are harming are not human, they are
"others." This train of thought can be applied to police
shootings, school shootings, and all the "evil" actions that are
present in our society.

   This is what many claim happened in Buffalo, New York on
May 14, 2022, when a White man went into a grocery store
and killed ten Black individuals. The shooter was motivated by
hate and also the White nationalist concept of "replacement
theory" which has been supported by some politicians and
certain media outlets in the United States. The question could
be asked if the one way to prevent mass shootings and police
brutality would be to change the narrative that exists from
people being the "enemy" or the "other" to everyone being
"human."

   Insanity and Legal Definitions
   Whether or not an individual has the capacity to stand trial
based upon psychological issues or "insanity" defenses has
been a long-standing issue. There have been a number of
standards for whether or not a defendant is culpable for the
crimes they have committed. The M'Naughten Rule is a
standard for judging whether an individual is legally sane,
requiring the offender to not know what they were doing, or
what they were doing was wrong.
   The irresistible-impulse test followed M'Naughten Rule,
as a judgement for mental sanity and fitness that examines if
(because of their mental state) the person could "not resist"
committing the crime. This test judges legal sanity on whether
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 155

or not the individual's mental fitness made them unable to
resist committing the crime.

   The Durham Rule is a standard for judging legal insanity
based upon the individual not being responsible for their
criminal actions based upon mental defect or mental disease.

   There also may be an adjudication of guilty but mentally
ill (GBMI). This adjudication finds the suspect guilty of the
crime, but based upon their prevailing mental condition are
generally sent to a state or psychiatric hospital for treatment
rather than to prison.

   Licenses and Attributions for Nature versus Nurture:
Are We Born Bad?

   "Nature versus Nurture: Are We Born Bad?" by Curt
Sobolewski is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   Figure 5.11 Sigmund Freud (1921) by Max Halberstadt,
CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

   Figure 5.12 Advertisement for the recruiting of the Milgram
experiment subjects (1961) by Olivier Hammam, CC BY-SA
4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

   Conclusions
   In this chapter, we focus on theories that are all about the
individual person and their own behavior. In this chapter, we
considered theories of intelligence and personality. Whatever is
believed to be the source of criminal behavior guides policies
and practices. For this reason, it is important to know the
theory behind the decisions. Some of the theories in this
chapter were deterministic, meaning people have a certain
156 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

intelligence or personality and there is not much to be done
about that. However, other theories suggested different
interventions like conditioning and therapy could help change
someone's behavior. As we discussed in Chapter 1, the point
of criminology is to understand why crime happens with the
end goal of being able to stop it. Think about how the theories
in these chapters affect how people may go about trying to stop
crime.

   Application Exercises
   Take an IQ test. What does it say about your likelihood
to commit crime according to the theories discussed in this
chapter?
   Take a psychopath test. What does it say about your
likelihood to commit crime according to the theories discussed
in this chapter?
   Go through Maslow's hierarchy of needs and see if your
needs are being met and at what level.
   Discussion Questions
   Is there both good and evil in everyone? What tips the scales
in one direction or the other?
   Which has more influence on someone's personality and
behavior - nature or nurture?
   Does intelligence have any influence on whether or not a
person is a criminal? Explain.
   Can a person be a psychopath and not a criminal? Explain.
   Freud's theories have been popular, but how do they apply
to the study of crime?
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 157

   How can Maslow's hierarchy of needs be used to help
support policy in our society?

   Key Terms
   ability
   associative learning
   classical conditioning
   conceptual learning
   conditioning
   criminal personality theory
   cutoff
   extraversion
   inherited
   IQ
   lifestyle theory
   negative punishment
   negative reinforcement
   neurotic extroverts
   neuroticism
   observational learning
   operant conditioning
   positive punishment
   positive reinforcement
   power orientation
   psychoanalysis
   psychodynamic theory
   psychopathic
   psychotic extroverts
158 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   psychoticism
   Summary
   The average IQ test score is 100. Someone below 85 was
considered undesirable and problematic. This label did lead
to someone being incarcerated or institutionalized, or even
murdered. Goddard advocated colonizing and sterilizing
people he deemed to be "mental defectives." He claimed that
at least half of criminals are mentally defective. Murchison
maintained that intelligence was not a factor in the causation
of crime, but Erickson discovered a link between IQ and crime
and claimed some crimes require a greater IQ than others.
Several scholars promoted research that made racist claims
about IQ differences between African Americans and
European Americans. Hirschi and Hindelang found within
social classes and racial groups, persons with low IQ were more
likely to be delinquent. Hernstein and Murray argued that
it was cognitive disability rather than economic or social
disadvantage that created crime.
   Walters formulated lifestyle theory that centers on the belief
that criminal behavior is a general criminal pattern of life.
Eysenck created criminal personality theory to explain
criminality. Bandura defined observational learning as the
process by which "people convert future consequences into
motivations for behavior." Pavlov conducted research that
resulted in his theory on classical conditioning and Skinner
looked at both good and bad stimuli and also good and bad
reinforcements in terms of how they affected behavior.
                       CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME | 159

Maslow believed that humans' needs are mentally prioritized
in order of importance. Freud believed the unconscious was
able to alter one's conscious values and emotions without the
individual being aware of this control. Koch viewed people
who had emotional and moral aberrations as suffering from
psychopathic inferiority. Kraepelin created categories of
psychopathic personality and Schneider argued there are many
types of abnormal personalities that are not harmful. The
important distinction is that psychopathic personalities suffer
from their abnormal personality and cause suffering to others
because of it. Asch conducted a study on the willingness of
adults to conform to authority. Zimbardo's Stanford Prison
experiment showed how quickly individuals would adapt to a
given role to commit evil acts.

   Resources
   The American Bar Association provides various resources,
such as publications including periodicals and the ABA
Journal. http://www.americanbar.org/aba.html
   The National Center for State Courts provides information
on mental-health courts. https://www.ncsc.org/Topics/
Alternative-Dockets/Problem-Solving-Courts/Mental-
Health-Courts/Resource-Guide.aspx
   PsychLAW is the American Psychological Association
website for psychology and law. It links to the APA journal
Psychology, Public Policy and Law and to APA amicus briefs.
http://www.apa.org/topics/law/index.aspx
   Licenses and Attributions for Conclusion
160 | CH. 5 PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORIES OF CRIME

   "Conclusion" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed under CC BY
4.0.

   References
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © by Taryn
VanderPyl. All Rights Reserved.
                                  CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 161

6.

CH. 6 SOCIAL
STRUCTURE THEORIES

   Curt Sobolewski and Jeff Bry

                                Ch. 6
        Social Structure Theories of Crime and Crimes of

                            Opportunity
   A special thank you to the Introduction to Criminology
OpenOregon resource for much of this chapter.
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/criminologyintro/
   Introduction
   Sociology has been a dominant force in the discipline of
criminology for decades, at both a macro and a micro level of
analysis. Two competing forces in the sociological explanation
of crime include the anomie perspective and the imitation
perspective. Each perspective provides a different sociological
analysis regarding crime and criminal behavior. We will begin
the discussion with anomie theories, which are more closely
correlated to social structure theories. Ch. 7 will examine
theories more strongly related to the imitation perspective,
which more closely aligns with social process theories.
162 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

Viewpoints of anomie and imitation are explained in this
chapter, with a discussion of the social structure theories of
sociology. The perspectives of anomie and imitation are
sometimes referred to as "early theories" in sociology.

   Anomie
   Emile Durkheim, a French sociologist who officially
established the field of sociology in the 1890s, believed that
we have to look at what makes up a society to understand
its social issues. Durkheim claimed that as society develops
and grows, unstable relationships evolve between individuals
and the community. The larger and more sophisticated society
becomes, the greater difficulties the society has in socializing
its members or teaching them how to fit into the society as a
whole.
   Durkheim saw that there could be some causes of crime
within a society, and it all came down to the cohesiveness of
the group. He believed that individualism (focusing on oneself
instead of the group wellbeing) could be a cause of deviance,
or going against the norms of that society.
   In today's society, Durkheim would look at the gap between
the rich and the poor and identify that as deviant
individualism in the form of greed, or a deviant adaptation
to the pursuit of "success." When such deviances happen and
the social equilibrium is disturbed (someone rocks the boat),
people are set adrift not having comfort or an understandable
place in society. The only way to fix this problem and restore
balance or equilibrium is to create a new or updated social
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 163

equilibrium by working these deviant adaptations into the
"new normal" of the society. Basically, the social norm is
updated by accounting for individualism within the group.

   Think about the last time you heard a news story about
someone or a group singled out as being "problematic" in
society. Were their issues completely of their own doing? Or
were their issues part of a change in society's structure that
caused an imbalance which needed to be addressed through
policy?

   For example, in the 1980s and 1990s, manufacturing jobs
started to leave the United States. This disturbed the
equilibrium by removing a solid wage-earning unskilled
profession and replacing it with absolutely nothing.
Individuals who did not have the education or training for
other types of employment were left to their own devices and
needed to discover how to earn a wage in a society where their
skill was no longer needed. What do you think was the overall
result of this disruption in the equilibrium? How would you
react if your job was taken away and what you could do no
longer mattered in this country?

   Social disturbances like this are problematic because
(besides hurting people who lose their job, sense of purpose,
and ability to take care of their family) it creates a social
condition where things are unstable, unfair, and confusing.
Durkheim called this social condition anomie, which is the
relative absence or confusion of norms and rules in society. He
explained that disturbing the norm in this manner was at the
164 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

core of explaining deviance. In other words, when there is a
breakdown in the social norms, society devolves into anomie.
What follows is a person feeling adrift with little connection
to society, making them no longer care about the group and
lifting any constraints they may have had on their behavior as
a result. We see this in times of economic decline; inevitably,
crime rates increase. The opposite is true when the society is
financially prosperous; crime rates decrease.

   Anomie provides valuable insight into the changes of crime
rates within society. It also can direct ways in which policy
can have a direct effect on crime in society. When significant
social, economic, or political changes occur, this change can
have a direct impact on the crime rate--whether good or bad.
Durkheim influenced a number of theorists such as Robert
Merton (discussed later in this chapter) who would later study
crime and take this theory of anomie deeper into the
explanation of crime in society.

   Theory of Imitation
   Gabriel Tarde was another French sociologist and
criminologist working at the same time as Durkheim. These
two frequently and publicly disagreed. Tarde focused
predominantly on criminology over sociology and tried to
figure out how people became criminally involved. In his book,
Le Lois de l'imtation (The Laws of Imitation) published in
1890, he made an argument that people do what they know.
Tarde was the first theorist to associate crime with learning in
what he called the laws of imitation.
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 165

   According to Tarde's theory of imitation, he believed that
crime is the result of imitation or modeling the behaviors of
others. When a person learns new responses by observing
others, this is called modeling. He did not view people who
committed crimes as biologically or psychologically different
from noncriminals; instead, he saw criminals as just modeling
the deviant behaviors they saw around them. He felt this was
especially true for fathers and their sons (like father, like son).
His theory went against the commonly held belief that
criminals were simply bad people. If crime, as Tarde argued,
is learned by observing and imitating the criminal behavior
of those around the individual, then crime could also be
unlearned. Tarde believed that this happened more likely in
dense, urban areas where individuals had exposure to more
people as models, ripe for imitation.

   According to Tarde, imitation is the source of all progress
that occurs, both good and bad. By recognizing the power
of imitation, people could try to control the outcome. He
believed that more positive connections and better
communication could lead to greater production of good
outcomes. An important factor in his "laws of imitation" is
that individuals need to be in close contact. People are
influenced by those with whom they have a relationship or at
least those whom they witness regularly. Think about who you
were in close contact with growing up. Your parents? Other
family members? Neighbors? The answer to this question
could determine the course of your life. According to Tarde, a
166 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

neighbor who was a medical doctor and a neighbor who was a
petty thief both could have a great influence on the behaviors
of a child who is observing. For this reason, Tarde named close
contact as the first of three "laws" of his "laws of imitation."

   The second law is related to the imitation of superiors by
inferiors. Tarde said people are influenced by those who have
power or are in positions of power. The person in the inferior
position (e.g., child, employee, new kid in school) may want to
see themselves as "superior" and by doing so may imitate the
behaviors and attitudes they see in those who hold the power
(e.g., parents, boss, cool kid in school). Another example is
when politicians make certain claims, people who are in their
same political party are likely to believe them and not question
what they say because it comes from someone who has power.

   What is the cost to the "inferior" person, though, of
conforming to what the "superiors" are saying and doing?
Think about the attack on the U.S. Capitol on January 6,
2021. Quite a few individuals who had no power imitated
those in power who they admired and that led them to
criminal acts. Their lack of power also meant they were not
able to fight a criminal justice system that did not favor their
social status, so many of them have had to face criminal
sanctions while those they were imitating remain free.

   The third and final "law of imitation," according to Tarde, is
insertion. This means that the new behaviors that were learned
from imitating someone you look up to replace your old
behaviors. Tarde believed people would observe someone else,
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 167

want to be more like them, copy their behaviors, then adapt
them to make them their own. This could mean "copycat"
crimes like we see when some horrible event gets a lot of media
attention. It could also mean using new technology to update
the crime or even changing weapons from a knife to a gun.
The behavior is customized and personalized as it replaces the
person's old behaviors.

   Tarde also recognized that opposition can occur. This can
happen when someone is torn between different sources for
modeling or when new and old ideas collide. Opposition leads
to some sort of adaptation. In other words, the person doing
the imitating might combine what they observe and learn from
more than one influence. In this manner, they create their own
way of behaving and thinking, which was fed by more than
one source.

   So far, we have looked at Durkheim who believed that
society was a collective unity, and at Tarde who saw society as
individualistic. Now, we will look at theorists who explored the
effect of different societal structures on crime.

   Licenses and Attributions for Early Theories
   "Early Theories" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed under CC
BY 4.0.
   Social Structure Theories
   Structural functionalism in sociology explores the ways
in which different parts of the community interact with each
other. A structural functionalist sees that the existence of a
social structure provides a continuous benefit to society. For
168 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

instance, if the educational system is strong, society thrives. If
the educational system is weak, society suffers. The weakened
system results in social issues, such as crime and poverty.
Durkheim is considered a structural functionalist who has
influenced theorists to look at the strength of the social
structure to determine the health of society.

   Conflict Theory

   Figure 4.2 Max Weber, 1918.
   German Sociologist Max Weber (figure 4.2) studied the
conflicts between social groups in the early 1900s. Social
groups are created by economic forces (similar social class,
income level, types of employment); by social forces (similar
values and beliefs); and by political forces (levels of social status
and power, honor or prestige, respect). These differences can
lead to the creation of interest groups that join forces to
exercise power or influence.
   Weber believed conflict among these social groups was
inevitable, which is the basis for what he called conflict
theory. He argued the authority figures in society are religion,
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 169

business, government, and the law. These are not going to
have the same interests, priorities, or goals as all social groups
thereby creating conflict between those who benefit from the
rules. Furthermore, those who do not benefit from the rules
are likely to be exploited, discriminated against, and
marginalized. For this reason, there will be conflict between
social groups and that leads to criminal or deviant behavior.

   Twists on Conflict Theory
   Weber's conflict theory was an expanse of Karl Marx's
(1848) philosophy about economic conflict. Marx saw conflict
originating in his version of the "haves and have-nots." He
blamed capitalist society for creating great wealth for a select
few and extreme poverty for many others. He saw the
capitalists as owning the means of production (businesses) and
the proletariat (workers) as the group that is exploited through
their labor. Marx saw this natural conflict that he believed
would create class wars and revolution as the workers replaced
the capitalists. As we know, there are still "haves and have-nots"
and a giant gap between the wealthy and the rest of us, so the
workers have still not replaced the capitalists. However, that
does not mean there has not been conflict.
   Around the same time as Weber, Dutch criminologist
Wilem Bonger was also building upon Marx's claims. Bonger
connected capitalism as argued by Marx to the promotion of
greed and self-interest that he referred to as excessive egoism.
He, like Marx, viewed capitalism as the core problem. Bonger
argued the poor commit crimes out of need or a sense of
170 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

injustice when they are pushed by the inequalities that exist
within a capitalistic system. He did not claim that poverty by
itself caused crime. Rather, when poverty was merged with
negative social forces such as racism, individualism, and
materialism, these conditions would be very conducive to the
rise of criminality.

   Another twist on conflict theory came from Swedish-
American sociologist Thorsten Sellin. He studied the role of
culture conflict in causing crime (1938). Sellin saw behavioral
norms as expressions of group cultural values. In a
homogenous society, where everyone's the same, there is a
consensus on what is right and what is wrong. But in a
heterogeneous society with cultural differences, conflict may
exist regarding what is right and wrong. Sellin said when the
values and beliefs of two different groups collide, culture
conflict results.

   Strain Theory

   Figure 4.3 Unemployed men during the Great Depression.
   It has been said that sociologist Robert Merton
                                  CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 171

"Americanized" Durkheim's anomie theory. Merton (1957)
argued that U.S. society considers economic success as an
absolute value, hence the "American Dream." As a result, the
pressure to achieve economic success overrides any need to fit
in with the rest of society's rules and follow their laws.

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What is the effect of disorganization, strain and
poverty on crime?
   "I don't think people being from poverty and drugs
and alcohol causing crime are mutually exclusive.
Addiction is more prevalent in more economically
depressed areas. https://www.addictioncenter.com/
addiction/low-inco...I wonder though, since crime is
already higher in economically depressed areas, whether
particular types of substance addictions combined with
indigence raises the chances that someone gets involved
in criminality. (I'm using criminality in a sociological
sense, not the legal sense, as being addicted to substances
already causes law-breaking, whether or not it is
172 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

reasonable or healthy to punish people for their
addictions--so in this context I don't take the legal
perspective seriously.)"

   In American society, there is a widely acknowledged goal
of some level of wealth that tends to be represented by home
ownership, two cars in the driveway, a picket fence, and a dog
(probably a golden retriever). However, being able to get this
"American Dream" is actually not possible for a lot of people.
The general message is to work hard, follow socially accepted
steps toward your goal, and you will be rewarded. This does
not work out in reality for many Americans and the distance
between what someone wants to achieve and what they are
actually able to achieve because of various obstacles and
limitations is strain (figure 4.3).

   Merton's strain theory is that when someone faces strain,
they experience anomie which Durkheim explained as the
relative absence or confusion of norms and rules in society.
When applied to strain theory, anomie is the willingness to
take alternative routes or use alternative means to get to the
goals you want. In other words, if a big television is a symbol
of success and happiness, someone may be willing to steal one
if they cannot afford to buy one so people think they are doing
well.

   Merton witnessed this phenomenon firsthand during the
Great Depression. He saw that people still valued American
culture and its focus on economic success but access to
legitimate opportunities to reach that success was extremely
                                  CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 173

limited. When confronted with the contradiction between
culturally accepted economic goals and socially accepted (and
limited) means of achieving success, many Americans
experienced anomie and that contradiction produced strain.

   How does someone respond to this strain? The majority,
according to Merton, accept their reality and conform by
accepting that they need to accept lower goals that can be
achieved through legitimate means. They achieve their own
level of success within the rules of society even if they never
reach their aspired goals. However, not everyone is willing to
adjust their goals, especially when being bombarded with
constant messaging that they need more through social media,
music, advertisements, television shows, movies, etc.

   Social Disorganization Theory

   Figure 4.4 Chicago 1930s.
   For the sociologists at the University of Chicago, the diverse
city was a perfect setting to test their theories, leading to several
new approaches to understanding crime in urban settings.
One popular theory that came out of the Chicago School is the
social disorganization theory.
174 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

   Sociologists Clifford Shaw and Henry McKay (1942)
applied some knowledge gained by other scholars at the school
to their own examination of tracking crime in certain Chicago
neighborhoods. They looked at Chicago's geographic
distribution of crime and delinquency and found that areas
of high crime were also characterized by weak community
controls. Social disorganization theory claims that
neighborhoods with weak community controls caused by
poverty, residential mobility, and ethnic heterogeneity will
experience a higher level of criminal and delinquent behavior.

   The neighborhoods they studied that had consistently high
crime rates consisted of mostly low-priced or subsidized rental
properties, a large portion of the residents being on public
assistance, and high rates of unemployment. This setting of
poverty meant that those who stayed living in that area long-
term were those who had no choice, versus those who moved
out as soon as they gained some financial stability. Leaving
at the first chance they got was the cause of high residential
mobility.

   Picture source Wikimediacommons.com
   From the image above, the concentric zone model suggests
                                  CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 175

crime is concentrated in the "inner" zones, as these
neighborhoods are less expensive, more run-down and people
do not want to stay there long-term. These inner zones are
more industrial, congested and are more disorganized. The
outer zones (residential, commuter) are generally more
expensive to live in and are more organized. As the level of
organization increases, crime decreases.

   There was also a steady stream of new people moving into
the neighborhood as they moved to the city or were no longer
able to stay in their previous neighborhoods. As a result, there
was constant movement in and out of the area with no one
considering it home or making any investment in the area.
Such an investment would otherwise create a sense of
community. However, these neighborhoods were marked by
high ethnic heterogeneity coupled with high residential
mobility, so for the time people lived in the area, they socialized
with and helped only people within their limited comfort zone
of shared ethnicity. There was no community building or
getting to know others in the neighborhood, which is usually
the source of informal social controls (keeping an eye on each
other's kids). The frustration of growing up in such a
neighborhood could also fall within the general strain theory.
176 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

   Picture source pixabay.com

   Image from pixabay.com
   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What is the effect of disorganization, strain and
poverty on crime?
   "When it comes to victimization I think it is just easier
to do it to someone who is poor because they may lack
                                  CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 177

knowledge of what they can do to get justice for said
crime and they more then likely have less money so they
cannot pursue a lot of options for payback for the crime
such as time consuming court cases or even just being
able to take the time to talk to police. I also feel people
who are experiencing poverty feel like the police won't
take them seriously because they don't have money. "

   Merton's Strain Theory
   Merton's Strain Theory is a sociological framework that
explains deviance as a result of the tension or "strain" between
culturally prescribed goals and the means available to achieve
them. Developed by sociologist Robert K. Merton in the
1930s, Strain Theory is grounded in the idea that society sets
common cultural goals (such as wealth, success, or status) but
does not provide equal access to the legitimate means
(education, employment) to achieve these goals. This
imbalance leads to strain, particularly among disadvantaged
groups, and motivates individuals to resort to deviant or
criminal behavior to attain societal expectations.
   Merton identified five modes of adaptation to strain:
   Conformity: Most people in society conform to the goals
and means despite the strain they experience. They continue to
work within the system, using socially acceptable means (e.g.,
education and employment) to pursue goals such as financial
success.
   Innovation: Individuals accept the societal goals but reject
the legitimate means to achieve them. Instead, they innovate
178 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

by turning to deviant means, such as crime, fraud, or other
illicit activities. This is common in situations where
individuals lack access to legitimate opportunities.

   Ritualism: These individuals abandon the societal goals
but rigidly adhere to the means. For instance, a person might
continue to follow rules and routines of work, not necessarily
to achieve success, but simply to maintain stability, even
though they no longer aspire to wealth or status.

   Retreatism: In this adaptation, individuals reject both the
societal goals and the means to achieve them. They withdraw
from societal expectations, often retreating into substance
abuse, vagrancy, or isolation. They essentially "drop out" of
the societal competition for success.

   Rebellion: Rebels not only reject the societal goals and
means, but they also seek to replace them with new ones. They
may engage in social movements or radical behaviors,
attempting to create a new societal order that aligns with their
values. This adaptation is common among activists or
revolutionaries who wish to change the status quo.

   Merton's Strain Theory provides an explanation for why
certain individuals, particularly those in lower socioeconomic
statuses, may resort to crime or deviant behavior. It emphasizes
the role of structural inequalities in producing deviant
behavior, noting that when legitimate avenues for success are
blocked, people may turn to alternative, sometimes illegal,
paths to achieve success.

   Merton's ideas were further developed by other scholars,
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 179

like Albert Cohen who focused on the role of status
frustration in the formation of delinquent subcultures, and
Cloward and Ohlin, who introduced the concept of
differential opportunity structures, suggesting that access
to both legitimate and illegitimate means varies across social
environments. These contributions expanded the
understanding of how strain can lead to different forms of
deviance based on one's access to resources and opportunities.

   References:
   Merton, R. K. (1938). "Social Structure and Anomie."
American Sociological Review, 3(5), 672-682.
   Cohen, A. K. (1955). Delinquent Boys: The Culture of the
Gang. New York: Free Press.
   Cloward, R. A., & Ohlin, L. E. (1960). Delinquency and
Opportunity: A Theory of Delinquent Gangs. New York: Free
Press.
   General Strain Theory
   American criminologist Robert Agnew expanded Merton's
strain theory to include short-term frustrations as possible
causes of strain in an adolescent's life. In general strain
theory, Agnew argued that social injustice or inequality may
be at the root of strain instead of just the search for the
American Dream (1992). Agnew would point to that negative
interaction as a possibility of strain in an individual's life,
particularly with adolescents. The feeling that the deck is
stacked against them and there is no reason to even attempt
to live by society's rules can lead an individual to criminal
180 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

or delinquent behavior. Delinquency, according to Agnew,
becomes a natural reaction to the stresses of adolescence.

   Merton's theory of strain depicted individuals working
toward an unattainable goal, but Agnew's theory suggests that
some individuals are running away from something instead.
This may include punishment by their parents or negative
relationships that exist at school. According to Agnew (1992),
adolescents are "pressured into delinquency by the negative
affective states - most notably anger and related emotions -
that often result from negative relationships."

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What is the effect of disorganization, strain and
poverty on crime?
   "Poverty can lead to crime through various pathways.
For instance, limited access to resources and
opportunities may push some individuals toward
criminal activities as a means of survival or economic
gain. Moreover, areas with concentrated poverty often
experience various social problems, including crime, due
                                  CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 181

to factors of inadequate housing, schooling, and
employment opportunities. On the flip side, people
living in poverty may also be more vulnerable to
becoming victims of crime. They might live in
neighborhoods with higher crime rates or lack the means
to secure their property and personal safety."

   Agnew identified three distinct types of strain for
adolescents:

   1. The failure to achieve positively valued goals;
   2. The removal or loss of something valued by the
individual (suspension from school, relationship
breakup, death of a family member, divorce); and
   3. The presence of negative stimuli (child abuse,
victimization, negative school experiences).
   All juveniles will experience at least one of these types of
strain during their lives, so then why do some participate in
delinquent behavior while others do not? Agnew (1992)
proposes four factors that predisposed juveniles to
delinquency.
   They reach the limit of their known coping strategies, so
their reaction is anger and frustration.
   They experience chronic strain which lowers the threshold
for tolerance of adversity, meaning that juveniles are unable to
deal with increasing levels of strain, acting out even when small
events happen in their lives.
   The chronic strain is cumulative, building their anger into
hostility and avoidance.
182 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

   As things get more difficult for them, they become prone to
fits of anger that focus on those they perceive are the cause of
their injustices.

   Delinquency is then the natural consequence of the strain
in their lives.

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Status Frustration Theory
   In his book The Culture of the Gang, Albert Cohen (1955)
proposed status frustration theory, which argues that four
factors--social class, school performance, status frustration,
and reaction formation (coping methods)--contribute to the
development of delinquency in juveniles. His theory assumes
that crime is a consequence of the creation of youth
subcultures in which deviant values and moral concepts
dominate.
   Cohen contended that middle-class goals serve as a
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 183

measuring rod for societal success. When we think about
achievement for adolescents, how is it measured? Through
SAT scores? Extra-curricular activities? GPA? Does the
measure of achievement look at the resources each child has
been given? For instance, what if a student's SAT score looked
differently if they came from a failing school compared with
scores from students who attended a well-resourced school?
Are SAT scores viewed differently if a child was able to pay to
take a prep class compared to one who wasn't able to afford
one? In Cohen's view, this is just part of the creation of the
middle-class measuring rod where students are set up to fail
because they do not have access to the resources other students
have. Students without support may not see value in education
and end up not pursuing a higher degree because they believe
they have already been set up to fail.

   Like anomie, strain, and general strain theories, the
frustration that is created by not obtaining desired goals can
lead to deviance. However, it is important to note, in all of
these cases of strain and frustration, the majority of juveniles
are not deviant and do conform to the proposed standards of
society. However, those who move toward delinquency may
be doing so because there is a sort of status they believe can
be achieved through delinquency. Whether it be through
violence, monetary delinquency, or just drug/alcohol use,
these juveniles finally achieve a level of status they couldn't
outside of their delinquent behavior.

   An interesting part of the school system is how, if a child
184 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

misbehaves, the punishment is suspending or expelling them
from school. If their grades don't meet the minimum, then
they may be removed from a sports team or other
extracurricular activity that could have given them the status
they desired and the taking away of their activity could lead
to frustration and possible deviant behavior. Cohen's main
points will be continued in the section in this chapter on
"Subculture Theories."

   Licenses and Attributions for Social Structure
Theories

   "Social Structure Theories" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.

   Figure 4.2 Photo of Max Weber, 1918 is in the Public
domain.

   Figure 4.3 Photo of Unemployed men during the Great
Depression is in the Public domain.

   Figure 4.4 Photo of Chicago 1930s is in the Public domain.
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 185

   Figure 4.5 Photo from the "I Feel Pretty" musical number
from West Side Story.

   In the 1950s and 1960s, many cities in the United States
saw an increase in juvenile gang activity. The actions of gangs
not only were a main focus in the media but also in popular
culture with West Side Story (figure 4.5) and in S.E. Hinton's
1967 publication of The Outsiders which later became a movie.
During this era, criminologists turned their focus to
opportunities we have in our everyday lives to commit crimes,
tying their theories to gang activity and delinquency.

   Differential Opportunity Theory
   Criminologists Richard Cloward and Lloyd Ohlin (1960)
combined Merton's strain theory with Sutherland's
differential association theory (which will be discussed later in
this chapter) to create differential opportunity theory. The
186 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

focus of differential opportunity theory is on the discrepancy
between what the lower-class juveniles desire and what means
are available to them because they have fewer opportunities
than their peers in other neighborhoods.

   Like Merton, Cloward and Ohlin emphasized cultural goals
and the means to achieve those goals. However, they added
to Merton's strain theory by suggesting that people's access to
both legitimate and illegitimate means is socially structured.
In other words, when looking at obtaining cultural goals,
different people have different opportunities (some have more
legal opportunities; some more illegal). For instance, in some
neighborhoods, there are more opportunities to participate in
illegitimate means to achieve one's goals. The most common
of these means is selling illegal drugs. Even though the risk
is high, the payoff for many is higher. They see this as an
opportunity to achieve their goal rather than pursuing a more
conventional method.

   This theory focuses on the gap between what an adolescent
wants and what they can legally get. The larger that gap, the
greater their likely exposure to illegitimate means and
willingness to use those means to get what they want. Cloward
and Ohlin (1960) said this is evident when there are differences
in access to learning structures (those that teach certain values
and skills) and performance structures (those that reward
delinquent or non-delinquent behavior based on those values
and skills). They argue the social structure of the community
is responsible for creating more access to legitimate
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 187

opportunities than illegitimate ones, especially in lower-
income communities.

   Routine Activities Theory
   Routine activities theory sees crime as a function of
people's everyday behavior. For a crime to be committed, there
needs to be three elements: a suitable target, a motivated
offender, and an absence of guardianship (Cohen & Felson,
1983). This theory claims, for example, that crime will occur
when the motivated thief is present near an easy target that is
not adequately protected.
   One of the most common robbery targets used to be
convenience stores. They were seen as easy targets because they
always had an amount of cash on hand and for a motivated
offender, it was the perfect location to get quickly in and out
without getting caught. However, with the help of a convicted
person who used to rob convenience stores, store owners
learned new strategies and changed into what we see today.
Having video cameras filming at all times, a time-locked safe,
and even a ruler on the door so that the clerk could give the
police a more accurate height estimation were all changes that
helped to make the convenience store less of a suitable target
because of the creation of guardianship in the store.
   Guardianship is measured by the extent to which people
during the course of their daily lives protect their property,
themselves, and others from crime. Reasons for reduced
guardianship have been linked to the fact that because of work
and maybe even vacation, our property is often left unguarded.
188 | CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES

Having a doorbell that also records video can be seen as a
significant change in guardianship when it comes to home
safety.

   Routine activities theory can explain a variety of deviant
acts as well as help to understand some changes in crime rates.
Osgood et al. (1996) found that in a survey of 18- to 26-year-
olds, the time spent in unstructured socializing with peers in
the absence of authority figures led to an increase in
delinquent behavior, illicit drug and heavy alcohol use, and
dangerous driving. A lack of structure creates more time to
participate in delinquent behavior and the presence of peers
makes that behavior more rewarding.

   Routine activity theory looks at the lifestyle and behavioral
patterns of individuals to determine their risk of criminal or
delinquent behavior in our society. However, there is criticism
of this theory as being a "victim blaming" theory since instead
of looking at the motivated offender, the theory can focus on
the victim and what the victim could have done differently to
avoid being victimized. Everyone has the right to live a non-
victimized life, but there are behaviors such as excessive alcohol
and drug use, walking in non-populated areas at certain times,
and even leaving your home that have been shown to create a
suitable target.

   During the COVID-19 pandemic, crime fell 23% in the
first month of the lockdown and that drop was seen to be
directly related to the population's mobility. Business closures
and stay-at-home orders meant that there was a decrease in
                                 CH. 6 SOCIAL STRUCTURE THEORIES | 189

people who were outside of their homes. During the
pandemic's restrictive times, home burglaries dropped but
commercial burglaries and car thefts rose. It could be said that
the motivated offenders needed to find a suitable target that
wasn't guarded, so cars and businesses became the focus.
Residential burglaries decreased by 24% while non-residential
burglaries rose 38%. Since people weren't leaving their homes,
cars stayed parked for a longer period of time, and in some
cities, the rate of car thefts doubled during the pandemic.

   Licenses and Attributions for Opportunity Theories
   "Opportunity Theories" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 4.5 Photo by Fred Fehl, New York, Public domain,
via Wikimedia Commons.
   References
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © by Taryn
VanderPyl. All Rights Reserved.
190 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

7.

CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS
THEORIES

   Dr. Sean Ashley; Curt Sobolewski; Dr.
   Zachary Rowan; Brandon Hamann; and Jeff
   Bry

                                Ch. 7
                       Social Process Theories
   Introduction
   In this chapter we will discuss various social process theories
of crime. In this discussion, we will examine various aspects
of social process, including interaction, labeling, associations
and learning. Social process theories view treatment by and
responses of key others (family, peers, teachers, etc.) may
greatly effect behavior. Role models, peer pressure and family
input (among other influences) may greatly shape individual
behavior, also insulate people against or push people towards
crime.
   Social Process Theories
   Social Structure does not explain everything, why do
people in bad neighborhoods NOT commit crime? The
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 191

perspective of social process broadens the discussion of
potential causes of crime, especially compared to social
structure crimes alone. For example:

   -Disorder, poverty, neighborhood decay, etc. alone do not
explain all crime.
-Discussion of socialization using Social Process Theories to more
adequately attempt to explain crime.
-Social-Psychological approach. Matter of individual
socialization coupled with the interactions people experience
socially.
-May be influenced by family, friends, peers, educational
experiences, etc.
-Interactions with teachers, police, employers, other authority
figures.
-Positive or Negative experiences affect outcomes.
Social Process Theory makes the assumption that
ANYONE has the potential to be delinquent or criminal.
Issues of race, class, sex, gender are not as important measures,
as ALL people have equal ABILITY to commit crimes. In
addition, negative environmental or structural factors may be
minimized by a positive influence. Examples could include
police officers, teachers, parents, grandparents, coaches,
ministers, peers, church, etc.
Social Process Theory also takes the perspective of how a
person is treated and socialized with effect the outcome of
delinquency and/or crime. From this perspective, we can
examine why people living in poverty do not commit crime,
192 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

also why people who have ample resources may commit
crime. What we are taught and taught to value will greatly
effect our level of criminality from a Social Process
Perspective.

   Symbolic Interactionism
   Interactionist Theories
   Interactionist theories are theories that suggest that
criminal behavior is learned through interaction with others.
Socialization and learning processes occur as the result of
group membership and relationships. In other words, the
saying "you are known by the company you keep" fits perfectly
with the interactionist perspective because it is the company
you keep that may determine your attitudes and subsequent
behaviors.
   An area of the interaction perspective is the dramaturgical
perspective. Irving Goffman (1959) states the dramaturgical
perspective is about roles an individual plays (mother, father,
teacher, dentist, etc.) and the attempts people make regarding
something he referred to as impression management.
Goffman saw people as "actors" on a stage, playing certain
roles and providing impression management based upon the
setting and the "script" they are given. For example, if you are
a married father of four children, there are certain behaviors
expected out of you and a specific script regarding how you
are supposed to behave. Impression management is a complex
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 193

process with a continual give and take of information. People
would like to put their "best foot" forward in most situations,
creating a situation of dramatic realization. Dramatic
realization is where you display the behavior and aspects of
your "self" you want others to see (good husband, good father,
hard worker). Most people do not want others to see their
negative attributes, so we try hard to provide a positive context
of who we are to others.

   Where crime and deviance stem (according to Goffman)
in dramaturgical perspective is through something he referred
to as discrediting information. Discrediting information is
information people are trying to hide that is not consistent
with the managed impressions they are attempting to present
to others. Once there is discrediting information, the
performance is altered including how others view the person
and their behavior based upon roles. For example, a potential
piece of discrediting information about a married father of
four could be that he is romantically involved with another
person besides his spouse. If this is
194 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

   The picture is from pixabay.com
   known (or even assumed), it could change perceptions of
him and his performance of his roles.
   Irving Goffman also conducted work around total
institutions. Total institutions are places where individuals
can rarely if ever come and go, also life is very structured and
intense (think state hospital, prison). Goffman argued time
and reality are different in these total institutions, where time
in these institutions will greatly affect the individual's sense
of self and reality. An example would include an individual
serving 10 years in prison. As the person is incarcerated, they
learn the processes and standards of the prison. The outside
world continues to evolve and change, without the individual
in prison. Arguably when the person is released from prison in
10 years, they will enter a world and society they don't really
recognize. What they will know is the environment, structure
and reality of the total institution. This process is referred to as
institutionalization or being institutionalized.
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 195

   Thoughts from Author Jeff Bry:
   "When I was doing juvenile probation, I placed many
young people in institutions for correctional
rehabilitation and treatment. What was somewhat
surprising to me, even after a year in an institution these
young people were often changed. They were used to
institutional life, getting up at a certain time, certain
privileges and restrictions, the rules of the institution.
Many seemed initially overwhelmed when released from
the institution and needed a bit of time adjust to life in
society."
196 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

   The picture is from pixabay.com
   Association Theory
   Differential Association Theory
   American sociologist Edwin Sutherland's (1939)
differential association theory asserted that criminality is
learned through a process of interactions with others who
communicate criminal values and who advocate for the
commission of crimes. Sutherland believed that other attempts
to explain criminality (genetics, biological, psychological) had
flaws and could not fully explain why a person committed a
crime. For Sutherland, the role of social learning was at the
core of criminality. He summarized his theory through the
following nine principles:
   1. Criminal behavior is learned.
   2. Criminal behavior is learned during interactions with
others through communication.
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 197

   3. Most learning about criminal behavior happens in
intimate personal groups and relationships.

   4. The process of learning criminal behavior may include
learning about techniques to carry out the behavior as well
as the motives and rationalizations that would justify criminal
activity and the attitudes necessary to commit crime.

   5. The direction of motives and drives toward criminal
behavior is learned through the interpretation of legal codes in
one's geographical area as favorable or unfavorable.

   6. A person becomes delinquent because of an excess of
definitions favorable to law violations over definitions
unfavorable to law violations.

   7. All interactions with others are not equal. They can vary
in frequency, intensity, priority, and duration.

   8. The process of learning criminal behavior through
interactions with others relies on the same mechanisms that are
used in learning about any other behavior.

   9. While criminal behavior is an expression of general needs
and values, it is not explained by those general needs and values
because noncriminal behavior is an expression of the same
needs and values.

   Sutherland combined psychological and sociological
principles to create a relational perspective on criminality. Even
though it was and is popular to blame mass media (movies,
books, social media, television, etc.) for social problems,
Sutherland did not believe it was possible to learn criminal
198 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

behavior through those avenues because they could not
provide the required social context for learning.

   The picture is from pixabay.com

   Thoughts from author Jeff Bry:
   "Differential association theory takes the perspective
that crime is learned, much like any other type of
learning. You learn to walk, talk, ride a bike etc., you
also learn about crime and a criminal perspective. Crime
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 199

is often taught from one person to another in
environments like neighborhoods and schools, but
certainly also in jail and prison. For certain groups
(youth gangs, the Mafia) part of basic membership
includes law violating behavior. As these groups are often
close knit (almost like family), learning occurs in
intimate closely connected groups where the criminal
behavior is supported and rewarded."

   Labeling Theory
   Labeling Theory
   Thank you to Dr. Sean Ashley
https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/introcrim/chapter/8-6-labelling-
theory/
   Labelling theory offers another approach to studying crime
and deviance. The roots of this theory can be found in the
work of George Herbert Mead (1934/2015), who pioneered
a new way of studying social reality known as symbolic
interactionism. Mead explains that we construct our social
world and our sense of self through the symbols we
exchange--language being the most significant form of
symbolic communication. Mead did not write about crime,
though his student Herbert Blumer (who coined the term
"symbolic interactionism") produced one of the earliest
studies concerning the influence of movies on delinquent and
criminal behaviour (Blumer & Hauser, 1933).
200 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What is the effect of labeling on crime?
   "I believe that labels can both negatively and positively
affect people. Most parents aren't going to label their
children as "stupid" because it would more than likely
just decrease their self-esteem. But I also think it can
leave a positive effect when trying to bring motivation
to people. If you get told that you're "doing a great job,"
you're more than likely going to be inclined to keep up
the good work. Labels can also harm in the sense that
people may not feel like they are accurately being labeled.
This could then lead to controversy and lowered self-
esteem. I feel like in a lot of criminal cases, they always
claim that the killer was "antisocial" or a "loner." Usually,
these labels caused criminals to act out since they wanted
a form of revenge. When using labels, I feel that we just
need to be more cautious."
   Mead's approach to studying social life set the stage for new
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 201

ways of thinking about crime and deviance. One approach,
which came to be known as labelling theory, was formulated
by the sociologist Howard Becker. Rather than looking at the
qualities or circumstances that make a person turn bad, Becker
(1963) asks how this definition of bad behavior was originally
constructed. As he explains in his book The Outsiders, "social
groups create deviance by making the rules whose infraction
constitutes deviance, and by applying those rules to particular
people and labeling them as outsiders" (p. 6).
In an earlier formulation of labelling theory, Frank
Tannenbaum (1938) refers to the process wherein a
stigmatizing label may lead a person to start seeing themselves
as a criminal. This occurs through "a process of tagging,
defining, identifying, segregating, describing, emphasizing,
making conscious and self-conscious" the criminal traits in
question (Tannenbaum, 1938, p. 19-20). He calls this process
the dramatisation of evil. In this drama, the specialized
treatment a young person is given by the police and courts is
instrumental in leading them to see themselves as a criminal.
202 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

Figure 8.3 Frank Tannenbaum at the Bayonne refinery strike
in 1915

   Grekul and LaBoucane-Benson (2008) explain this dynamic
with regard to the formation of gangs comprised of
Indigenous youth in the Prairie provinces:
Aboriginals deal with two powerful labels: Aboriginal first,
and through stereotyping, gang member. A broader historical
context marred by colonialism, discriminatory government
practices, and residential schools contributes to a situation
where labels stigmatise and propel the labelled further into a
life of deviance; the labels can in effect produce further deviant
and criminal behaviour. One ex-gang member recalls the police
calling his group of friends a gang, so they "began to act that
way" and identify as a gang. (p. 71-72)

   Labelling theory focuses on how criminality is created and
                                     CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 203

how people come to be defined and understood as criminals
through symbolic exchanges. It is a micro-level theory but is
nevertheless concerned with the social (rather than individual)
dimension of crime and deviance. In this regard, it shares a
great deal with Durkheim, who saw crime as an integral part of
society. In this view, crime can never be completely eliminated
from society as it plays a role in defining the boundaries of a
social group. Critics charge that this approach can lead to a
morally relativistic view of crime where there is no essential
reason why one act should be considered criminal and another
not. Durkheim reminds us, however, that even if laws differ
from society to society, human beings require social regulation
if they are to remain at peace in the world.

   Media Attributions
   Frank Tannenbaum © Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division is licensed under a Public Domain
license
   In terms of discussions of deviance and labeling, American
sociologist Howard Becker (1963) believed that "deviance is
not a quality of the act the person commits, but rather a
consequence of the application by others of rules and
sanctions to an offender." In other words, according to
Becker's labeling theory, someone only becomes deviant
once that label is applied to them. This can occur through
negative societal reactions that ultimately result in a tarnished
and damaged self-image and negative social expectations.
   Think about the labels that exist in our society: one of the
204 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

most difficult ones to see past for many is the label of the
"criminal." For example, what do you think immediately when
someone tells you they were in jail or prison? Right away,
a label is created and it usually isn't created from direct
knowledge but a range of stereotypes that have been obtained
over the years. Once the label is created it affects how the
individual is treated and viewed.

   When someone asks you about yourself, what is the first
thing you tell them? Do you say you are a student, or a
brother/sister, or a parent? Our master status, or most
prominent identity description, according to Becker, defines
our social position and a criminal label can become a master
status overriding all others (Becker, 1963). Having a criminal
record can make it difficult for an individual to get
employment, buy or rent a home/apartment, or even find a
healthy relationship mainly because of the negative label. In
fact, there has been a movement to remove the question that
asks about past criminal convictions from job applications
because, for many, that automatically disqualifies the
individual from job consideration.

   Should we forever be known and labeled for our worst day?
Everyone has participated in activities that could put their
master status in jeopardy but for many, that information is
never discovered. However, in a society now that records so
much of its behavior, our past indiscretions could change our
future lives even if we have changed as individuals. Once a
                                     CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 205

negative label is assigned, then it is a difficult process to regain
a positive master status.

   This damaged self-image could result in a self-fulfilling
prophecy, which is a process in which an originally false
expectation leads to its own confirmation. In other words, if
you treat someone like a criminal then they may ultimately
become a criminal to confirm the false expectations of society.

   Impact of Diversion Programs on Juveniles
   Juvenile diversion programs hold youth accountable for
their behaviors without resorting to legal sanctions (meaning
they will not end up with a criminal record). This concept can
be seen as arising from two theories: labeling and differential
association. Labeling theory views the experience of processing
certain youth through the juvenile justice system as potentially
doing more harm than good since it can stigmatize them for
committing relatively minor acts that could have been handled
outside of the formal system (Lundman, 1993). Labeling a
juvenile a "delinquent" can affect the way in which the juvenile
defines themselves and how society perceives them which, in
turn, can influence future behaviors.
   Differential association theory states that juveniles who
become part of the system will end up adopting antisocial
attitudes and behaviors from their delinquent peers. The more
youth are exposed to more advanced delinquent youths and
adults, the more it is thought to have a criminogenic effect on
the individual. This increases the chance of the confined youth
reoffending. In other words, they learn more bad behaviors
206 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

from others while they are locked up with them. According
to the theory, the more you limit a juvenile's exposure to the
juvenile justice system, the less likely they will adopt the
attitudes and behaviors of those present in the system.

   Diversion programs intend to minimize the effects of
labeling youth as deviant while limiting their opportunities to
associate with delinquent peers and adopt antisocial behaviors.
Adolescence is a time of discovery and mistakes can be made
but without diversion programs some juveniles' adolescent
mistakes could limit their opportunities for the rest of their
lives.

   Shaming
   John Braithwaite and colleagues (1989) discuss the power
of shaming as a means of controlling behavior. Braithwaite
argues shaming is potentially an effective method of reducing
crime, especially if it is conducted in an appropriate manner.
Stigmatic shaming is more punitive shaming, where the
individual is ostracized from society and most of its members.
Braithwaite argues reintegrative shaming to be the more
appropriate method of shaming. Reintegrative shaming takes
the approach of "condemning the crime, not the criminal."
The person still has value and can make contributions to
society, so it is the job of society to assist the offender in
reintegrating into their community. This approach borrows
heavily from many Asian cultures, where reintegrative
shaming is commonly used.
   The shaming approach takes aspects of labeling theory,
                                     CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 207

using perspectives of stigma and negative labels that may
further affect criminal behavior. The United States tends to
lean towards stigmatic shaming, where the offender is labeled
and treated fairly poorly once released from prison.
Reintegrative shaming offers the potential for a community
and opportunity for the offender.

   Image from Pixabay.com
   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What is the effect of labeling and shaming on
behavior?
   "I just wanted to briefly note something I thought
was interesting about both Reintegrative Shaming, and
the Dramaturgical Perspective. In modern psychology,
shame is seen as something more sort of general, and that
is attached to the individual, while guilt is more specific
and has to do with specific actions, and, some believe,
that guilt is a kind of tool for maintaining human
relationships, as guilt gives us the opportunity to fix
whatever it was that violated the rules or expectations
208 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

of certain relationships. (In this way, I think it could
be thought that Goffman's discrediting information is
what can be dealt with through the function of guilt and
relationship management, however I'm not quite sure
about how much that information is essentially attached
to the individual). In terms of this psychological
definition of shame versus guilt, I think Braithwaite hits
the nail right on the head with his differentiating what
sticks with the individual (shame and stigma) and what
is the specific thing which must be rectified or dealt
with in some way (guilt), it's just that, at least in our
book's telling, Braitwaite didn't explicitly separate guilt
and shame the way psychologists might. But expanding
on Braitwaite's points about stigma, is, I believe, correct
there, in that stigma and shame go hand in hand, and
this is why in psychology and social work it is explicitly
discussed to attempt to use person-first language, and to
not conflate the individual with the stigmatizing label,
to, for example, call a man suffering with schizophrenia
a man suffering with schizophrenia, rather than a
schizophrenic. This can is also talked about in how you
might admonish your kids for example, and the
importance of, rather than saying something like "you're
a messy person," saying, "you made a mess," that way
you are separating your child out from the label, and in
pointing out the specific action (making a mess) there
is something about which the child can feel guilty and
                                     CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 209

make things right, but, when the child becomes used
to hearing "you're a messy little such and such," you're
dealing with shame, rather than guilt, and shame is
something that can't be so easily dealt with and can cause
the child to decide that if they are a messy person, what
good is it to try to do better."

   Social Learning Theory
   Social learning theory asserts that people learn attitudes
and behaviors conducive to crime in both social and nonsocial
situations from positive reinforcement (rewards) and negative
reinforcement (punishments). An absence of rewards could
make criminal behavior more attractive while the presence of
punishment may steer an individual away from similar
behavior.
   Sociologist Robert Burgess and criminologist Ronald Akers
(1966) believed that "criminal behavior is a function of norms
which are discriminative for criminal behavior, the learning
of which takes place when such behavior is more highly
reinforced than noncriminal behavior." In other words, if
deviant behavior is rewarded then the individual will continue
with that behavior similar to a student who is rewarded for
good grades and strives to continue to achieve good grades.
   Social learning occurs in two ways: imitation and
reinforcement. An individual observes what happens to others
and if the actions are rewarded then it is more likely the actions
will be copied. For instance, if a friend of yours illegally obtains
a pair of limited-edition shoes and is praised by others, then it is
210 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

more likely that you would try to obtain the shoes in a similar
manner with hopes of receiving the same praise.

   This theory is similar to differential association theory that
focuses on imitating behavior that has been modeled by those
around you, but it broadens the focus by specifying the process
of learning from other people by including the observation of
whether that person is being rewarded for their behavior. This
becomes part of the decision to become deviant.

   Dr. Zachary Rowan and Michaela McGuire, M.A. made
the following contribution to this chapter specific to social
learning theory. https://kpu.pressbooks.pub/introcrim/
chapter/9-4-social-learning-theory/

   While Sutherland (1947) developed one of the most well-
known theories, one limitation was his description of precisely
how learning occurred. In Proposition #8 of differential
association theory, Sutherland (1947) states that all the
mechanisms of learning play a role in the learning of criminal
behavior. This suggests that the acquisition of criminal
behavior involves more than the simple imitation of observable
criminal behavior, but Sutherland does not fully explain how
exactly definitions from associates facilitate criminal behavior.
Building off the recommendations of C.R. Jeffery (1965) to
integrate concepts of operant behaviour theory into
differential association theory, Robert Burgess and Ronald
Akers (1966) reformulated the propositions developed by
Sutherland into what was initially called differential-
reinforcement theory. Akers (1998) eventually modified
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 211

differential reinforcement theory into its final form, social
learning theory (SLT).

   SLT is composed of four main components: 1) differential
associations, 2) definitions, 3) differential reinforcement, and
4) imitation. The first two components are nearly identical to
those observed in differential association theory. Differential
association was expanded to be inclusive of both direct
interactions with others who engage in criminal acts, and more
indirect associations that expose individuals to various norms
or values. For example, friends of friends who may not directly
interact with an individual still exert indirect influence
through reinforcing behaviors and definitions of a directly tied
friend. Definitions were similarly described as attitudes, or the
meanings attributed to behaviors and can be both general and
specific. General definitions reflect broad moral, religious, or
other conventional values related to the favorability of
committing a crime, whereas specific definitions contextualize
or provide additional details surrounding one's view of acts of
crime. For example, a general definition of crime may reflect
an individual's belief that they should never hurt someone
else, but the use of substances is acceptable because it does
not harm anyone else. Recent efforts have also underscored
that attitudes towards crime can be even more specific and
depend on situational characteristics of the act (e.g., Thomas,
2018, 2019). For instance, an individual may hold the general
definition that they should never fight someone; however, they
may adopt a specific definition that suggests that if someone
212 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

insulted your family or started the conflict first, then perhaps
fighting is acceptable.

   Borrowing from principles of operant conditioning,
Burgess and Akers (1966) argued that differential
reinforcements are the driver of whether individuals engage
in crime. This concept refers to the idea that an individual's
past, present, and anticipated future rewards and punishments
for actions explain crime. If an individual experiences or
anticipates that certain behaviors will result in positive benefits
or occur without consequences, this will increase the
likelihood that the behavior will occur. This process is
comprised of four types of reinforcements or punishments:

   Positive reinforcement: reinforcements that reward
behaviour, such as money, status from friends, and good
feelings, that will increase the likelihood that an action is taken.

   Positive punishment: the presentation of a negative or
aversive consequence, such as getting arrested, injured, or
caught, after a behaviour is exhibited to decrease the likelihood
it will happen again.

   Negative reinforcement: reinforcements that help a
person avoid the negative consequences of a behaviour, such
as avoiding getting caught, arrested, or facing disappointment
from others, that will increase the likelihood that an action is
taken.

   Negative punishment: the removal of a positive
reinforcement or stimulus after an undesired behaviour occurs
to decrease the likelihood a person will engage in the behaviour
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 213

again. For instance, if a child gets into a fight with a friend their
parent may take away their cell phone, cut off their Netflix
access, or remove other privileges.

   Lastly, imitation is the mimicking of a behavior after
observing others participate in the behavior. Within intimate
personal groups, individuals will observe criminal acts or
substance use that are often are used to facilitate the initiation
of the behavior. Once the behavior has been engaged in,
imitation plays less of a role in the maintenance of or desistance
from that behavior.

   Example: Ed Kemper and Social Learning Theory
214 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

   Figure 4.7: Ed Kemper's Mugshot (1973).
   It would be uncommon for serial killers to learn how to kill
by watching others, however, if the focus is turned to the idea
of rewards and punishments, then social learning theory could
be applied to those individuals. Serial killers in interviews have
confessed to being humiliated by parents, caretakers, and the
                                      CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES | 215

opposite sex. When faced with the same issues later in their
lives, the anger and resentment that has built up over the years
may have transformed the individual into a murderer.

   The serial killer Ed Kemper (figure 4.7) is an example of
a serial killer who developed anger toward his caregivers and
then later went on to kill them. Ed Kemper was featured in
the Netflix show Mindhunter and with the exception of his
grandfather (he killed his grandparents at age 15), all of his
victims were women. Kemper not only killed his victims but
degraded them after death which allowed him to enact
behaviors that he wanted to previously direct toward his
mother. Later, he killed his mother.

   Kemper spoke of his hatred for his mother because of the
psychological abuse she subjected him to as a child and he
chose to murder her in order to make the killings stop. When
he came to the conclusion that ultimately it was his mother
he wanted to kill all along, Kemper surrendered himself to
authorities. Kemper learned to kill indirectly through the hate
he endured from his mother and sisters. His family did not
treat him as a human being and later he accepted that label and
became a serial killer.

   Licenses and Attributions for Interactionist Theories
   "Interactionist Theories" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.
   "Social Learning Theory" by Dr. Zachary Rowan and
Michaela McGuire, M.A. is licensed under CC BY 4.0.
216 | CH. 7 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORIES

   Figure 4.7 Photo of Ed Kemper's Mugshot (1973) is in the
Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons.

   References
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © 2023 by Dr.
Sean Ashley is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © 2023 by Dr.
Zachary Rowan and Michaela McGuire, M.A. is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.
   Braithwaite, J. (1989). Crime, Shame and Reintegration.
Cambridge University Press.
   Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life. Doubleday.
   Goffman, E. (1961). Asylums: Essays on the Social
Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. Anchor
Books.
   Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the Management of
Spoiled Identity. Prentice-Hall.
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 217

8.

CH. 8 CONFLICT AND
FEMINIST THEORY

   Kevin Walby; Kelly Gorkoff; Dr. Rochelle
   Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
   Dr. Sheri Fabian; and Jeff Bry

                                Ch. 8
         Critical/Conflict/Feminist Perspectives of Crime
   https://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=6223&context=jclc
   The Rise of Critical (Conflict) Criminology
   Authors: Kevin Walby and Kelly Gorkoff
   Given our contention that defining critical criminology is
a difficult task, we claim that critical criminology scholarship
represents a break from the orthodoxy or custom of the
discipline of criminology (Tierney, 2006; Martel et al., 2006;
Ratner, 1984, 2006). Critical criminology initially evolved
alongside criminological theories loosely called "new
deviancy" that proposed new theories of crime such as labeling
theory (see 8.6 Labelling Theory), social reaction theory,
transactionalism, and interactionism, and was a significant
218 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

part of a general move in the social sciences away from the
dominant positivistic paradigm of criminology (Tierney, 2006;
Garland & Sparks, 2000; Hargreaves et al., 1976). In general,
this dominant paradigm focused on identifying and studying
causes of crime that could then be corrected, and the assumed
purpose of criminological knowledge was to control crime.
Lynch (2000) takes this further and suggests that traditional
positivist criminology has had the effect of legitimizing control
of the lower classes and normalizing punishment. This
dominant knowledge was rarely questioned and became
standardized in criminology/criminal justice language,
practice, and research (Lynch, 2000). Critical criminology
questioned this often taken-for-granted, normalized idea of
crime and justice as well as its connection to crime control and
punishment and encouraged research that questioned this a
and focused on thinking more broadly about crime in society
(Martel et al., 2006). Ratner (2006) refers to this as "the push
to construct an alternative to the ruling paradigm of a state-
saturated field" (p. 648). By this, Ratner means we should
question what crime means in society and the government's
power to punish "criminals."

   Most critical criminology adopts a critical social science
position that is anti-positivist. A critical social science
examines/critiques normative boundaries of criminological
knowledge and its use. Critical social science research focuses
on the big picture or social structures instead of individual
determinants of people's behavior (trauma, upbringing,
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 219

psychological traits). This focus allows scholars to deconstruct
taken-for-granted or dominant knowledge. It also allows one
to engage in social change by questioning established ways
of thinking or knowing. Sayer (2009) discusses denaturalizing
dominant knowledge as a way to propose that another world is
possible and to re-think and re-constitute accepted ideas about
how to administer justice (Kraska & Newman, 2011). For us,
critical criminology is an attempt to investigate power relations
and domination as they occur in social systems and social
structures while providing alternatives to existing power
relations and dominant social institutions. Critical
criminology involves research and investigation, and it calls for
activism and attempts to change things.

   In what follows in this chapter, we examine the key thinkers
critical criminology draws on, beginning with Marx, as well as
a few emergent elements of critical criminology.

   Marx and the basis of Critical Criminology
   Authors: Kevin Walby and Kelly Gorkoff
   The tendency of critical criminology to investigate and
attempt to transform the world begins with Karl Marx and
subsequent Marxist criminological scholars.
   Marx and the Critique of Capital
   Most people would probably not identify Karl Marx as a
criminologist, though he is often seen as a political economist,
a critical historian of economics, and a sociologist. Marx's
writings were concerned with the rise of social institutions
during industrialization which included the development of
220 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

criminal law, the power of police and prisons, and processes
of criminalization. At the core of his work, Marx rejected the
idea that societies operate based on a consensus (see 1 What is
Crime?). Instead, he suggests that societies are full of conflict,
which is often reflected in, and stems from, its relations of
production (the social relationships involved in producing the
things we need to survive such as food, and shelter).

   To provide some examples, in Capital, Volume One, Marx
(2004) addresses these critical issues in chapters 26, 27 and 28.
As he examines the capitalist mode of production, he explores
the social formation that occurs alongside it. In chapter 26
on the secret of so-called primitive accumulation, Marx argues
there is nothing natural about the creation of private property
(e.g., owning land or factories), the extraction of resources
from the land (e.g, cutting trees or drilling oil), or the
extraction of value from those resources (e.g., paying for
lumber/gas or profiting from selling lumber/gas). Marx argues
that our capitalist order is a political and economic one formed
through various attempts at social control of these processes
of private property, extraction and value. He claimed that the
process of so-called primitive accumulation and the extraction
of value from the resources found in land is only possible
through the development of a state apparatus (e.g.,
government) that supports capitalist exploitation. Part of that
state apparatus, perhaps the main part, is social control agents
such as police and prisons.

   In chapter 27 of Capital, Volume One, which is on the
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 221

expropriation of the agricultural population from the land,
Marx (2004) argues that, instead of land being collectively
governed and people benefiting in a collective way from the
value of resources and land, the capitalist mode of production
requires the expropriation of people from their land, their
territory, and the resources found there. This goes for
populations in the English countryside, and it could be further
extended to colonial relations with Indigenous peoples in
British colonies such as Canada. To achieve control of
resources and land, social control agents of the state apparatus
forcibly expropriate populations from the land to privatize
it and its resources (such as lumber, oil, and minerals) for
capitalist landowners. The example of establishing Indigenous
reserves in Canada is an example of the expropriation of people
from their land, a process that continues today.

   In chapter 28 of Capital, Volume One, Marx (2004) writes
about bloody legislation, a swath of laws passed by the state
apparatus in the 18th and 19th centuries in the
Commonwealth countries that do two things. First, they
enable the creation of private property, enabling the
privatization of wealth, value, resources, land, thereby creating
a powerful capitalist class. Secondly, they are used against the
working class and against the lumpenproletariat who cannot
work or choose not to work. These laws allowed for the
expropriation discussed above. These laws also force persons
to work in the capitalist mode of production in factories. If
people choose not to work, bloody legislation is applied to
222 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

them, to criminalize and punish them. If persons are unhoused
and move from region to region or from the country into
the city because their land has been stolen from them by the
capitalist class, they too have bloody legislation applied to
them, specifically laws of vagabondage. Laws are also passed
to dissuade labor organizing and resistance (Poulantzas, 1975;
Griffin et al., 1986; Kuriakose & Iyer, 2021).

   This swath of laws is created to control the working class
and the lumpenproletariat, and to enforce the capitalist mode
of production. Although Marx is usually not identified as a
criminologist per se, even this one work, Capital, Volume One,
offers a rich history and analysis of the way the state apparatus
was formed to support the capitalist mode of production and
how criminal law in its origin emerged as a tool of control
for elites. Criminal law, police and prisons from a Marxist
perspective, exist to control the population, to force people
to work, and to prevent people from collectivizing (or equally
sharing) land, resources and wealth.

   Using Marx
   A significant figure in early critical criminology, William
Chambliss (1964), drew on Marx's ideas to analyze the origin
of vagrancy laws (some enacted as early as 1349) and
concluded that these laws were created to force people to work
in factories and other places, by criminalizing those who did
not. These laws were pivotal in capital expansion and
Chambliss (1964) notes how different categories of "the
criminal" were created as capitalism expanded. These included
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 223

individuals who made and sold goods in traveling shows, those
who organized gambling events, and those who took goods
that were in transit from one factory to another. Chambliss
(1964) defined crime as "conduct that is defined and controlled
by agents of the dominant economic class in a politically
organized society, to benefit capitalism" (p. 71). To enforce
these laws, policing, courts and prisons are obviously necessary.

   Another Marxist, Louis Althusser (1969, 1971), named this
set of agencies "repressive state apparatuses" and defined them
as bodies granted the legal right to use physical force to control
the masses. This includes the military, the police, the judiciary,
and the prison system. It is argued that these bodies are used to
enforce laws and to demand obedience to laws based on unfair
expropriation. Generally, the presence of these institutions is
enough to gain compliance, but when the unfairness of
capitalist/worker exchanges is questioned or laid bare, these
bodies engage in explicit legalized violence. Gordon (2005,
2006) examines how the rise of law-and-order policing, and the
over-policing of poverty and the poor, coincided with changes
in the capitalist order. He identifies governmental changes in
policing alongside shifts in economic policies such as the shifts
from Keynesianism (pre-1960s) to monetarism (1960-80s) to
neo-liberalism (1980s-present).

   As Marx traces this out in detail in chapters 26, 27 and 28
of Capital, Volume One and as critical criminologists such as
Chambliss and Althusser argued, the criminal justice system
is essentially a tool of the capitalist class. However, this view
224 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

that the system always operates as an arm, or instrument of,
capitalism has been critiqued as overly conspiratorial. Some
Marxist criminologists debate whether things are really so
instrumental.

   Karl Marx depiction from pixabay.com
   A Marxist criminologist named Richard Quinney (1978)
argued that there are instrumental and structuralist Marxist
positions. An instrumental Marxist position continues the
understanding put forward by Marx, that the state apparatus
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 225

and criminal law exists as a direct result of capitalism to uphold
capitalism and the capitalist mode of production. A
structuralist Marxist position argues that governments are
somewhat autonomous and are not simply installed by the
owning class. For example, structural Marxists Leo Panitch
(1977) and Nicos Poulantzas (1975) argue that the state acts
on behalf of capital, not at its behest. Theorists such as these
suggest that although governments might pass laws that appear
to help protect the population (i.e., minimum wage, labor law)
and reduce the power of the owning class, overall, police and
corrections operate to maintain the capitalist economy (which
as discussed above is, at its base, unequal and supports the
wealth and power of a small number over the majority).

   Structural Marxists agree that law works to ensure capitalist
accumulation and to maintain conditions where the
generation of wealth is possible. This is often called the
structural imperative or the way social structures create reality.
Louis Althusser (1969, 1971) was also interested in how law
and criminal justice are legitimized or normalized in the
thoughts of the general population. Therefore, structural
Marxists focus less on the coercive nature of law alone and
more on the ideological function of law. Quinney and others
examine how ideas of crime and criminals are shared in the
general population. Marx and Engels wrote in The German
Ideology (1947) about how the mode of production of
capitalism gave rise to people's false beliefs about society and
their role in it. They referred to this as "phantoms formed in
226 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

the human brain that appear upside down..... that sublimate
material life processes." Contemporary Marxists argue
ideologies are necessary to support and legitimate the actions
of the state to enforce definitions of crime in law, policing
and corrections. These ideologies are often detached from the
broader social system and individuals are thought to be
responsible for their behavior. Ideologies are comprised of all
the ideas we form about crime and criminals that are
communicated by social institutions from family, school,
media and politics, but are essentially about supporting ideas
that hide the coercive nature of the capitalist mode of
production.

   Althusser (1971) called these institutions the ideological
state apparatus. These concepts about crime include ideas like
criminals are bad, punishment is good and helpful, and law is
equal. However, according to Marxist theory, laws are created
to make sure capitalism continues to thrive and to control
the conduct of individuals who might threaten it. This is also
known as hegemony, or when the ideas of the dominant class
become the ideas of everyone (Gramsci, 1971).

   Structuralists offer a compelling set of arguments about the
law-society relationship. This includes how ideas of human
rights and democracy become used to justify and legitimate
oppressive law. Anatole France, a French novelist, captured
this ideology of equality in his quote "the Law in all its majestic
impartiality forbids both rich and poor alike to sleep under
bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal bread." This quote
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 227

speaks to the ideological dimension of law, which often clouds
the exploitive relations of law itself. This ideology of capitalism
and crime is the illusion that capitalism is noncoercive;
therefore, the law itself is an ideological form (Reiman, 2013,
p. 229).

   Another dimension of Marxism we find in critical
criminology is the study of corporate crime or crimes of the
powerful (see 15 Crimes of the Powerful). Sutherland (1949)
distinguished between working class crime and crimes of the
elite or "white-collar crime." The criminalization of both
categories of acts are related to capital accumulation: working
class crimes such as theft uphold private property relations,
assault upholds the need of a healthy body to work, and crimes
of the elite such as fraud or insider trading uphold "proper"
relations of capital accumulation. However, it is more difficult
to criminalize wrongdoings of the powerful. Laureen Snider
and Steven Bittle study Canadian corporate crime and its
legislation. Their research shows that police rarely enforce
legislation such as Bill C-45 (Bittle, 2012). Bill C-45, often
referred to as The Westray Bill, amended the Criminal Code
to outline the criminal liability of organizations/corporations.
The Westray Disaster saw 26 miners in Nova Scotia die in an
explosion in 1992. The disaster was said to be the fault of
the corporation that owned the mine, but they could not be
criminally charged under the legislation of the time. Bill C-45
defines criminal liability for corporations. However, Bittle
(2012) contends the new legislation is rarely enforced for
228 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

several reasons including the contention that criminalizing
actions of capitalists is dangerous and could harm capital
accumulation, thereby affecting jobs and profits (Bittle &
Snider, 2015). For more on the dangers of exposing these
crimes see 15 Crimes of the Powerful.

   Summary
   Marx himself and later Marxists provide an important
foundation for thinking about critical criminology and for
thinking about the role of law, police and prisons in our
society. By examining how the relations of capitalist
production create systems such as police, courts, and
corrections to maintain and legitimate the expropriation and
exploitation of land and people, as well as studying ideologies
that cloud this exploitive dynamic, Marxist conceptions of
critical criminology are an important foundation of critical
criminology.
   Authors: Kevin Walby and Kelly Gorkoff
   Foucault, Marx and Power
   Another key figure in critical criminology is Michel
Foucault. While not a Marxist, the influence of Marx is evident
in his work. As discussed above, for Marx, power is always
connected to economic power and how it manifests at the
level of the state. Marx's contemporaries focus on how bloody
legislation and state repression to uphold capitalist relations of
production/capitalist social structures. Foucault reconsidered
how power works, and he has been called a post-structuralist.
He argued that simply focusing on power as equal to the law
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 229

creates a kind of "sterilizing political consequence" (1990, p.
79). Instead, he views power via language and how we think
and know about things, or in other words, how power works
between people, not on people.

   What makes Foucault's work important is that he extends
or broadens the analysis of power away from economic re/
oppression into thinking about power existing flowing/
circulating between people and groups/institutions. A student
of Althusser, Foucault rejected the idea that people were
duped into submission by ideology, arguing instead that
people actively engaged with power on a daily basis. For
Foucault, power operates like a network of relations that we
are all a part of. This encompasses more than economic power,
and includes power in the form of language and action. He
argued that thinking about power this way encourages us to
understand power similar to a building block in how things
get made, composed or constituted. As critical criminologists,
if what we are interested in is investigating power relations,
turning to Foucault helps broaden our scope of analysis.

   Phases of Foucauldian Thought
   Foucault's arguments changed over time. Although it is
difficult to periodize or categorize Foucault's work, some have
argued that there are three movements or phases to Foucault's
thinking. The first is called the archaeological phase, the
second is the genealogical phase, and the third is the phase of
ethics.
   In the archaeological phase, Foucault (1972) is interested
230 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

in the emergence of discourses and how these are translated
into techniques or methods of power. In this case, power is
not thought of as repressive but is based in knowledge and
takes the form of charts, maps, diagrams and tables that make
human activity understandable.. A discourse is the general
domain of all statements and classifications about some topic
or issue, such as the discourse of child development (e.g.,
benchmarks of biological, emotional, and psychological
changes occurring in young people as they grow) or discourse
of victimhood (e.g., the condition of being hurt, damaged or
made to suffer) (Gorkoff, 2011). Grounded in this way of
thinking, rather than seeing law simply as a bloody mechanism
or a mechanism of force, Foucault understands law as a
discourse or a mechanism for categorizing and classifying
people, and he uses developments in the human and natural
sciences to do this.

   Discourse is like a system of categories captured in language
that creates the way we perceive reality. Foucault said discourse
is both an instrument and an effect of power. In the study
of criminology, discourse is important. Discourses that come
from and are used by courts, tribunals, commissions of
inquiry, and the law itself operate as a machine for trying to
produce truth out of complexity and for trying to categorize
human beings in particular ways. Discourse therefore becomes
a transfer point of relations of power between groups (such as
prisoners, advocates, and politicians) and how a social issue/
occurrence gets framed or thought about as a problem.
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 231

   For instance, the criminal is a key discursive category. Public
discourses about the criminal as immoral, violent, troubled,
abnormal, and to be feared or avoided appear commonsense.
These discourses become entwined with discourses of law,
punishment, and justice. Foucault would encourage us to
examine these descriptors and their relations, and how they
create particular realities. This language extends beyond the
criminal justice system and we can examine how the criminal
is amplified and reinforced in crime literature and television/
movies that feed on the fascination with the sensationalistic
imagery of criminal life. We can focus on how these notions
of criminality inscribe meaning and play a central role in
historical and contemporary social and cultural life (see 12
Cultural Criminology), as well as the role these discourses play
as mediators of social debates and crises (Atack, 2001).

   Many other categories and classifications are important for
Foucault as well. In this archaeological phase of his work,
Foucault is trying to locate or dig up where these classifications
and categories we take for granted today emerged.

   In the second phase of Foucault's work, which we can call
genealogy, Foucault (1975) is interested in not only techniques
of classification, but how these types of classifications or
discourses turn into different mechanisms of discipline and
normalization. For instance, he examines how techniques of
discipline and normalization that developed in the criminal
justice system developed and operated in parallel ways in other
institutions such as in education, factories, hospitals, and
232 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

asylums. He details the historical development of timetables
that organize one's day and discipline one's activity. In prisons,
prisoners are subjected to a timetable that structures their day,
requiring them to rise, eat, work, and sleep at certain times.
This disciplinary timetable was used in numerous social
institutions that developed around the same time. Schools
used timetables to organize the day and discipline students
into routines. Factories used timetables to order shifts and
ensure the discipline of workers. Foucault argues that all these
places tend to resemble one another to the extent that they
deploy similar techniques of discipline and normalization.
Foucault uses the term the carceral to articulate the multiple
networks of diverse elements and the power of normalization
that extends into the entire social body, how these things are
tethered to one another, and how they reinforce one another
over time.

   In his key genealogical work, Discipline and Punish (1975),
Foucault focuses on a detailed history of how punishment
changes from the body of the condemned (hanging,
beheading) to the soul of the convicted (therapy, reflection,
confinement, etc.). In the primary punishing institution,
prison, the soul of the convicted is no longer tortured in
public, but instead is subjected to hierarchical observation,
normalizing judgements, and practices of discipline. These
practices and techniques of punishment eventually become
normalized. These techniques of disciplinary power are not
about the use of the bloody power of the state on the
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 233

individual, but how things such as a daily schedule, self-
control over posture and bodily functions, and the use of
surveillance become the mechanisms people find themselves
exposed to, and how institutions, programs, and polices are
created. This approach is nuanced enough to understand how
domination operates and develops in different ways in various
social settings. For Foucault, power and domination are not
limited to the state. There are power relations operating that
do not simply stem from law or from the state apparatus, but
are actually located in individual relationships (e.g., guard/
prisoner; lawyer/accused) though they may reinforce them at
some points in time. The terms and processes Foucault
advances allow for critical criminologists to locate power
relations and domination in a multitude of sites and further,
in a genealogical way.

   The third phase of Foucault's work is often referred to as the
phase of ethics, where Foucault (1990) turns from an interest
in the genealogy of disciplinary institutions to self-control or
self-discipline and ultimately to how individuals engage in
"care of the self" or makes themselves up as people or what
he called an "ethical self." In The History of Sexuality, Volume
One, and elsewhere, Foucault (1982) shifts from studying
technologies of institutions to technologies of the self. In his
book, he examines how sex is spoken about and how it is
known, then how individuals who engage in sexuality form
themselves as sexual beings based on this knowledge. This
includes understanding how we conduct ourselves as people.
234 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

It is focused on how we make ourselves good students, good
workers, good athletes, good partners, etc. In other words.
Foucault was interested in how people governed themselves in
a free society, how we make ourselves into members of society,
and how we control our own behavior.

   Foucault is careful to note that self-governance does not
happen in a vacuum. It may happen in relation to those forms
of knowledge (discourses) Foucault uncovered in his
archaeological work, or in relation to the discourses Foucault
investigated in his genealogical work. This raises a number of
interesting questions such as how we make ourselves into
subjects of law (juridical subjects) including being, or not
being, a law-abiding citizen. He thought that although we
seemingly have the freedom to control our own actions (e.g.,
freely obey the law), Foucault outlined that these choices are
not truly free, and that we are "governed from a distance" by
the discourses and knowledge that we experience.

   Foucault's work allows us to think about power as an
intersection between a knowledge about something, and
techniques of organizing the behavior of others and/or
ourselves. He gives this the term governmentality, which is
the analysis of who can govern and who is governed but also
the means by which our own and others activities are shaped
(Foucault, 1990, 2005, 2011). In his final lectures, Foucault
offers this concept as a tool for looking at the intersection of
these different phases of his work. The goal is to examine how a
governmental rationality or some kind of classificatory system
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 235

intersects with the way a whole population starts to govern
itself or make itself intelligible.

   Locating Foucault
   Again, these are simply our musings about Foucault's work.
Not everyone will agree with this distilling of Foucault's whole
corpus into these movements of thought and there have been
some interesting adaptations and debates. For example, Alan
Hunt (1992), an important Marxist figure in legal studies and
criminology, suggested that by broadening the scope of what
power means, and at times offering multiple fluid definitions
of power, Foucault expels law from his analysis. Remember,
according to Foucault, equating power with law and the state
creates a sterilizing political consequence meaning that it stops
any other way of thinking about law except as oppressive.
However, Hunt suggests it might be equally sterilizing to argue
that power is so fluid that it is found everywhere, including in
one's own governance of their thoughts and bodily practices.
Hunt (2004) has further developed this into the conceptual
framework of law as governance, bringing Foucault and Marx
together, in some ways. His work on governing consumption
brought together how law (around food, clothing, etc.) and
self-regulation (deciding what to eat and how to dress) work
together to construct dominant and normative moral
positions.
   Foucault remains incredibly important for a critical
criminologist because he allows for a more open analysis of
power and domination, that is not reducible to the state
236 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

apparatus, law or capital. Some Marxists, including Alan Hunt
(2004), found it appealing, and fruitful to work with Foucault
and Marx together, seeing as how they complement one
another. Foucault's work has led to a whole area of study
referred to as governmentality studies. Scholars such as
Mariana Valverde (2010), Nicholas Rose (1993), and David
Garland (2001) have identified themselves as governmentality
scholars and contributed much to critical criminology in this
vein. David Garland's work on cultures of control could be
construed as a type of governmentality studies. We discuss his
work below.

   Garland, Governmentality and the Culture of Control
   David Garland picked up on Foucault's concept of
governmentality and his method of genealogy or history of
the present to write several articles (1997) and a book (2001)
analyzing how crime is problematized and controlled by
examining the structure of the crime control apparatus that
has emerged out of cultural, social, and economic shifts in
society. Garland linked Foucault's idea of the self-governing
subject and how power creates people, to a history of crime
control policies (both governmental rationalities and
technologies of crime control) in the United States and Britain
between 1970 and 2000.
   He was particularly interested in how the penal welfare state
that was designed to assess, diagnose, and treat offenders
changed into a third sector of crime control characterized by
the rise of prevention and security apparatuses. He details how
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 237

the system moved from a system of punishment and
rehabilitative justice (where those convicted of crimes received
treatment for what caused their offending) to one of safety and
risk management (the management of spaces and people who
were risky). He details the rise of victims' rights movements
and interest groups such as women's groups calling on the
criminal justice system to address rape and domestic violence
and neighborhood groups asking for more police presence or
safety programs in their community.

   Garland details how this creates a new culture of crime
control focused on three things: first, the transformation of
penal welfarism/rehabilitative punishment; second, a
criminology of control; and third, one that uses economic
styles of reasoning (risk) over social reasoning.

   In the transformation of penal welfarism, Garland outlines
how rehabilitation gets redefined away from the offender's
needs to the safety of the victim and protection of society.
For instance, whereas an offender who may have committed
a crime because they suffered from addiction would be given
community treatment under penal welfarism, if that prisoner
rates as high risk on a risk assessment tool, they could be
incarcerated where they could be more easily managed.

   This transformation affects how prisoners are treated in
prisons, where they are tracked, monitored, and controlled
based on the risk they are said to pose to society at large. This
process often includes the use of tools and knowledge such
as abstract risk categories, which Garland suggests are ways to
238 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

"govern offenders from a distance" and engage them in their
own self-responsibilities. This is accompanied by a change in
normative criminology to study the criminology of everyday
life and the criminology of the other, which is based on the
desire for expressive justice, zero tolerance and individual
safety. Such interventions are assessed based on cost-benefit
analyses and techniques of managerialism in which the point
of crime control is to manage risk.

   Garland details how these changes occur as political,
cultural and economic structures take on a neo-liberal form,
similar to the way Gordon (2005) talked about changes in
policing we discussed earlier in this chapter. These changes
result in different forms of governmental power (e.g., new
types of punishment) how we govern our own conduct and
the conduct of others, and how we make ourselves up within
these new sets of social relations. For the criminal justice
system, he argues that new culture of crime control changes
the way we think about people who break the law; we begin to
see them not as people who need rehabilitation, but as others
that pose risk and as delinquents to be feared, controlled, and
responsivities. This changes the way we think about crime
and the criminogenic situation as one to be managed using
law and order practices, securitizing places and spaces using
more aggressive individualized surveillance practices. We can
see examples of this in the many security or CCTV cameras
in the spaces and places we go such as shopping malls, parking
lots, and schools. Garland argues that this new culture of
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 239

control does not help communities become safe spaces but
instead makes us afraid of those around us.

   These three elements of control become entwined in a way
that cannot be reduced to a single formula. Instead, they
constitute a field of power relations that draws attention to the
impact of new knowledges and technologies upon the power
relations between governmental actors as well as between the
rulers and the ruled (Garland, 1997, p. 188).

   Summary
   Foucault gave critical criminologists concepts that expand
the ways we think about law, control, and power. By engaging
the subject, he outlines the ways in which knowledge itself
becomes a form of power by which laws get created and
maintained, how people interact with discourses to regulate
their own conduct and the conduct of others, and how this
translates into systems of carceral control. Foucault's concepts
have been taken up in a variety of ways in critical criminology,
and he remains a key figure in these discussions.
   Foundations of Feminist Criminology
   Dr. Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
and Dr. Sheri Fabian
   It is helpful to begin with a brief definition of feminism.
A central definition can be challenging, because as the Break
Out Box below illustrates, there are many kinds of feminism,
each with their own unique focus. However, there are features
common to every type of feminism that we can use to establish
a solid foundation when exploring feminist criminology.
240 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

Primarily, feminism argues that women suffer discrimination
because they belong to a particular sex category (female) or
gender (woman), and that women's needs are denied or
ignored because of their sex. Feminism centers the notion of
patriarchy in understandings of inequality, and largely argues
that major changes are required to various social structures and
institutions establish gender equality. The common root of all
feminisms is the drive towards equity and justice.

   Break Out Box: Different Feminisms
   Feminist perspectives in criminology comprise a broad
category of theories that address the theoretical shortcomings
of criminological theories which have historically rendered
women invisible (Belknap, 2015; Comack, 2020; Winterdyk,
2020). These perspectives have considered factors such as
patriarchy, power, capitalism, gender inequality and
intersectionality in the role of female offending and
victimization. The six main feminist perspectives are outlined
below.
   Liberal Feminism
   According to Winterdyk (2020) and Simpson (1989),
liberal feminism focuses on achieving gender equality in
society. Liberal feminists believe that inequality and sexism
permeate all aspects of the social structure, including
employment, education, and the criminal justice system. To
create an equal society, these discriminatory policies and
practices need to be abolished. From a criminological
perspective, liberal feminists argue that women require the
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 241

same access as men to employment and educational
opportunities (Belknap, 2015). For example, a liberal feminist
would argue that to address the needs of female offenders,
imprisoned women need equal access to the same programs
as incarcerated men (Belknap, 2015). The problem with the
liberal feminist perspective is the failure to consider how
women's needs and risk factors differ from men (Belknap,
2015).

   Radical Feminism
   Radical feminism views the existing social structure as
patriarchal (Gerassi, 2015; Winterdyk, 2020). In this type of
gendered social structure, men structure society in a way to
maintain power over women (Gerassi, 2015; Winterdyk,
2020). Violence against women functions as a means to further
subjugate women and maintain men's control and power over
women (Gerassi, 2015). The criminal justice system, as well,
becomes a tool utilized by men to control women (Winterdyk,
2020). It is only through removing the existing patriarchal
social structure that violence against women can be addressed
(Winterdyk, 2020).
   Marxist Feminism
   Like the radical feminist perspective, Marxist feminists view
society as oppressive against women. However, where the two
differ is that Marxist feminists see the capitalist system as the
main oppressor of women (Belknap, 2015; Gerassi, 2015).
Within a classist, capitalist system, women are a group of
people that are exploited (Winterdyk, 2020). Exploitation in
242 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

a capitalist system results in women having unequal access to
jobs, with women often only having access to low paying jobs.
This unequal access has led to women being
disproportionately involved in property crime and sex work
(Winterdyk, 2020). Like other Marxist perspectives, it is only
through the fall of capitalism and the restructuring of society
that women may escape from the oppression they experience.

   Socialist Feminism
   Social feminists represent a combination of radical and
Marxist theories (Belknap, 2015; Winterdyk, 2020). Like
radical feminists, they view the existing social structure as
oppressive against women. However, rather than attributing
these unequal power structures to patriarchy, they are the
result of a combination of patriarchy and capitalism.
Addressing these unequal power structures calls for the
removal of the capitalist culture and gender inequality.
Socialist feminists argue these differences in power and class
can account for gendered differences in offending -
particularly in how men commit more violent crime than
women (Winterdyk, 2020).
   Post-modern Feminism
   Ugwudike (2015) outlines how postmodern feminism
focuses on the construction of knowledge. Unlike other
perspectives outlined above, which suggest there is "one
reality" of feminism, postmodern feminists believe that the
diversity of women needs to be highlighted when one
considers how gender, crime and deviance intersects to inform
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 243

reality (Ugwudike, 2015, p. 157). For postmodern feminists,
they acknowledge the power differentials that exist within
society, including gendered differences, and focus on how
those constructed differences inform dominant discourses on
gender. Of importance is the focus on "deconstructing the
language and other means of communication that are used to
construct the accepted `truth' about women" (p. 158). Also of
importance is the acknowledgement of postmodern feminism
regarding how other variables, like race, sexuality, and class,
influence women's reality (Ugwudike, 2015).

   Intersectional Feminism
   Winterdyk (2020) notes that some academics add a sixth
perspective. Intersectional feminists address the failure of the
above perspectives to consider how gender intersects with
other inequalities, including race, class, ethnicity, ability,
gender identities, and sexual orientation (Belknap, 2015).
Some of the above theories attempt to paint the lived
experiences of all women as equal, whereas intersectional
perspectives acknowledge that women may experience more
than one inequality (Winterdyk, 2020). There is an inherent
need to examine how these inequalities intersect to influence
a women's pathway to offending and/or risk of victimization.
Recently, Indigenous Feminism has emerged as a critical
discourse on feminist theory that considers the intersection
of gender, race, as well as colonial and patriarchal practices
that had been perpetuated against Indigenous women (Suzack,
2015).
244 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

   Feminist activism has proceeded in four `waves' (for a
discussion of the waves of feminism, see A Timeline |
Aesthetics of Feminism). The first wave of feminism began in
the late 1800s and early 1900s with the suffragette movement
and advocacy for women's right to vote. The second wave of
feminism started in the 1960s and called for gender equality
and attention to a wide variety of issues directly and
disproportionately affecting women, including domestic
violence and intimate partner violence [IPV] employment
discrimination, and reproductive rights. Beginning in the
mid-1990s, the third wave focused on diverse and varied
experiences of discrimination and sexism, including the ways
in which aspects such as race, class, income, and education
impacted such experiences. It is in the third wave that we see
the concept of intersectionality come forward as a way to
understand these differences. The fourth wave, our current
wave, began around 2010 and is characterized by activism
using online tools, such as Twitter. For example, the #MeToo
movement is a significant part of the fourth wave. The fourth
wave is arguably a more inclusive feminism - a feminism that
is sex-positive, body-positive, trans-inclusive, and has its
foundations in "the queering of gender and sexuality based
binaries" (Sollee, 2015). This wave has been defined by "`call
out' culture, in which sexism or misogyny can be `called out'
and challenged" (Munro, 2013).

   We return to the second wave of feminism, in a time of
social change, where feminist criminology was born. The
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 245

emerging liberation of women meant newfound freedoms in
the workforce and in family law, including the availability and
acceptability of divorce, but these relative freedoms rendered
gender discrimination even more visible. In the 1960s and
1970s, North American society specifically was full of unrest,
with demonstrations and marches fighting for civil rights for
Black Americans, advocating for gay and lesbian rights, and
protesting the Vietnam War. Marginalized groups were calling
out inequality and oppression, and demanding change.
Feminist activism brought attention to the inequalities facing
women, including their victimization, as well as the challenges
female offenders faced within the criminal justice system. The
breadth and extent of domestic violence, specifically men's
violence against women within intimate relationships, was
demonstrated by the need for domestic violence shelters and
the voices of women trying to escape violence. Conversations
at the national level led to government-funded shelters as well
as private donor funding from those who saw the need for safe
havens from abuse.

   At the same time, the historic and systemic trauma of
women involved in the criminal justice system as offenders
was being recognized, including attention to their histories
of abuse, poverty, homelessness, and other systemic
discriminations. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, feminist
scholars recognized the absence of women within
criminological theory; more specifically, as Chesney-Lind and
Faith (2001, p. 287) highlight, feminist theorists during this
246 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

time "challenged the overall masculinist nature of criminology
by pointing to the repeated omission and misrepresentation of
women in criminological theory."

   Feminist criminology, mainly driven by American feminist
scholars and activists, began with feminist theorists' call to
action to address racism and sexism within criminology and
the criminal justice system.

   Critiques of Existing Criminological Theory
   Dr. Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
and Dr. Sheri Fabian
   When feminist criminology emerged in the 1970s, the focus
was mainly on how women were accounted for in
criminological theories. Feminist criminologists recognized
that theories of crime and deviance regarding women's
offending tended to take one of three paths: (1) theories were
openly misogynistic, negatively portraying women or situating
them as "less than" men; (2) theories were gender blind and
completely ignored gender; or (3) theories took an "add
women and stir" approach, meaning that the theory was
primarily about men and assumed explanations for crime and
deviance could be applied to women without question. Most
criminological theories were silent on the victimization of
women.
   Cesare Lombroso is referred to as the "father of
criminology" (Belknap, 2015; Deutschmann, 2007; Williams
& McShane, 2010). His theory is openly misogynistic, viewing
women as "less than" men and discussing them in a negative
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 247

manner; thus, Lombroso's theory serves as an excellent
example of the first path theories tend to take regarding
women's offending.

   In the late 1800s, Lombroso studied both male and female
incarcerated offenders in Italy, examining their physical
characteristics to see what differentiated criminals from non-
criminals. He developed the concept of the born
criminal--individuals who were atavistic, more primitive and
less evolved than non-criminals, and thus more prone to
engage in criminal activity (Williams & McShane, 2010).
Lombroso argued that women were typically less evolved than
men, but their criminal tendencies were balanced by their lack
of intelligence and passive natures. Deutschmann (2007)
summarized Lombroso's gendered approach:

   "The typical woman...was characterized by piety, maternal
feelings, sexual coldness, and an underdeveloped intelligence.
Criminal women, on the other hand, were either born with
masculine qualities (intelligence and activeness) conducive to
criminal activity, or encouraged to develop these qualities
through such things as education and exercise." (p. 163)

   The second path theories take regarding female offending
is exemplified by the original social bond theory by Travis
Hirschi, which completely ignored gender and the female
experience. Social bond theory examined why people conform
to rules and laws, avoiding offending. Hirshi (1969) posited
that four key bonds discouraged criminal activities:
attachment, commitment, involvement, and belief. When
248 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

initially testing his theory, Hirschi focused exclusively on boys,
even though both girls and boys were included in his sample
(Belknap, 2015). As a result, the female experience is invisible
in social bond theory. Hirschi's exclusive focus on boys and
men in research while developing and testing theory was not
unique at the time; social bond theory simply represents one
example of how a degree of gender blindness was (and still
is) common in many criminological theories. Such gender
blindness results in theories of criminality based entirely on
data and experiences of boys and men, actively erasing the
unique perspectives and experiences of girls and women.

   Lastly, Cloward and Ohlin's (1960) opportunity theory
demonstrates the "add women and stir" approach in
criminological theory, the third path that theories on crime
and deviance tended to take regarding women's offending.
Drawing on Merton's idea of strain as the gap between socially
prescribed goals and the inability to achieve those goals,
Cloward and Ohlin (1960) argued that there were both
legitimate and illegitimate ways to achieve goals, and these
opportunities differed based on someone's race,
neighborhood, class, and gender (Deutschmann, 2007;
Williams & McShane, 2010). Rather than theorizing how men
and women may experience strain differently, Cloward and
Ohlin viewed boys as having "legitimate concerns" around
money and status, while girls were seen as experiencing
"frivolous concerns" related to finding romantic partners
(Belknap, 2015, p. 33). While they mentioned gender in their
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 249

theory, Cloward and Ohlin (1960) made assumptions about
the goals of women, and actively ignored the unique strains
faced by women, such as discrimination, parenting and
childrearing responsibilities, limited education and
employment opportunities, and disproportionate
victimization.

   The many androcentric (male-centered) explanations for
crime and criminality not only centered on men as the primary
focus of explanations, but were mainly the work of male
theorists. This reality called for a new theorising of women,
created by women, related to both victimization and
criminalization. Feminist criminologists demanded a centering
of gender as a key factor in understanding crime and
criminality. Here we see the scholarship of ground-breaking
feminist criminologists like Meda Chesney-Lind, Carol Smart,
and Karlene Faith, and the theorists and criminologists they
have inspired, such as Elizabeth Comack, Gillian Balfour,
Joanne Belknap, and others.

   Issues that Brought Feminist Criminology to the
Surface

   Dr. Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
and Dr. Sheri Fabian

   The key issues that brought feminist criminology to the
surface involved domestic violence or violence against women
(Dobash & Dobash, 1979; Johnson, 1996; Johnson &
Dawson, 2011) and the differential and unequal treatment of
women as offenders within the criminal justice system
250 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

(Britton, 2000; Chesney-Lind & Pasko, 2004; Comack, 1996).
We discuss the issue of women as offenders later in this
chapter. We look now to how the contributions of feminist
criminology have shaped our understandings of women's
victimization.

   Victimization
   "Feminist criminology has perhaps made its greatest impact
on mainstream criminology in the area of women's
victimization" (Britton, 2000, p. 64).
   Gender-based violence is disproportionately experienced by
women in Canada (Cotter & Savage, 2019, p. 3) and around
the world (World Health Organization, 2021). As Bruckert
and Law (2018) note, violence against women stems from a
broad range of systemic issues, including those rooted in
patriarchal beliefs, such as colonialism, neoliberalism and
capitalism (p. 9). Such social structures intersect with aspects
of identity (such as sexual orientation, gender expression, age,
ability, ethnicity) which can increase risk of victimization.
   Female victims account for two-thirds of police-reported
family violence in Canada (Conroy, 2021). Women are much
more likely to be murdered by their male intimate partners
than male partners are to be murdered by their female partners;
in fact, women make up approximately 80% of all victims of
intimate partner homicide (Conroy, 2021).
   The trend of the disproportionate victimization of women
grows larger when looking at the victimization of women
along intersectional social positions and identities:
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 251

   While anyone in Canada can experience violence, women,
girls and young women, Indigenous women and girls, lesbian,
gay and bisexual people, women living with a disability and
women living in rural and remote regions, are at greater risk of
violence. (Government of Canada)

   Specifically, women with disabilities experience double the
rate of violent crime compared to women without disabilities
(Cotter, 2018). With regards to lesbian, bisexual, transgender
and non-binary people's experiences of violence, there is a lack
of comprehensive statistics, but the available evidence indicates
that bisexual women and transgender individuals face very
high levels of violence compared to their heterosexual and
cisgender counterparts (Jaffray, 2020; Langenderfer-Magruder
et al., 2016). In particular, bisexual women in Canada have
the highest rates of violent victimization and physical assault,
and transgender people are more likely to experience violence
compared to cisgender people in Canada (Jaffray, 2020). When
considering intersections of transphobia and racism,
experiences of violence are higher among racialized
transgender and non-binary individuals (Chih et al., 2020).
While the lack of comprehensive data on transgender women
and non-binary people's experience of victimization is glaring
(see Experiences of violent victimization and unwanted sexual
behaviors among gay, lesbian, bisexual and other sexual
minority people, and the transgender population, in Canada,
2018), as is the lack of available data on Black women's
victimization, what we do know is that Black women's
252 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

experiences of violence are rooted in misogynoir, a concept
coined by Moya Bailey and defined as "the virulent and often
unseen hatred directed at Black women due to the
intersections of anti-Blackness, misogyny and racism in
society" (Maynard, 2017, p. 130). Feminist criminology
critically interrogates statistics such as the ones presented
above, and points to the gendered elements of such violence,
calling for wide recognition and social and criminal justice
reforms.

   Indigenous women's experiences of violence are also
situated within intersectional social identities as well as
colonial and gendered structural inequities. In particular,
Indigenous women's experiences of violence are directly linked
to the colonial history of Canada, beginning with the Indian
Act, and permeating through past and present discriminatory
policies and practices within various social institutions,
including but not limited to health care, criminal justice and
education. The intergenerational trauma of the residential
school system, as well as pervasive systemic racism, have
resulted in higher levels of domestic violence, substance abuse,
and suicide (Comack, 2018). Indigenous women are also
much more likely to be the victims of violent assaults and
victimization than non-Indigenous women, and this violence
tends to be more severe (Monchalin, 2016) (see `Nobody
wants to look for a 40 year-old Native woman down here'). For
example, in Canada, Indigenous women are three times more
likely to experience intimate partner violence than women
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 253

who are not Indigenous (Boyce, 2016). A crisis of violence
against Indigenous women and girls in this country exists, yet
too often the victimization of Indigenous women continues
to be dismissed and ignored by legal and law enforcement
systems.

   Sexualized Violence
   Dr. Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
and Dr. Sheri Fabian
   The majority of victims who experience sexualized violence
(e.g., sexual assaults, sexual harassment, unwanted touching,
revenge pornography) are women. Young women and girls face
greater rates of sexual violence, representing nearly nine out of
every ten (87%) survivors of sexual assault (Rotenberg, 2017).
Age plays a role as well, with 12- to 17-year-olds comprising
approximately one-third of victims, and 18- to 24-year-olds
comprising 21% of victims (Rotenberg, 2017, p. 13). In data
collected from 2009 to 2014 on sexual assaults against men and
women, men were the perpetrators of sexual assault in 98% of
the cases where charges were laid (Rotenberg, 2017). As with
all other forms of victimization, women's experiences depend
on their interlocking social identities. For example, women
with disabilities reported double the rate of sexual assaults in
the last 12 months compared to women without disabilities
(Cotter, 2018). Moreover, bisexual women were close to four
times more likely to experience sexual violence in the past year
compared to heterosexual women (Jaffray, 2020). Bisexual
women are also more likely to report sexual assault and
254 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

unwanted sexual behaviors online and in public compared to
heterosexual and gay women and men (Jaffray, 2020).
Similarly, transgender people are more likely to report
unwanted sexual behavior online and in public compared to
cisgender people in Canada (Jaffray, 2020). As with other
forms of violence, certain groups of women are more likely
to experience sexual violence due to racism, colonialism,
transphobia, and ableism (Government of Canada, n.d.; Lyons
et al., 2017b). The risk of violence also increases for gender
and sexual minorities, particular for those who are Black,
Indigenous, or racialized. Griner et al.'s (2020) survey of US
college students found transgender people were much more
likely than cisgender people to experience violent victimization
and especially sexual assault (p. 5716). The 2018 Statistics
Canada Survey of Safety in Public and Private Spaces shows
similar findings that "a higher proportion of transgender
Canadians ... had experienced physical or sexual assault in their
lifetimes than cisgender Canadians" (Jaffray, 2020, p. 12).

   Not only do women experience sexualized violence at
disproportionately higher rates than men, women are also
much more likely to be blamed for their own victimization,
such as in cases of sexual assault. One of the more glaring
examples of the pervasiveness of victim-blaming can be seen
in the judgment delivered by Robin Camp, an Alberta judge
who asked a sexual assault complainant in a sexual assault trial
why she couldn't simply "keep her knees together." Camp
subsequently resigned his position as a judge because of the
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 255

social outcry over his attitude towards sexual assault victims
(for more on this case, see `Knees together' judge in sexual
assault trial says he will resign from the bench), however he
was reinstated as a lawyer in Alberta less than a year later (see
`Knees together' judge Robin Camp wins bid to be reinstated
as lawyer in Alberta). Victim blaming has also been found
to be pervasive when women report sexual assaults to police.
The Globe & Mail Unfounded investigation (see Unfounded:
Police dismiss 1 in 5 sexual assault claims as baseless, Globe
investigation reveals) revealed that police dismiss 20% of sexual
assault claims because they do not believe a crime has been
committed (Doolittle, 2017). Fear of victim blaming is also
one of the reasons for the underreporting of sexual assaults
(and other forms of sexualized violence). Assessing self-reports
of victimization from the General Social Survey, Conroy and
Cotter (2017) reveal that over 8 in 10 sexual assaults are not
reported to the police, a proportion that has remained
constant over several decades. Reasons for the lack of reporting
include feelings of shame, guilt, and worry about what people
will think of them should their assault be known (Conroy &
Cotter, 2017).

   What feminist criminology does, then, is point to the role of
patriarchy, colonialism, capitalism and other social structures
and relationships in our broader society regarding the
disproportionate victimization of women. While patriarchy
privileges men and the male experience over women and the
female experience, establishing men as more important and
256 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

more valued and positioning women in a perpetual state of
vulnerability, third wave feminism, which spans from the
mid-1990s to approximately 2010 (Delago, 2021), and critical
race scholars established the vital importance of intersectional
analyses of gender-based violence (Bruckert & Law, 2018).

   Feminist criminology challenges social institutions
including police, courts, and corrections within the criminal
justice system to acknowledge and address the
disproportionate impact of gender on women's victimization.
Feminist criminologists acknowledge that due to systemic
factors, including violence, colonialization, and inequality,
women are much more likely to suffer from childhood sexual
abuse than men. They also acknowledge that alcohol or
substance use is often a coping mechanism that may result
in increased likelihood of contact with the criminal justice
system. Lastly, they understand that there is a high proportion
of incarcerated women who have experienced trauma
(Comack, 2018; Shdaimah & Wiechelt, 2013). In essence,
feminist criminologists ask us to examine how the
criminalization of women is intertwined with the
victimization of women. The question becomes: how can the
criminal justice system respond to the unique needs of women
given this victimisation-criminalisation continuum (Chesney-
Lind & Pasko, 2004; Comack, 1996)?

   Criminalisation of Women
   Dr. Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
and Dr. Sheri Fabian
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 257

   Comack (2020) argues that criminology has focused on
men as offenders. This focus has been justified because the
majority of police-reported offenders are men (Comack, 2020;
Savage, 2019). While comprising a much smaller proportion
than male offenders, female offenders are still represented in
adult, youth, and violent offence statistics (Belknap, 2015).
Accordingly, we must consider the unique pathways of women
as offenders to inform criminal justice system responses to
women as offenders.
Traditional criminological theories rarely account for female
offending (Belknap, 2015). With the rise of feminist
criminology in the 1970s, a variety of theories have attempted
to explain female offending. For example, Adler and Simon's
liberation thesis (1975, cited in Belknap, 2015) accounted for
female offending by connecting the women's liberation
movement with what was believed to be an increase in female
crime rates in the 1960s and 70s. This theory attempted to
address the gender-ratio crime problem, as well as account for
changes in women's crime rates (O'Grady, 2018). While both
Adler and Simon connected their theory to women's
liberation, they differed on the overall effect on crime. Adler
posed that violent crime would increase, while Simon
suggested that only property crime would increase for women
(Belknap, 2015). On the other hand, according to Simon,
female violent crime would decrease because women would
be less frustrated as they gained equal access to opportunities
(Belknap, 2015). This theory, in its simplest form, argued that
258 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

women's liberation leads to convergence in gender roles, and
increased opportunities for employment for women. Adler
and Simon claimed increased employment also increased
opportunities for crime including corporate and white-collar
crime, ultimately leading to a convergence in crime rates
(Tavcer & Dekeseredy, 2018). While a substantial gender gap
in offending remains, the theory was important because it
considered women and located women's engagement in crime
within social systems and outside of the biological realm.
Hagan and colleagues' power control theory (1985, cited in
Belknap, 2015) outlined the role of social control in
accounting for gendered differences in crime. They theorized
that the gendered power dynamic between parents was often
replicated with their children. In a patriarchal home, where
women had less power, children were socialized into gendered
roles where boys were encouraged to take risks and given more
freedom, while girls were more restricted in their activities and
socialized to be obedient and quiet. In such households, girls
had fewer opportunities, to engage in deviance. According to
Hagan and colleagues, in egalitarian households, with equal
power between parents, relatively equal freedoms and levels of
parental supervision, were given to daughters and sons, which
allowed for more opportunities for girls to engage in deviant
behavior (Belknap, 2015). Note that while this theory does
least attempt to explain female offending, it is not without
its critics. Of particular concern is how the theory blames
mothers who work outside of the home for their daughters'
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 259

delinquency (O'Grady, 2018). The theory has also been
criticized "for its simplistic conceptualization of social class
and the gendered division of labor in the home and workplace,
and for its lack of attention to racial/ethnic differences in
gender socialization and to single-parent families, most of
which are headed by women" (Renzetti, 2018, p. 78).
Feminist theories have also attempted to account for female
offending through the cycle of violence and pathways theories.
Widom (1989) examined the relationship between trauma and
offending in their cycle of violence theory (cited in Belknap,
2015). This theory posits that girls and women who experience
trauma are more likely to be arrested later in life. For example,
some evidence suggests that when faced with a traumatic
experience, a person may turn to substance use as a coping
mechanism (Barker, 2018). This type of coping method can
lead to increased involvement with the criminal justice system
if individuals are utilizing illegal substances, are engaging in
illegal activity to support their substance use (e.g., theft), or
engaging in illegal activity due to their substance use (e.g.,
driving under the influence) (Barker, 2018). Support for this
theory of offending has been mixed, at best (Belknap, 2015).
Pathways theory focuses on the route for offending among
female offenders. Not unlike the cycle of violence theory,
pathways theory considers the role of childhood abuse and
trauma in female offending, which is particularly important
as evidence shows that female offenders report higher rates
260 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

of childhood trauma than the general population (Comack,
2018; Shdaimah & Wiechelt, 2013).

   Summary
   A special thank you to Dr(s) Stevenson, Kusz, Lyons and
Fabian for their work on this chapter. As we examine crime,
there are various aspects of structural and power inequalities
this chapter points out. This chapter explores the viewpoints
of crime regarding the poor, powerless and a variety of
disenfranchised groups.
   Attribution
   Introduction to Criminology Copyright © 2023 by Dr.
Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons; and
Dr. Sheri Fabian is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

                              References
   Dr. Rochelle Stevenson; Dr. Jennifer Kusz; Dr. Tara Lyons;
and Dr. Sheri Fabian
   Barrett, B. J., Fitzgerald, A. J., Stevenson, R., & Cheung, C.
H. (2017). Animal Maltreatment as a Risk Marker of More
Frequent and Severe Forms of Intimate Partner Violence.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0886260517719542
   Barker, J. (2018). Canadian Female Offenders. In J. Barker
& D. S. Tavcer (Eds.), Women and the criminal justice system:
a Canadian perspective (2nd ed., pp. 63-90). Emond.
   Barrett, B. J., Fitzgerald, A., Peirone, A., Stevenson, R., &
                             CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 261

Cheung, C. H. (2018). Help-seeking among abused women
with pets: Evidence from a Canadian sample. Violence and
Victims, 33(4), 604-626. https://doi.org/10.1891/
0886-6708.VV-D-17-00072

   Beaudette, J., Cheverie, M., & Gobeil, R.
(2014).Aboriginal women: Profile and changing population.
Correctional Service of Canada.

   Belknap, J. (2004). Meda Chesney-Lind: The mother of
feminist criminology. Women and Criminal Justice, 15(2),
1-23. https://doi.org/10.1300/J012v15n02_01

   Belknap, J. (2015). The invisible woman: Gender, crime, and
justice. (4th ed.). Cengage Learning.

   Boyce, J. (2016). Victimization of Aboriginal people in
Canada, 2014. Statistics Canada.

   Britton, D. M. (2000). Feminism in criminology:
Engendering the outlaw. The Annals of the American Academy
of Political and Social Science, 571(1), 57-76. https://doi.org/
10.1177/000271620057100105

   Brown, G. P., Baker, J., McMillan, K., Norman, R.,
Derkzen, D., Stewart, L. A., & Wardrop, K. (2018). Prevalence
of mental disorder among federally sentenced women offenders:
In-Custody and intake samples. Research Branch, Correctional
Service Canada.

   Bruckert, C., & Law, T. (2018). Women and gendered
violence in Canada: An intersectional approach. University of
Toronto Press.

   Chesney-Lind, M. (2020). Feminist criminology in an era
262 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

of misogyny. Criminology, 58(3), 407-422. https://doi.org/

10.1111/1745-9125.12247

Chesney-Lind, M., & Faith, K. (2001). What about

feminism?      Engendering      theory-making           in

criminology. Explaining criminals and crime, 287-302.

Chesney-Lind, M., & Pasko, L. (2004). The Female

Offender: Girls, Women, and Crime (2nd ed.). Sage

Publications.

Chih, C., Wilson-Yang, J. Q., Dhaliwal, K., Khatoon, M.,

Redman, N., Malone, R., Islam, S & Persad, Y. on behalf of

the Trans PULSE Canada Team (2020). Health and well-being

among racialized trans and non-binary people in Canada.

Available from: https://transpulsecanada.ca/research-type/

reports

Cloward, R. A., & Ohlin, L. E. (1960). Delinquency and

Opportunity: A Theory of Delinquent Gangs. Free Press.

Comack, E. (1996). Women in Trouble: Connecting

Women's Law Violations to their Histories of Abuse. Fernwood.

Comack, E. (2018). Coming Back to Jail: Women, Trauma,

and Criminalization. Fernwood.

Comack, E. (2020). Feminism and criminology. In R.

Linden (Ed.), Criminology: A Canadian perspective (pp.

156-185). Nelson.

Comack, E., & Balfour, G. (2014). Criminalizing Women

Gender and (In)Justice in Neoliberal Times. Fernwood

Publishing.
                   CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 263

    Connell, R. W. (2000). The men and the boys. University of

California Press.

    Connell, R. W. (2005). Masculinities (2nd ed.). University

of California Press.

    Conroy, S. (2021). Family violence in Canada: A statistical

profile, 2019. Juristat. Statistics Canada Catalogue, (85-002).

    Conroy, S., & Cotter. A. (2017). Self-reported sexual assault

in  Canada,                2014.  Statistics      Canada.

https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/85-002-x/2017001/

article/14842-eng.htm

    Correctional Service Canada (CSC) (2019, May

16). Statistics       and    research         on  women

offenders. https://www.csc-scc.gc.ca/women/

002002-0008-en.shtml

    Cotter, A. (2018). Violent victimization of women with

disabilities,         2014.       Statistics      Canada.

https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/85-002-x/2018001/

article/54910-eng.htm

    Cotter, A., & Savage, L. (2019). Gender-based violence and

unwanted sexual behaviour in Canada, 2018: Initial findings

from the Survey of Safety in Public and Private

Spaces. Juristat: Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, 1-49.

    Crenshaw, K. (1989). Demarginalizing the Intersection of

Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of

Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist

Politics. University of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989(8): 139-167.
264 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

   Crenshaw, K. (1995). Critical race theory: The key writings
that formed the movement. New Press.

   Delago, M. (2021). A brief look at the four waves of
feminism. The Humanist. Retrieved from
https://thehumanist.com/commentary/a-brief-look-at-the-
four-waves-of-feminism/.

   Derkzen, D., Wardrop, K., & Wanamaker, K. (2019).
Women offender assessment: Can gender-informed variables
improve risk prediction? Correctional Service of Canada.

   Deutschmann, L. B. (2007). Deviance and Social Control
(4th ed.). Nelson Canada.

   Dobash, R. E., & Dobash, R. P. (1979). Violence Against
Wives. The Free Press.

   Doolittle, R. (2017). Unfounded: Why police dismiss 1 in 5
sexual assault claims as baseless.The Globe and Mail,2

   Fitzgerald, A. J., Barrett, B. J., Stevenson, R., & Cheung,
C. H. (2019). Animal maltreatment in the context of intimate
partner violence: A manifestation of power and control?
Violence Against Women, 25(15), 1806-1828. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1077801218824993

   Folsom, J. (2018). Women Offenders and Mental Health.
In J. Barker & D. S. Tavcer (Eds.), Women and the criminal
justice system: a Canadian perspective (2nd ed., pp. 203-226).
Emond.

   Gerassi, L. (2015). A heated debate: Theoretical
perspectives of sexual exploitation and sex work. Journal of
Sociology and Social Welfare,42(4), 79-100.
                   CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 265

Gobeil, R., Blanchette, K., & Stewart, L. (2016). A Meta-

Analytic Review of Correctional Interventions for Women

Offenders: Gender-Neutral Versus Gender-Informed

Approaches. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 43(3),

301-322. https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854815621100

Government of Canada (n.d). About gender-based

violence.      https://women-gender-equality.canada.ca/en/

gender-based-violence-knowledge-centre/about-gender-based-

violence.html

Griner, S. B., Vamos, C. A., Thompson, E. L., Logan, R.,

Vázquez-Otero, C., & Daley, E. M. (2020). The Intersection

of Gender Identity and Violence: Victimization Experienced

by Transgender College Students. Journal of Interpersonal

Violence, 35(23-24), 5704-5725. https://doi.org/10.1177/

0886260517723743

Hamilton, A., & Sinclair, M. (1996). Report of the

Aboriginal Justice Inquiry of Manitoba: Public Inquiry into

the Administration of Justice and Aboriginal People.

Winnipeg, MB: Aboriginal Justice Inquiry of Manitoba

Hankard, M., & Dillen, J. (Eds.). (2021). Red dresses on

bare trees: stories and reflections on missing and murdered

Indigenous women and girls. J. Charleton Publishing.

Hirschi, T. (1969). Cases of Delinquency. University of

California Press.

Jacobs, B. (2017). Decolonizing the violence against

Indigenous women. In P. McFarlane & N. Schabus (Eds.),
266 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

Whose land is it anyway? A manual for decolonization (pp.
47-51). Federation of Post-Secondary Educators of BC.

   Jaffray, B. (2020). Experiences of violent victimization and
unwanted sexual behaviours among gay, lesbian, bisexual and
other sexual minority people, and the transgender population,
in Canada, 2018. Juristat. Canadian Centre for Justice
Statistics, Statistics Canada.

   Johnson, H. (1996). Dangerous domains: Violence against
women in Canada. In Nelson crime in Canada series. Nelson
Canada.

   Johnson, H., & Dawson, M. (2011). Violence against
women in Canada: Research and policy perspectives. Oxford
University Press.

   Kendig, N. E., Cubitt, A., Moss, A., & Sevelius, J. (2019).
Developing Correctional Policy, Practice, and Clinical Care
Considerations for Incarcerated Transgender Patients
Through Collaborative Stakeholder Engagement. Journal of
Correctional Health Care, 25(3), 277-286. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1078345819857113

   Kewley, S. (2017). Strength based approaches and protective
factors from a criminological perspective. Aggression and
Violent Behavior, 32, 11-18.

   Langenderfer-Magruder, L., Whitfield, D. L., Walls, N.
E., Kattari, S. K., & Ramos, D. (2016). Experiences of Intimate
Partner Violence and Subsequent Police Reporting Among
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Adults in
Colorado: Comparing Rates of Cisgender and Transgender
                 CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 267

Victimization. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 31(5),

855-871. https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260514556767

Lynch, S. M., Fritch, A., & Heath, N. M. (2012). Looking

Beneath the Surface: The Nature of Incarcerated Women's

Experiences of Interpersonal Violence, Treatment Needs, and

Mental          Health. Feminist  Criminology, 7(4),

381-400. https://doi.org/10.1177/1557085112439224

Lyons, T., Krüsi, A., Pierre, L., Small, W. & Shannon, K.

(2017a). The Impact of Construction and Gentrification on

an Outdoor Trans Sex Work Environment: Violence,

Displacement and Policing. Sexualities,20(8), 881-903.

Lyons, T., Krüsi, A., Pierre, L., Kerr, T., Small, W. &

Shannon, K. (2017b). Negotiating Violence in the Context of

Transphobia and Criminalization: The experiences of Trans

Sex Workers in Vancouver, Canada. Qualitative Health

Research, 27(2), 182-190.

Maynard, R. (2017).Policing Black Lives: State Violence in

Canada from Slavery to the Present.Fernwood Publishing.

Monchalin, L. (2016). The Colonial Problem. University of

Toronto Press.

Munro, E. (2013). Feminism: A fourth wave? Political

Insight,        4(2),      22-25. https://doi.org/10.1111/

2041-9066.12021

O'Grady, W. (2018) Crime in Canadian Context: Debates

and Controversies (4th ed.) Oxford University Press Canada.

Renzetti, C. M. (2018). Feminist perspectives. In Routledge

handbook of critical criminology, (pp.74- 82). Routledge.
268 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

Savage, L. (2019). Female offenders in Canada, 2017.

Juristat. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Statistics

Canada.

Shdaimah, C. S., & Wiechelt, S. A. (2013). Crime and

compassion: Women in prostitution at the intersection of

criminality and victimization. International Review of

Victimology, 19(1), 23-35. https://doi.org/10.1177/

0269758012447217

Simpson, S. S. (1989). Feminist theory, crime and

justice. Criminology        (Beverly      Hills), 27(4),

605-632. https://doi.org/10.1111/

j.1745-9125.1989.tb01048.x

Sollee, K. (2015, October 30). 6 things to know about 4th

wave feminism. Bustle [online]. https://www.bustle.com/

articles/119524-6-things-to-know-about-4th-wave-feminism

Statistics Canada (2017, October 25). Aboriginal peoples

in Canada: Key results from the 2016 Census.

https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/daily-quotidien/

171025/dq171025a-eng.pdf?st=N8eOvAsJ

Stevenson, R., Fitzgerald, A., & Barrett, B. J. (2018).

Keeping Pets Safe in the Context of Intimate Partner Violence:

Insights From Domestic Violence Shelter Staff in Canada.

Affilia - Journal of Women and Social Work, 33(2), 236-252.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0886109917747613

Stewart, L. A., Wardrop, K., Wilton, G., Thompson, J.,

Derkzen, D., & Motiuk, L. (2017). Reliability and validity
                            CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY | 269

of the Dynamic Factors Identification and Analysis - Revised.
Correctional Service of Canada.

   Suzack, C. (2015). Indigenous feminisms in
Canada. NORA: Nordic Journal of Women's Studies, 23(4),
261-274. https://doi.org/10.1080/08038740.2015.1104595

   Tam, K., & Derkzen, D. (2014). Exposure to trauma among
women offenders: A review of the literature. Correctional
Service of Canada.

   Tavcer, D. S. (2018). Ashley Smith. In J. Barker & D. S.
Tavcer (Eds.), Women and the criminal justice system: a
Canadian perspective (2nd ed., pp. 171-172). Emond.

   Tavcer, D. S. (2018). Prostitution and missing and
murdered women and girls in Canada. In J. Barker & D. S.
Tavcer (Eds.), Women and the criminal justice system: a
Canadian perspective (2nd ed., pp. 255-275). Emond.

   Tavcer, D. S., & Dekeseredy, W. (2018). Female Crime:
Theoretical Perspectives. In J. Barker & D. S. Tavcer (Eds.),
Women and the criminal justice system: a Canadian
perspective (2nd ed., pp. 33-56). Emond.

   Tavcer, D. S., Barker, J., & Dekeseredy, W. (2018).
Experiences of Female Offenders: The Intersection of
Victimization and (re)offending. In J. Barker & D. S. Tavcer
(Eds.), Women and the criminal justice system: a Canadian
perspective (2nd ed., pp. 173-201). Emond.

   Ugwudike, P. (2015). An introduction to critical
criminology. Bristol University Press. http://www.doi.org/
10.2307/j.ctt1t89436
270 | CH. 8 CONFLICT AND FEMINIST THEORY

Wardrop, K. & Pardoel, K. (2018). Examining change in

criminogenic need levels associated with correctional program

participation among federally sentenced women. Correctional

Service of Canada.

Williams, F. P., & McShane, M. D. (2010). Criminological

theory  (Vol.       5th).  Pearson        Education.

http://www.loc.gov.proxy.lib.sfu.ca/catdir/toc/fy043/

2003058220.html

Winterdyk, J. (2020). Canadian criminology. Oxford

University Press.

World Health Organization. (2021). Violence Against

Women. Retrieved April 1, 2021 from https://www.who.int/

news-room/fact-sheets/detail/violence-against-women.
                     CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 271

9.

CH. 9 CONTROL/
DEVELOPMENTAL
THEORIES

   Brian Fedorek and Jeff Bry

Ch. 9
   Control/Developmental Theories of Crime
   Introduction
   This chapter will examine control theories and

developmental theories of crime. A control theorist asks the
question "why don't" people commit crime? The assumption
is crime is easier and is perhaps a matter of our "reptilian
brains" in a biological sense, it takes control to reduce these
natural "selfish" tendencies. Developmental theorists take the
perspective that crime is not a "static" phenomenon but is
changeable due to events that occur during the life-course of
an individual. These perspectives will be examined in this
chapter.
272 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

   Image from pixabay.com
   Control Theories of Crime
   Control theories do not ask why people commit crime, but
instead wonder why people don't commit crime. Control
theorists generally take positions regarding humans that isn't
very positive, that people are selfish and self-serving. In this
perspective, control theorists take the following assumptions/
positions.
   Ask a central question: Why DON'T people become
involved in crime?
   Assumption we as people are selfish, self-motivated. Takes
a level of self-control or imposed control (by an outside force)
for us to comply.
   With proper control, crime should be reduced.
   From this perspective, people need to be controlled to limit
their offending patterns. If proper controls are used, this
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 273

should be an effective and inexpensive crime control method
for society.

   Early Work Regarding Control
   Early work in control theory started with an examination of
socialization and social sanctions, rewards, punishments etc.
to enact control. Socialization would be described and viewed
as an internal control, while social sanctions, rewards and
punishments would be viewed as external controls Reiss
(1951), Nye (1958). Socialization (internal control) is life-long
social experience people get from close association with others.
A good example would be socialization in families and
parenting style. If parents or other close socialization agents do
not teach self-control or impose control mechanisms on the
individual to teach this self-control, they may be maladjusted
in terms of control principles. Shame, guilt, remorse, empathy
etc. are examples of internal controls that are socialized into
individuals.
   External controls would include parenting style as well,
what limits or controls parents or other caregivers impose
upon the individual. What consequences are imposed upon
the individual for specific behaviors, are these consequences
consistent and predictable? Included in external controls
would also be the police, courts, schools, peers or any other
group or agent which may influence control over the
individual.
   Nye (1958) in a study of young people found that attention,
support, acceptance and nurturing at home tends to "insulate"
274 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

the individual against outside influences. If they feel supported
at home, they are less likely to seek out these needs elsewhere.
Nye (1958) also found family disturbances (divorce, working
mothers, parent-child conflict) may lead to diminished
control. While this narrative may seem somewhat offensive
in a modern age (especially single-parent households, working
mothers) the perspective is these disturbances may reduce
control in a household.

   The assumption of control theorists is that people will not
listen and conform "on their own" but need to have
appropriate levels of control over their behavior. This brings
up an interesting conversation piece, are people "born good"
or are people "born bad." Not that either side necessarily fits
control theory perspectives, but it does lead to an interesting
question. "Will people behave or conform because it is the
right thing to do, or will people generally act in their own self-
interest?"

   Brian Fedorek
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
4-11-control-theories/
   5.11. Control Theories Copyright © 2019 by Brian Fedorek
is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
   Previously discussed theories asked why people commit
crime. The methods used tried to identify the driving forces
behind a criminal's behavior. For example, biological and
psychological theories sought to identify traits that determined
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 275

criminality. Strain theories assumed people were good, but bad
things happen, which causes many to be pushed into criminal
behaviors. Learning theories demonstrated the importance of
learning criminal attitudes to commit crimes. These attitudes,
especially when reinforced, will prevail in social situations.
Control theories differ in their approach. Instead of assuming
criminals have "something" or experienced "something" that
drives their criminal behavior, control theories ask why more
people do not engage in illegal behavior. Control theories
assume people are naturally selfish, and if left to their own
devices, will commit illegal and immoral acts. Control theories
try to identify what types of "controls" a person may have that
stops them from becoming "uncontrollable."

   Early control theorists argued that there are multiple
controls on individuals. Personal controls are exercised
through reflection and following pro-social normative
behavior. Social controls originate in social institutions like
family, school, and religious conventions. Toby (1957)
introduced the phrase "stakes in conformity," which is how
much a person has to lose if he or she engages in criminal
behavior.[1] The more stakes in conformity a person has, the
less likely they would be willing to commit crime. For example,
a married teacher with kids has quite a bit to lose if he or
she decided to start selling drugs. If caught, he could lose his
job, get divorced, and possibly lose custody of his children.
However, juveniles tend not to have kids nor are they married.
They may have a job, but indeed not a career. Since they have
276 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

fewer stakes in conformity, they would be much more likely to
commit crime compared to the teacher.

   Image from pixabay.com
   Travis Hirschi is most associated with control theories. In
1969, he argued that all humans have the propensity to
commit crime, but those who have strong bonds and
attachment to social groups like family and school are less
likely to commit crime. [2]Often known as social bond theory
or social control theory, Hirschi presented four elements of
a social bond - attachment, commitment, involvement, and
belief. Attachment refers to affection we have towards others.
If we have strong bonds, we are more likely to care about their
opinions, expectations, and support. Attachment involves an
emotional connectedness to others, especially parents, who
provide indirect control.
   Social Bond (Travis Hirschi, 1969)
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 277

   Attachment - Being attached to prosocial people, activities
etc. If you are attached to your family and care what they think
about you, there is a better chance you will conform.

   Commitment - The more you are committed to prosocial
goals etc., the better the chance you will conform. Being
married and having children tends to reduce criminal behavior
in people, especially if they are committed to their spouse and
children.

   Involvement - Being involved in prosocial activities
(sports, school, jobs, positive peer groups) tends to reduce
crime. If people are busy doing prosocial activities, there is less
time for antisocial activities.

   Belief - The belief structure of the individual is important
regarding choices and behavior. For example if a teenager feels
drinking underage should be legal and is no big deal, there is a
better chance they break that law.

   Picture sourced from pixabay.com
278 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

   From Author Jeff Bry:
   "The social bond is a very well-supported theoretical
perspective in criminology. Being properly bonded to
important others (parents, spouse, peers) is crucial,
especially pro-social people and situations. If you are
bonded to antisocial people or behavior, this tends to
increase the probability of antisocial behavior. Think
about enterprises such as the Mafia, Youth gangs, etc.
where membership in these groups tends to come with
the expectations of criminal activity. If you are bonded to
people and groups that are involved in crime, this tends
to increase the probability you will also be involved in
crime.
   Parenting Exericse
   Parenting can be a challenging responsibility. Parents are
supposed to teach children how to behave. Ideally, parents
have control over their children in many ways.
   What are ways parents have "direct" control over their
children?
   What are ways parents have "indirect" control over their
children?
   Commitment refers to the rational component of the social
bond. If we are committed to conformity, our actions and
decisions will mirror our commitment. People invest time,
energy, and money into expected behavior like school, sports,
career development, or playing a musical instrument. These
are examples of Toby's "stakes in conformity." If people started
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 279

committing a crime, they would risk losing these investments.
Involvement and commitment are related. Since our time and
energy are limited, Hirschi thought people who were involved
in socially accepted activities would have little time to commit
a crime. The observational phrase "idle hands are the devil's
worship" fits this component. Belief was the final component
of the social bond. Hirschi claimed some juveniles are less
likely to obey the law. Although some control theorists
believed juveniles are tied to the conventional moral order and
"drift" in and out of delinquency by neutralizing controls
(Matza, 1964), Hirschi disagreed.[3] He believed people vary in
their beliefs about the rules of society. The essential element
of the bond is an attachment. Eventually, Hirschi moved away
from his social bond theory into the general theory of crime.

   Hirschi Exercise
   Hirschi believed strong social bonds made people less likely
to commit a crime. The components of a social bond include
attachment, commitment, involvement, and belief. Please
describe each of the components of the social bond and
explain how each applies to your educational journey. How
can you be attached, committed, involved, and believe in
higher education?
   Gottfredson and Hirschi (1990) claimed their theory could
explain all crime by all people (as a master trait or
characteristic). They argued the lack of self-control was the
primary cause of criminal behaviors. They claim most ordinary
crimes require few skills to commit and have an immediate
280 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

payoff.[4] There is not any long-term planning or goal; crimes
are committed for immediate pleasure. Moreover, they claim,
people who commit these ordinary crimes tend to be
impulsive, insensitive to the suffering of others, short-sighted,
and adventuresome. If true, these traits (low self-control) were
established before the person started committing crimes and
will continue to manifest throughout a person's life. The root
cause of low self-control is ineffective parenting. If parents are
not attached to their child, supervise their child, recognize the
child's deviant behaviors, or discipline their child, the child
will develop low self-control. Gottfredson and Hirschi claim
self-control, or the lack thereof, is established by eight years
old.

   Gottfredson and Hirschi's (1990) viewpoint of low self-
control is very similar to psychopathy in many ways. As crime
is an act of fraud or self-interest, the individual will see
situations only as they benefit them. Those with low self-
control are selfish, risk-takers, impulsive and very short-cited
in their goals. They have a difficult time thinking about the
future, they tend to live in the moment. People with self-
control will work towards a goal, saving money to make a
substantial purchase or benefit from an investment. People
with low self-control seek immediate gratification, they would
rather act on a situation than wait for a desired outcome. This
approach to life increases the probability they will commit
crime, as crime is easier and more immediate than working
a job. People with low self-control also engage in more risky
                     CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 281

behaviors, such as unprotected sex, excessive alcohol and illicit
drug use. As they are self-centered and selfish, they generally
have a difficult time maintaining relationships and jobs. They
may be superficially charming and fun to be around, but the
more time you spend with them the higher the chance they
victimize you in some manner. They have a great amount of
difficulty maintaining friendships, romantic relationships and
jobs for this reason.

   Control theories are vastly different from other
criminological theories. They assume people are selfish and
would commit crimes if left to their own devices. However,
socialization and effective child-rearing can establish direct,
indirect, personal, and social controls on people. These are all
types of informal controls.

Toby, J. (1957). Social disorganization and stake in
conformity: Complementary factors in the predatory behavior
of hoodlums. Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology and
Police Science, 48, 12-17. 

   Hirschi, T. (1969). Causes of delinquency. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. 

   Matza, D. (1964). Delinquency and drift. New York, NY:
John Wiley. 

   Gottfredson, M., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of
crime. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
282 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

   Developmental/Life-Course Theories of Crime
   Crime over the life-course tends to be somewhat
predictable, most people "age out" of offending by their early
to mid-twenties. The age crime curve suggests criminal
behavior to be more substantial from ages 16-24, where risk
of crime (and victimization) increases substantially around the
age of 16 and dissipates substantially around the age of 24.
   When discussing issues in a developmental manner, there
are numerous correlates of criminal and antisocial behavior.
Examples could include prenatal issues or complications
which may affect intellectual outcomes for the individual.
Birth complications may also create issues, as may poor
prenatal care and nutrition. These issues contribute to various
outcomes for individuals and lead to discussions and
contributions from the life-course perspective of crime.
   The life-course perspective takes the position that various
factors and situations may put us on a different "path" or life-
course which may greatly affect our outcomes and choices.
Individuals born with any variety of birth defects,
complications or other issues/difficulties start out in the world
behind their peers. If provided services and assistance, many of
these early issues can be mitigated. If the individual does not
receive interventions or assistance, these developmental issues
may greatly affect their ability to learn and contribute in
society. This may sound judgmental, but services and
interventions afforded a poor family will look quite different
than those afforded a wealthy family. If a child begins life with
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 283

developmental issues, which are also coupled with
(potentially) a poor family, poor neighborhood and less well-
funded school, all of these issues put the child on a specific
"path" which may be difficult to overcome.

   From this perspective, the life course perspective assumes
that there are strong correlations between life events and
deviant behaviors and therefore crime. Being born to a poor
family may limit opportunities, but being born to a poor
family while having developmental delays or issues may more
distinctly limit opportunities for the individual.

   The life course perspective views life events via a perspective
known as life stages, turning points in one's life and pathways.
These issues are all maintained and supported by social
institutions (Elder, 1985). The life course perspective assumes
people's lives are determined by certain life events that occur
(Benson, 2001). These life events may significantly effect the
path of their life, enhancing or limiting their opportunities.
The life course perspective can be viewed through viewpoints
of trajectories and transitions.

   Trajectories are pathways over the life course, involving
long-term patterns such as jobs, family history, etc. Transitions
are short-term patterns or events, or turning points that may
greatly affect life and life changes, such as graduation, marriage,
divorce, or being a parent (Thornberry, 1997). Transitions play
an important role in the manner in which future trajectories
will develop (Sampson and Laub, 1990). Experiences as a child
will affect life events in adolescence and adulthood, just as
284 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

experiences in adolescence and adulthood may affect future
trajectories. From this perspective, transitions or any life event
may have significant impacts on various outcomes during the
life course.

   For example, quitting school in the 10th grade will have
significant consequences for employment options for the
individual. This may be viewed as an inappropriate transition,
as having a 10th grade education will severely limit a person in
our society. Other examples of early transitions could include
early pregnancy, early law violating behavior, early chemical
use/abuse, etc. Any positive or negative choice will have a
consequence, such as a 10th grade education may greatly limit
opportunities for a high paying job. More appropriate choices
(and transitions) such as getting a high school diploma, a
college degree, or waiting to have children until you are
financially stable, may greatly affect future outcomes.

   The Glueck Research
   Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck conducted longitudinal
research of 500 delinquent and 500 nondelinquent boys
(1940's) in south Boston. In this study, the Glueck's
researched a variety of developmental and life course aspects
of crime, including early onset of offending. Other areas of
research included socio-economic factors of the families,
number of children in the family, body type and intelligence of
the boys, and personality and physical attributes. The Glueck's
found early onset of antisocial behavior was strongly correlated
with offending behavior in adulthood. They also found poor
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 285

family relations were a important predictor in persistent
offending. They found that those boys with lower IQ's,
powerful body builds, and mental illness had higher rates of
crime.

   Photo from Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia.org
   Sampson and Laub (1993)
   Completed follow up work of the Glueck research.
Sampson and Laub (1993) "discovered" the original Glueck
research in the library of Harvard University. This research was
found intact, including access to the names and information
of each participant. Sampson and Laub (1993) continued the
research where the Glueck's had left off, finding interesting
correlations from a developmental and life course perspective.
Some of the findings include a small percentage of the
delinquent boys in the Glueck study committed crimes
throughout the life course. These boys were in and out of the
criminal justice system, they committed crime at least to some
extent throughout their lives.
   Sampson and Laub (1993) also found that parenting style
286 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

was an important predictor of criminal behavior, as were
school performance and poverty. They found that a majority
of the boys stopped committing crime by their early to
mid-20's. Transitions such as marriage, military service, high-
school and college graduation, and full-time employment led
to "desistance" from crime and criminal behavior. As these
boys grew and aged, the ones that made appropriate
transitions (jobs, marriage, families) were at a lower likelihood
of offending. Later research by Sampson and Laub (2004)
found some of the delinquent boys kept offending into their
older adult years. Their offending patterns were not as prolific
or substantial as when they were younger, but they would still
commit crimes if given the opportunity.

   Life Course Trajectories Moffit (1993)
   Terrie E. Moffit (1993) completed research into the life
course trajectories of people and the correlation to criminal
behavior. Moffit (1993) examined transitions and life course
trajectories of antisocial youth. Moffit found a "dual taxonomy
of Life-Course Persistent and Adolescent Limited offenders in
her research.
   Life-Course Persistent Offenders are people that start
offending early in life, starting at a young age and continuing
throughout their life course. These individuals have many
developmental issues to contend with; neurological problems,
birth complications, prenatal exposure to tobacco and alcohol,
also a negative home environment. As many of these
individuals have negative home environments, their issues and
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 287

needs are not addressed. They have a troubled upbringing and
may have a variety of developmental issues that affect their
ability to learn. School is difficult for these children, they
generally begin school academically behind their peers and
become more frustrated with each passing grade.

   As a response to these issues and difficulty with school, the
life-course persistent offenders begin acting out in school.
They cannot compete academically with their peers, they also
generally receive very little assistance or nurturing from home.
As school and academics are painful for them, they begin to act
out and lash out against teachers, peers and the school itself.

   Adolescent Limited Offenders are generally fairly well
adjusted, rule following children. They generally try their best
to follow the rules, they also generally try their best at school.
Moffit (1993) argues these children see the life-course
persistent children as being troubled, but also potentially
humorous and capable of doing and saying things (to teachers,
authority figures, etc.) they would not do and say. As these
adolescent limited children grow and begin to enter
adolescence, Moffit (1993) argues something changes for many
of them. Moffit (1993) argues they see the life-course persistent
children breaking rules and being contrarian, they think that is
"cool" and would like to emulate them. She argues they look
up to the life-course persistent children, seeing them as defiant
and not "taking any crap" from people around them.
288 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

   Image from pixabay.com
   While the adolescent limited children may make some bad
choices and become somewhat belligerent, they are also
socialized and grounded to have life expectations and life goals.
They also generally respect authority (parents, law
enforcement, teachers) and there are limits to what they will
do in terms of behavior. Moffit (1993) argues these children
"outgrow" this behavior, mainly because they have stable
households and families, they also have goals and aspirations
they would like to achieve.
   Moffit (1993) also contends the adolescent limited children
begin to see the life-course persistent children as negative and
begin to label them as such by later adolescence. The
adolescent limited children want to participate in sports and
other activities, attend school functions and eventually go to
college and gain stable employment. Also as the adolescent
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 289

limited children gain more freedom (later curfew, driver's
license, etc.), they begin to organically gain more freedom and
control over their lives.

   One other factor is the life-course persistent children may
not be around by high school, they may drop out or be "kicked
out" of school. They may also be involved in the juvenile
justice system and institutionalized, so they may not be as
accessible to the adolescent limited children.

   Transitions are important in Moffit's (1993) research as
well. As children grow and experience life, some of these
transitions may positively or negatively affect their life course.
For example, adolescent limited children who experience
trauma (abuse, neglect, sexual assault, etc.) may respond to this
trauma in a negative manner including negative choices. Or life
events such as divorce of their parents, death of a parent, death
of a close friend etc. may also put these children on a different
trajectory than they were originally on.

   Transitions may be important for life-course persistent
children as well. Some of these children may have positive
experiences that change or alter their trajectory, including
positive adult role models, a pro-social friend group, or
someone in their life that pushes them in the right direction.
Or perhaps they receive treatment and assistance for their
developmental issues, which pushes them into a different
trajectory. Military service has been demonstrated as being a
"life altering" experience for many people. There is evidence
(as a transition) that military service may change the trajectory
290 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

of life-course persistent offenders Sampson and Laub (1993).
The rigor, discipline and accountability of military service (and
boot camp) may be life changing for these individuals.

   Image from pixabay.com
   Farrington's Theory of Delinquent Development (1995)
   David Farrington completed a longitudinal study of the
criminal careers of 411 persistent offending delinquent boys
born in 1954. Farrington's (1995) research attempted to isolate
factors that may predict a lifelong continuity of criminal
behavior in these offenders. Key aspects of Farrington's study
include:
   Antisocial Potential (AP):
   Short-Term AP: Refers to the immediate potential to
engage in antisocial behavior, influenced by situational factors
such as peer pressure, alcohol consumption, and immediate
rewards.
                     CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 291

   Long-Term AP: Refers to the enduring potential to engage
in antisocial behavior, influenced by long-term factors such as
personality traits, family background, and social environment.

   Cognitive Processes:
   Farrington's theory emphasizes the role of cognitive
processes in the translation of antisocial potential into actual
behavior. This includes decision-making processes, moral
reasoning, and the individual's perception of potential rewards
and punishments.
   Developmental Pathways:
   Farrington identifies different developmental pathways to
delinquency, suggesting that individuals may follow various
routes based on their experiences and life circumstances. Early
risk factors, such as poor parenting, low intelligence, and
association with delinquent peers, play a significant role in
setting individuals on these pathways.
   Life-Course Perspective:
   The theory incorporates a life-course perspective,
recognizing that the likelihood of engaging in delinquent
behavior changes over time. Key life events, such as marriage,
employment, and military service, can serve as turning points
that increase or decrease antisocial potential.
   Interaction of Risk and Protective Factors:
   Farrington highlights the importance of the interaction
between risk factors (e.g., poverty, family criminality) and
protective factors (e.g., strong social bonds, positive influence
292 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

of parents especially mothers, positive school experiences) in
shaping delinquent behavior.

   Farrington (1995) found early onset of offending to be an
important correlate of chronic offending. He argues that the
traits of chronic persistent offenders to be found by the age of
8. Farrington also identified poor, large families as being more
criminogenic, especially if one or both parents have a criminal
record. Other key correlates include poor parental supervision,
harsh or erratic punishment, impulsivity, hyperactivity and
poor achievement (and attendance) in school. Some other
protective factors include shyness, very few friends at age 8,
noncriminal families, being highly regarded by their mothers.

   Farrington's (1996) work Understanding and Preventing
Youth Crime examines various correlates of youth crime,
including developmental aspects. Farrington highlights the
importance of early intervention in terms of addressing issues
as quickly as possible. Farrington (1996) discusses individual
traits and characteristics coupled with situational and
environmental cues which may propel young people towards
delinquency. Addressing environmental and developmental
issues early may reduce the affects of these indicators, which
may also reduce the affects of the transitions.
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 293

   Summary
   This chapter identifies and addresses issues of control
(inappropriate levels of control and bonding, low self-control)
as well as developmental and life course perspectives of
offending patterns. In terms of bonding and low self-control,
early intervention and proper socialization is crucial to
produce positive outcomes regarding social bonds and
personal levels of control. If an individual is not properly
bonded or have low self-control, there is an increased
probability of offending behavior.
   From a developmental and life course perspective, a variety
of developmental issues (especially if not addressed) may
increase the probability of life course related offending
patterns. Certainly, transitions may occur at any stage of the
life course which may increase or decrease criminal behavior.
Untreated or diagnosed developmental issues are problematic,
294 | CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES

but inappropriate early transitions (dropping out of school,
getting pregnant, early chemical use) may increase the
probability of crime. In a similar manner things like marriage,
a full-time job and military service may act as "insulators"
against criminal behavior.

   References
   Farrington, David P. "The Development of Offending and
Antisocial Behavior from Childhood: Key Findings from the
Cambridge Study in Delinquent Development." Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, vol. 36, no. 6, 1995, pp.
929-964.
   Farrington, David P. Understanding and Preventing Youth
Crime. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 1996.
   Glueck, Sheldon, and Eleanor Glueck. Unraveling Juvenile
Delinquency. Harvard University Press, 1950.
   Glueck, Sheldon, and Eleanor Glueck. Delinquents and
Nondelinquents in Perspective. Harvard University Press, 1968.
   Moffitt, Terrie E. "Adolescence-Limited and Life-Course-
Persistent Antisocial Behavior: A Developmental Taxonomy."
Psychological Review, vol. 100, no. 4, 1993, pp. 674-701.
   Nye, F. Ivan. Family Relationships and Delinquent
Behavior. Wiley, 1958.
   Reiss, Albert J. "Delinquency as the Failure of Personal and
Social Controls." American Sociological Review, vol. 16, no. 2,
1951, pp. 196-207.
   Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. Crime in the
                    CH. 9 CONTROL/DEVELOPMENTAL THEORIES | 295

Making: Pathways and Turning Points Through Life. Harvard
University Press, 1993.
296 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

10.

CH. 10 THE NATURE
AND EXTENT OF CRIME

   Shanell Sanchez and Jeff Bry

                               Ch. 10
                    Nature and Extent of Crime
   Introduction
   When we discuss crime, we generally discuss what is known
through official channels (UCR, NIBRS, NCVS). What is
equally compelling is the amount of crime we don't know
about, as many crimes that occur are not reported to law
enforcement. Some items may be minor, and people do not
think it is worth the trouble to report, or perhaps they feel
the loss is their own fault and they won't get the item back
(stolen bike for example). These items contribute to something
known as the "dark" or hidden figure of crime.
   Dark or Hidden Figure of Crime
   Shanell Sanchez
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
2-1-dark-figure-of-crime-or-unreported-crime/
   It is difficult to determine the amount of crime that occurs
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 297

in our communities every year because many crimes never
come to the attention of the criminal justice system. There
are various reasons that will be discussed, such as victims not
reporting, victims not realizing they are victims, and offenders
not getting caught. Research reveals, that on average, more
than half of the nation's violent crimes, or nearly 3.4 million
violent victimizations per year, went unreported to the police
between 2006 and 2010, according to a new report published
by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). [1] Because of this
underreporting of crime, criminologists often refer to a
concept known as the dark figure of crime.

   Picture from pixabay.com
   There are three general sources of crime statistics that will
be covered in this chapter: official statistics, which we often
describe as reported statistics, self-report statistics, and
victimization statistics. Each of these sources of crime statistics
298 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

has pros and cons, and we will spend time discussing those as
well. Additionally, we will discuss the importance of looking
at crime trends over time, relying upon statistics and research
when developing policy, and how data should be a tool that
enhances the criminal justice system.

   If we have accurate and reliable crime statistics, we can
evaluate criminal justice policies and programs. For example,
we could use crime statistics to see if incarcerating drug
offenders is effective. Such effectiveness is studied in the
correctional system via the `risk principal,' or classifying people
based on the level of risk. https://heinonline.org/HOL/
LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/
fedsen27&div=37&id=&page=

   Relying on official statistics can be problematic to grasp a
correct understanding of crime in society because many crimes
never even come to the attention of the criminal justice system.
Official statistics are often the crimes that are known or
reported to police or others. It may seem shocking that people
do not report crimes, but it is more common than we think.
Let us take the example of looking at the gap between reported
and unreported crimes.

   Dark Figure of Crime Example
   My father-in-law grew up in a small town in South Dakota.
When his family moved to Colorado, they still had a rural
mindset to their property. They often think people should not
touch other people's things, so there is no need to lock up
their house, car, or other property. He leaves his vehicle, house,
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 299

and garage unlocked in Colorado because of that mindset.
However, they live in a large, populous part of Colorado in
a suburb outside Denver. Most people do not know the
neighbor three doors down. One morning he woke up to his
truck gone! The first thing he did was realize he left the keys in
the truck and the truck was unlocked (normal to him). Next,
he decided to take a walk to look for it before phoning the
police. He located the truck, and it was damaged. It appeared
that kids took it for a joy ride, as evidence from the beer cans
and odor. He chose not to call the police. Why? He was happy
the property had was located, yet he believed `it was his fault,'
and he had to get to work. Is this type of reaction more
common than we may think?

   Picture from pixabay.com
   A friend of mine was a victim of domestic violence for over
300 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

nine months and never told anyone, especially the police. Her
boyfriend was only presented as perfect, loving, and romantic
on social media and around people. When she did come
forward, it was after she landed in the emergency room due
to him assaulting her. People may initially think domestic
violence victims would always call the police, but there are so
many reasons people do not come forward.

   When victims of crime do not report, or police are not made
aware of a crime these crimes go uncounted in the official
statistics. They become part of the `dark figure of crime` that
we will learn about throughout this section. [2]

   Some Reasons People May Not Report [3]
   1. The victim may not know a crime occurred
   2. The offender is a member of the family, a friend, or an
acquaintance
   3. The victim thinks it is not worth reporting
   4. The victim may fear retaliation
   5. The victim may also have committed a crime
   6. The victim does not trust the police

Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2012). Nearly 3.4 million violent
crimes per year. https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/press/
vnrp0610pr.cfm 

   Biderman, A., & Reiss, A. (1967). On exploring the "dark
figure of crime." The Annals of the American Academy of
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 301

Political and Social Science. 374(1), 1-15. https://doi.org/
10.1177/000271626737400102 

   Brantingham, P., & Brantingham, P. (1984). Patterns in
Crime, New York: Macmillan. 

   Picture from pixabay.com
   Official Statistics
   Shanell Sanchez
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
2-2-official-statistics/
   Despite being aware that crime does go unreported, it is
still important to estimate and attempt to measure crime in
the country. However, it is essential always to be aware of the
data sources strengths and weaknesses when reading crime
statistics. Also, be cautious of how changing data collection
techniques may alter statistics. For example, if a survey never
collected data on prescription drug abuse but then all of a
302 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

sudden does it could seem like prescription drugs are being
abused at high rates. However, it is most likely just because
it is the first time the questions got asked and there are no
comparison groups.

   Official statistics are gathered from various criminal
justice agencies, such as the police and courts, and represent
the total number of crimes reported to the police or the
number of arrests made by that agency. Remember, if an
officer uses discretion and does not arrest a person, even if a
crime was committed, this does not get reported.

   The Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI's) Uniform
Crime Reports (UCR) is the largest, most common data on
crime currently available. The UCR lists the number of crimes
that were reported to the police and the number of arrests
made. The link below can take you to the UCR
homepage https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr.

   The UCR Program's primary objective is to generate
reliable information for use in law enforcement
administration, operation, and management. Various groups
and agencies rely upon the UCR crime data, such as law
enforcement executives, students, researchers, the media, and
the public at large seeking information on crime in the nation.
[1] The UCR began in 1929 by the International Association
of Chiefs of Police to meet the need for reliable uniform crime
statistics for the nation. In 1930, the FBI was tasked with
collecting, publishing, and archiving those statistics. Every year
there are four annual publications produced from data
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 303

received from more than 18,000 city, university and college,
county, state, tribal, and federal law enforcement agencies
voluntarily participating in the program. [2]

   The UCR Program consists of four data collections: The
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS), the
Summary Reporting System (SRS), the Law Enforcement
Officers Killed and Assaulted (LEOKA) Program, and the
Hate Crime Statistics Program. The UCR also publishes
special reports on Cargo Theft, Human Trafficking, and
NIBRS topical studies. The UCR Program will manage the
new National Use-of-Force Data Collection.

   National Incident-Based Reporting System, or NIBRS
   The National Incident-Based Reporting System, or
NIBRS, was created to improve the overall quality of crime
data collected by law enforcement. NIBRS is unique because
it collects data on crimes reported to the police, but also
incidents where multiple crimes are committed, for example
when a robbery escalates into a rape. [3] NIBRS also collects
information on victims, known offenders, relationships
between victims and offenders, arrestees, and property
involved in the crimes. See the link to go directly to
NIBRS https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr/nibrs
   Hate Crime Statistics
   Congress passed the Hate Crime Statistics Act, 28 U.S.C. §
534, on April 23, 1990. This required the attorney general to
collect data "about crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice
based on race, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity." Hate
304 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

crime statistics may assist law enforcement agencies, provide
lawmakers with justification for certain legislation, provide the
media with credible information, or simply show hate crime
victims that they are not alone (FBI, 2018). See the link to
go to the FBI's hate crime statistics link https://www.fbi.gov/
services/cjis/ucr/hate-crime.

   The FBI UCR Program's Hate Crime Data Collection
gathers data on the following biases:

   Race/Ethnicity/Ancestry
   Anti-American Indian or Alaska Native
   Anti-Arab
   Anti-Asian
   Anti-Black or African American
   Anti-Hispanic or Latino
   Anti-Multiple Races, Group
   Anti-Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
   Anti-Other Race/Ethnicity/Ancestry
   Anti-White
   Religion
   Anti-Buddhist
   Anti-Catholic
   Anti-Eastern Orthodox (Russian, Greek, Other)
   Anti-Hindu
   Anti-Islamic
   Anti-Jehovah's Witness
   Anti-Jewish
   Anti-Mormon
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 305

   Anti-Multiple Religions, Group
   Anti-Other Christian
   Anti-Other Religion
   Anti-Protestant
   Anti-Atheism/Agnosticism/etc.
   Sexual Orientation
   Anti-Bisexual
   Anti-Gay (Male)
   Anti-Heterosexual
   Anti-Lesbian
   Anti-Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, or Transgender (Mixed
Group)
   Disability
   Anti-Mental Disability
   Anti-Physical Disability
   Gender
   Anti-Male
   Anti-Female
   Gender Identity
   Anti-Transgender
   Anti-Gender Non-Conforming
   The types of hate crimes reported to the FBI are broken
down by specific categories. The aggregate hate crime data
collected for each incident include the following:
   Incidents and offenses by bias motivation: Includes
crimes committed by and against juveniles. Incidents may
include one or more offense types.
306 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

   Victims: The types of victims collected for hate crime
incidents include individuals (adults and juveniles), businesses,
institutions, and society as a whole.

   Offenders: The number of offenders (adults and juveniles),
and when possible, the race and ethnicity of the offender or
offenders as a group.

   Location type: One of 46 location types can be designated.
   Hate crime by jurisdiction: Includes data about hate
crimes by state and agency.
   Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted
Program LEOKA
   LEOKA provides data and training that helps keep law
enforcement officers by providing relevant, high quality,
potentially lifesaving information to law enforcement agencies
focusing on why an incident occurred as opposed to what
occurred during the incident, with the hope of preventing
future incidents. [4]

LEOKA Data
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 307

   Exclusions from the LEOKA Program's Data
Collection

   Deaths resulting from the following are not included in the
LEOKA Program's statistics:

   Natural causes such as heart attack, stroke, aneurysm, etc.
   On duty, but death is attributed to their own personal
situation such as domestic violence, neighbor conflict, etc.
   Suicide
   Examples of job positions not typically included in the
LEOKA Program's statistics (unless they meet the above
exception) follow:
   Corrections/correctional officers
   Bailiffs
   Parole/probation officers
   Federal judges
   The U.S. and assistant U.S. attorneys
   Bureau of Prison officers
   Private security officers
   All of these official statistics are a great starting point,
although, recognize they are imperfect in nature. Police
agencies can change their attention to certain events, which
can change the overall number of arrests. For example, if police
begin cracking down on domestic violence the statistics may
go up. This crackdown can make it appear that the problem
has increased, although it can be related to the crackdown. Just
remember, if the crime is not reported, or no arrest is made it
will not get captured in the data.
308 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

   Bureau of Justice Statistics Exercise
   The BJS is relatively user-friendly. Look at crime statistics
by state, region, or city, and explore different years and crime
types.
https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=datool&surl=/arrests/
index.cfm
Examine current state AND city crime trends in the past five
years.
Second, pick a state AND city interested in living in and
examine the crime trends for the past five years.

U.S. Department of Justice. (2017). UCR Reports 
   U.S. Department of Justice. (2017). UCR Reports 
   Rantala, R. R. (2000). Effects of NIBRS on crime statistics.

Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report. U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Justice Programs. Washington, DC. 

   FBI (2017). https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr/leoka 
   Victimization Studies
   Shanell Sanchez
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
2-4-self-report-data/
   Victimization studies attempt to fill in where police
reports are missing by asking people if they have been a victim
of a crime in a given year, reported or not. The National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) is the primary source of
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 309

information on criminal victimization in the United States.
The NCVS helps fill in gaps that the UCR and NIBRS cannot
fill in because that data is only crimes known to police. Every
year the U.S. Census Bureau administers the survey and
gathers data on frequency, characteristics, and consequences
of criminal victimization from approximately 135,000
households, composed of nearly 225,000 persons. The NCVS
collects information on nonfatal personal crimes (i.e., rape or
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, and
personal larceny) and household property crimes (i.e.,
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported
and not reported to police. [1] It is important to help fill in the
gap of the dark figure of crime previously discussed.

   The NCVS collects information on age, sex, race and
Hispanic origin, marital status, education level, and income,
and whether they experienced victimization. Additionally, the
NCVS collects information about the offender about age, race
and Hispanic origin, sex, and victim-offender relationship,
characteristics of the crime (e.g., time and place of occurrence,
use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic
consequences), whether the crime get reported to police,
reason(s) the crime was or do not get reported, and victim
experiences with the criminal justice system. [2] See the link
below to explore the NCVS https://www.bjs.gov/
index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=245

   See the report below on findings of repeat
310 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

victimization from the NCVS: https://www.bjs.gov/
index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6046

   NCVS Exercise
   Go to the NCVS page and use the analysis tool that allows
you to examine the National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS) data on both violent and property victimization. You
can select the victim, household, and incident characteristics.
   You can instantly generate tables with national estimates
of the numbers, rates, and percentages of victimization from
1993 to the most recent year that NCVS data are available. The
pre-set Quick Tables show you trends in crime and reporting
to the police. If you would like more detail, use the Custom
Tables analyze victimization by excellent characteristics.
   https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=nvat
   As with any data source, there are challenges and limitations
to victimization surveys. Respondents may have issues
recalling victimization, which can lead to underreporting or
overreporting. If an individual was traumatized the event may
blur together, and it may have occurred in 2017 rather than
2018, but gets reported as 2018. Other times respondents may
lie or omit information for various reasons such as shame,
fear, confusion, and a lack of trust. If the respondent is
uncomfortable with the interviewers, they may not want to
tell them that their partner abused them, out of fear it will
get reported to police. However, methodological techniques
can attempt to minimize these challenges buy bounding to
mitigate the chances of this happening. [3]
                        CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 311

Bureau of Justice Statistics, Data Collection: National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) 

   Bureau of Justice Statistics, Data Collection: National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 

   Lab, S., Holcomb, J., & King, W. (2013). Criminal justice:
The Essentials. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 

   Shanell Sanchez
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
victimization-data/
   Self-report statistics are stats that are reported by
individuals. Self-report statistics get gathered when people are
asked to report the number of times they may have committed
a particular crime during a set period in the past, regardless
of getting caught or not. For example, in-class students take
a criminal activity checklist and report behaviors they have
engaged in at some point in their lives. People should be honest
since the data has no identifying information collected, and
report even if no one ever found out what we find during class
time it that all the students, for over eight years of teaching,
have committed a crime. However, the amount of students
that have to get caught is minimal, especially those that
received formal sanctioning from the CJ system (funneling of
crime).
   Monitoring the Future is an ongoing study of the behaviors,
attitudes, and values of American secondary school students,
college students, and young adults. Each year, a total of
312 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

approximately 50,000 8th, 10th, and 12th-grade students get
surveyed (12th graders since 1975, and eighth and 10th graders
since 1991). Besides, annual follow-up questionnaires are
mailed to a sample of each graduating class for some years
after their initial participation. The Monitoring the Future
Study has been funded under a series of investigator-initiated
competing research grants from theNational Institute on
Drug Abuse, a part of the National Institutes of Health.
MTF is conducted at the
Survey Research Center in the Institute for Social
Research at theUniversity of Michigan.

   Monitoring the Future Drug Use Amongst Teens
   How do we get estimates on drug use amongst teens if most
of them do not get caught? We rely on reports like the one
above from the MTF. Monitoring the Future (MTF) is a long-
term study of substance use among U.S. adolescents, college
students, and adult high school graduates through age 60. The
survey is conducted annually, which allows us to examine long
term trends. MTF findings identify emerging substance use
problems, track substance use trends, and inform national
policy and intervention strategies. Respondents are
confidential, which means we cannot link their answers to
them. Therefore, people may be more likely, to tell the truth.

[1]

   In the Report: One Form of Drug Use Showed a Sharp
Increase in Use in 2018

   The most important findings to emerge from the 2018
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 313

survey is the dramatic increase in vaping by adolescents.
Vaping is a relatively new phenomenon, so we are still
developing measures related to this behavior, which included
asking separately for the first time in 2017 about the vaping
of three specific substances--nicotine, marijuana, and just
flavoring. As the section on vaping in this monograph shows,
there was a significant and substantial increase in 2018 in the
vaping of all three of these substances, including some of the
most substantial absolute increases MTF has ever tracked for
any substance. Given that nicotine is involved in most vaping,
and given that nicotine is a highly addictive substance, this
presents a severe threat.[2]

   Self-report statistics are great because they can help discover
problems we were unaware of, such as vaping. Further, it helps
us identify victimless crimes, or crimes to where there is no
victim such as drug use, gambling, and underage drinking.
Lastly, we uncover offenses that are not as serious such as
shoplifting, which are less likely to be known to police. [3]

   However, self-report data also has its limitations.
Respondents may exaggerate or underreport their criminal
behavior, for various reasons. For example, in the class activity
we do, many students did not know what they did was illegal
behavior until the statute was read, so they would never have
thought they committed a crime. Lastly, if we do not capture
a large sample, we may limit who gets the survey. If we are
surveying kids in school about substance abuse, but not
314 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

reaching out to all kids even if they get suspended, we may miss
important data. [4]

   Which Data Should We Use?
   In each type of data (official, self-report, and victimization)
there are pros and cons. Additionally, each source is more
likely to produce a better picture of what is occurring
depending on the area of study. If a person wanted to get the
best statistics on reported homicides in the US, which source
would be best? How about domestic violence? What if we
were interested in finding out drug abuse rates amongst teens
in high school?

Johnston, L.D., Miech, R.A., O'Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.D.,
Schulenberg, J.E., & Patrick, M.E. (2018). MTF. 2018
Overview Key Findings on Adolescent Drug Use 

   ohnston, L.D., Miech, R.A., O'Malley, P.M., Bachman,
J.D., Schulenberg, J.E., & Patrick, M.E. (2018). MTF. 2018
Overview Key Findings on Adolescent Drug Use 

   Hindelang, Hirschi, & Weis, (1981). Measuring
delinquency. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Pubs. 

   Lab, S., Holcomb, J., & King, W. (2013). Criminal justice:
The Essentials. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 

   Shanell Sanchez
   https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/ccj230/chapter/
2-3-challenges-with-crime-measurement/
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 315

   Genocide: Misuse of Statistics Exercise
   The misuse of statistics promotes crime myths and
generates fear of crime. There are various ways that we can
misuse statistics, such as limiting public access to critical
information, intending to mislead the public by presenting
false information, or using deceptive formats to present
information. [1]
   Exercise: Find a news article that demonstrates an apparent
misuse of statistics for a crime OR an article that demonstrates
that people are trying to get release accurate and reliable
information about a crime. Specifically, discuss how it is a
misuse of statistics or not and why that particular article was
picked in 500 words.
   For example, the article I found is about the genocide in
Myanmar. The article is titled, "What is happening in
Myanmar is genocide. Call it by its name" in the Washington
Post. For a long time, no one referred to this crime as a
genocide, and there were deliberate attempts by the
government in Myanmar and the world to not refer to it as
genocide. Despite visual evidence that a genocide was
occurring, the government tried to deny it. The news said,
"NO MORE. Call it what it is."
   https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-
opinions/what-is-happening-in-myanmar-is-genocide-call-it-
by-its-name/2018/08/29/
611a1090-aafe-11e8-a8d7-0f63ab8b1370_story.html?utm_te
rm=.9e76f629a8b3
316 | CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME

Genocide of Rohingya families
   Watch the video link embedded at the top of the CNN

news clip where the Monks say the international community
is wrong and it is not genocide. However, the United Nations
took a stance by calling it genocide and calling for the end
of it. https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/25/asia/myanmar-
buddhist-nationalism-mabatha/index.html

   Misusing statistics can happen all the time, and sometimes
it is intentional, others accidental. When we think back to the
example of my grandfather, he would just cite stats out of
nowhere. However, he had never really studied any of the
issues and his sources were unreliable. As a child, I often
wondered how he knew this? He did not intend to spew
inaccurate facts but accidentally did to us because he listened
to someone who thought they had knowledge. This happens
often when people give `opinions' without facts, which they
                       CH. 10 THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME | 317

are merely opinions. It is important to be able to distinguish
this.

Kappler, V., & Potter, G. 2018. The Mythology of Crime and
Criminal Justice (5th ed.). Waveland Press, Inc: Long Grove. 

   Chapter Summary
   This chapter analyzes and nature and extent of crime,
including the "dark figure" of crime and various measures of
crime. As we examine and discuss the dark figure of crime, we
come to realize there are aspects of crime we cannot accurately
measure. While we do have a variety of methods of reporting
and measuring crime, this dark figure issue is pervasive in
criminal justice causing issues with reported official statistics.
Self-report and victimization research is often helpful, but still
incomplete (even when coupled with official statistics) in fully
describing the nature and extent of crime.
318 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

11.

CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST
PERSONS

   Jeff Bry

                               Ch. 11
                       Crimes Against Persons
   Introduction
   When people think about issues that make them fearful
of crime, crimes against people are commonly cited. The
potential to be victimized causes stress and anxiety for many
people, there is also a fascination with this phenomenon cited
in the True Crime and other cultural phenomena regarding
crime. In this chapter we will examine crimes against persons,
including violent crimes. We first need to examine definitions
of instrumental and expressive violence to differentiate
differing motivations.
   Instrumental Violence: Violence directed at strangers for
personal or financial gain.
   Armed robbery, burglaries, etc.
   There is some practical benefit to committing the crime,
including money, items, status, etc.
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 319

   Expressive Violence: Crimes that are emotion based,
venting rage, anger or frustration.

   School shootings could be an example.
   Committing acts of violence as a response to situational and
structural factors such as poverty, bad neighborhoods, etc.
   Responding to intolerable situations/treatment such as
being abused (domestic violence, rape, child abuse).

   In a Students Own Words:
   Question: Why do you think people fear crime?
   People fear violent crime when they hear about it. If
you never heard about or saw violent crime you wouldn't
fear it because you don't know about it. The media
abuses this. Broadcasting rare crimes that don't occur
that frequently within a society will cause fear. People
fear it because "if the media is broadcasting it, it must be
of epidemic proportions". 14 out of 1000 persons above
320 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

18 years old get stalked yearly. This is unreasonable to
worry about frequently because the odds are so low.

   Crime Typologies
   Crime typologies are categories discussed by
criminologists to identify crime by a set of defined
characteristics. Generally, these characteristics include aspects
of crime including (but not limited to) victim behavior,
offender motivation, legal categories, situational factors of the
criminal act or event and specific aspects of the offender
themselves. When examining crime typologies, one is able to
decipher and understand the nature of crime based upon each
typology. For example, the typology for murder will look quite
different from the typology for shoplifting. In this chapter we
will examine typologies specific to crimes against persons.
   Murder/Homicide
   Murder and homicide are often used interchangeably, they
are actually distinct definitions. Murder is the act of willfully
killing someone in an unlawful manner. Homicide may be
murder, but it may also be committed in self-defense or in
other justifiable and/or legal manner. Often court systems will
use the term criminal homicide to make this distinction,
where a criminal homicide is causing the death or another
without legal cause or excuse.
   According to the UCR/NIBERS, in 2022 there were
22,000 people murdered, which results in about 6.9 per
100,000 people. To put this in perspective, in 2020 there were
approximately 21,570 murders, with a rate of 6.5 per 100,000
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 321

people. (Brennan Center for Justice) (FBI Uniform Crime
Reporting (UCR)).

   Here are the murder statistics for previous years according
to the UCR:

   2020: Approximately 21,570 murders, with a rate of 6.5 per
100,000 people.

   2010: About 14,722 murders, with a rate of 4.8 per
100,000 people.

   2000: Roughly 15,586 murders, with a rate of 5.5 per
100,000 people.

   1990: Around 23,440 murders, with a rate of 9.4 per
100,000 people.

   1980: Approximately 23,040 murders, with a rate of 10.2
per 100,000 people

   1970: There were 16,000 murders, with a rate of 8.3 per
100,000 people.

   1950: There were approximately 7,130 murders, with a rate
of 4.6 per 100,000 people.

   1930: There were approximately 8,920 murders, with a rate
of 7.1 per 100,000 people (FBI Uniform Crime Reporting
(UCR)) (Brennan Center for Justice).

   As you can see the number of murders and the murder rate
is lower in 2022 than it was in either 1980 or 1990. People tend
to assume crime (and serious crime) keeps increasing every
year (crime gets worse), these statistics show the cyclical nature
of crime and specifically murder. The murder rate in 1930
was slightly higher than the murder rate in 2020. Researcher
322 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

often look for trends or events that may increase or decrease
crime and specifically (in this case) the murder rate. Drugs,
gangs, social and political turmoil may affect the murder rate
in specific time frames.

   In terms of murder, first-degree murder takes the
perspective the murder was planned, including something
referred to as malice aforethought, meaning the killing was
planned and premeditated. Second-degree murder is often
viewed as a "crime of passion", where the decision to kill and
the killing happen almost simultaneously. For a murder to be
second-degree, the killing must generally follow insults or
abuse, where people "react" to some stimuli. If people have
time to think about the outcome of killing someone that
demonstrates premeditation, which would generally be first-
degree murder.

   Third-degree murder refers to homicides that result from
someone's unlawful or negligent actions. Common terms for
third-degree homicide often include manslaughter, negligent
homicide, negligent manslaughter and involuntary
manslaughter. An example of negligent homicide could
include a person driving under the influence who hits and kills
a pedestrian.

   Explanations for Murder/Homicide
   The Subculture of Violence Thesis Wolfgang and
Ferracuti (1967) take the stance certain groups have values and
norms that are more conducive to violence. These violent
subcultures view acts of violence as being justified in dealing
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 323

with problems, or gaining an advantage in situations. The
perspective violence is a matter of learning from culture (values
and norms) and accepted and supported by the culture is a
key attribute of this theory. Elijah Anderson (1999) with his
pivotal work Code of the Street discusses a similar perspective,
concentrating on inner-city neighborhoods. Anderson (1999)
suggests this "code" justifies violence (and threats of violence)
to govern individual and neighborhood behavior. This code is
taught and reinforced at a community level.

   Katz (1988) discusses the "sneaky thrills" of committing
crime, arguing that the subculture of violence can be driven
by the seductive appeal of committing crimes. Crime is easier
than work, it is also more engaging and entertaining. Crime
does not necessarily demand a schedule; people can commit
crime when they are in need and/or see an opportunity.
Messerschmidt (1993) adds the variable of masculinity into
the discussion of the subculture of violence. Messerschmidt
(1993) suggests violent behavior can be a method for males to
assert their masculinity in certain cultural context.

   The Victim-Offender Relationship regarding homicides
often focuses on understanding the relationship (dynamics
and motivation) behind homicides that occur among people in
pre-existing relationships. These relationships include family,
friends, or acquaintances. These homicides are referred to as
primary homicides, or homicides committed where the
victim and offender know each other. Wolfgang (1958) found
that 25% of all homicides were between family members, with
324 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

interesting differences based upon gender. Females were far
more likely to be both offender and victim in this category of
primary homicide, killed by or killing family members. Males
were more likely to be killed by friends and acquaintances than
family members, but when a male was killed by a female there
was a good chance the offender was his spouse. Fagan and
Browne (1994) found physical aggression and abuse between
spouses is a strong correlate to risk of homicide. Secondary
homicides are homicides committed between strangers.

   Victim Precipitation is another perspective on the cause
of homicide. Victim precipitation in homicide refers to
situational factors where the victim is thought to have
provoked or contributed to the violent encounter that led to
their death. Wolfgang (1958) in his study of homicides in
Philadelphia, found 26% of homicides he examined involved
victim precipitation. His findings concluded in the majority
of these cases involved scenarios where the victim initiated the
violence or provoked the offender in some manner. Luckenbill
(1977) found situations involving "situated transactions"
where the interactions between victim and offender escalated
to lethal violence. Luckenbill (1977) found victim
precipitation often plays a role in escalation of interactions.
Wolfgang and Ferracuti (1967) found that in subcultures
supportive of violence that victim precipitation is more likely.
They theorize that in these subcultures cultural norms can
affect the likelihood of victim precipitated homicide.

   Sibling Offenses refers to offenses that initiate a homicide,
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 325

but where a homicide was not the intention. Examples could
be an attempted robbery where the victim resists and the
offender shoots and kills the victim. The offender did not
intend to kill the victim in the act of robbing them, but the end
result is a homicide.

   Weapon Use is one other important category regarding
homicide. According to the Uniform Crime Reports (2021)
in 2020 firearms were used in approximately 77% of all
homicides, with handguns being most commonly used. Knives
or other cutting instruments were used in about 10% of
homicides. Blunt objects, hand and feet and all other weapons
accounted for the other 13% of weapons used in homicides.
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention's (2019)
National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) closely
tracked the Uniform Crime Reports data, finding 74% of
homicides were committed using firearms. As firearms are so
predominantly associated with homicide and death, statistics
are highlighted below including suicides, accidental deaths and
deaths from legal intervention.
326 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

      Total   Gun Gun Gun Deaths from Accidental Legal
Year Gun      Homicides Suicides Deaths Intervention

      Deaths

2020 45,222 19,384 24,292 535        611

2010 31,672 11,078 19,392 606        596

2000 28,663 10,801 16,586 776        500

1990 37,155 18,253 18,885 1,416      601

1980 34,514 15,009 17,352 1,618      535

1970 23,500 10,588 11,622 2,928      362

1950 12,397 6,081 5,548 3,019        289

1930 8,755 3,487 4,431 2,622         215

Summary and Observations:
   Observations
   Trends Over Time: The total number of gun deaths has

generally increased over time, with significant increases in
recent decades.

   Homicides: The number of gun homicides peaked in the
1990s but remains high, especially in 2020.

   Accidental Deaths: Accidental gun deaths were higher in
earlier decades but have decreased over time, possibly due to
better education, safer gun storage practices, and
improvements in firearm safety technology.

    Legal Intervention: Deaths from legal intervention have
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 327

remained relatively stable but are a small percentage of the total
gun deaths

   Data Sources:
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports
   FBI Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program
   National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) reports

   Picture source pixabay.com
   These statistics provide a snapshot of the impact of gun
violence and accidents over nearly a century, illustrating the
evolving nature of this significant public health issue.
328 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

   In a Students Own Words:
   Question: What do people think about violent crime?
   The fear of violent crime often seems bigger than the
actual risk. This fear can come from various sources like
media portrayal of crime, personal experiences, or
societal attitudes. News outlets often focus on violent
crimes because they grab attention, which can skew our
perception of how common they actually are. In. reality,
violent crimes are less common compared to other types
of crime, like property crimes. But it's natural for people
to be more affected by the idea of violence since it poses a
direct threat to personal safety. The actual risk of being a
victim can depend heavily on factors like where you live,
your lifestyle, and the time of day.
   Alcohol and Drug Use is another common correlate of
homicide. The NVDRS (2019) found that in 31% of homicide
victims tested positive for alcohol, and around 25% tested
positive for illicit drugs such as cocaine, opioids or marijuana.
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 329

Felson and Staff's (2010) research explored the effects of
alcohol intoxication and its affects on violence, including
homicide. The author's concluded alcohol significantly
impairs individual judgement and increases aggression and
violence. The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism (NIAAA) reported on their fact sheet that alcohol
is a factor in 40-50% of all homicides.

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Rape
   Rape is a topic that has seen dramatic change over the
decades. As you can see by the statistics provided, rape appears
to have severely increased following the 1970's. Some historical
context is important regarding this topic and issue.
   2020: 126,430 reported rapes, with a rate of 38.4 per
100,000 inhabitants.
330 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

   2010: 85,593 reported rapes, with a rate of 27.5 per
100,000 inhabitants.

   2000: 90,186 reported rapes, with a rate of 32.0 per
100,000 inhabitants.

   1990: 102,560 reported rapes, with a rate of 41.1 per
100,000 inhabitants.

   1980: 82,990 reported rapes, with a rate of 36.8 per
100,000 inhabitants.

   1970: 37,990 reported rapes, with a rate of 18.7 per
100,000 inhabitants.

   1950: 4,190 reported rapes, with a rate of 2.6 per 100,000
inhabitants.

   1930: 3,290 reported rapes, with a rate of 2.1 per 100,000
inhabitants. (FBI Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR)) (FBI
Archives).

   According to the FBI Archives (FBI Archives) the 1950's
and 1960's were a time of "initial awareness" when it came
to rape. Societal attitudes were generally against the victim
during these decades, with victim blaming and societal stigma
against the victim being significant. During these decades rape
prosecution was extremely difficult, requiring proof of
physical resistance and corroboration from witnesses. The
1970's began the period of reform pertaining to rape and rape
laws. This change was partially a result of the Feminist
Movement, which brought attention to sexual violence and
advocated for change systemically towards rape and rapists.
The result were establishment of Rape Crisis Centers, also
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 331

states began to change their rape laws. Physical resistance was
no longer required, also victim testimony was found to be
sufficient evidence.

   Rape and rape laws continue to evolve, including cultural
movements such as the "Me Too" movement
https://metoomvmt.org/. Rape is still a complicated topic and
issue, one that appears to still be misunderstood and
underreported.

   Categories of Rape
   Rape is generally acknowledged as non-consensual sexual
contact (historically intercourse) committed by force, threat of
force, or other forms of coercion. Inability to give consent due
to age, mental incapacity or intoxication is generally viewed as
rape as well.
   Statutory Rape involves sexual contact with a person who
is below the age of consent. The age of consent will vary by
jurisdiction.
   Marital Rape involves non-consensual sexual contact
between spouses. Marital rape is not acknowledged in certain
countries, it has only in recent decades been acknowledged and
prosecuted in the US.
   Date Rape involved sexual contact committed by someone
the victim knows, generally a friend, neighbor or as the term
suggests a date. Date rape commonly involves drugs or alcohol
as a method to incapacitate the victim, manipulation and
coercion are often methods of the offender.
   Acquaintance Rape is a rape by someone the victim
332 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

knows. Similar to date rape, this type of rape may include
"grooming" techniques and occur in settings known to the
victim (work, school, neighborhood, home, etc.).

   Gang Rape is a rape involving multiple offenders. In these
instances the victim is more likely to resist, with may result in
extreme violence and injury to the victim.

   Theories of Rape
   The Feminist Perspective is broad and diverse, but tends
to be discussed in the following contexts:
   Power and Control: Rape is not viewed as only a sexual
act but is viewed as an extension of power and control. Rape
is a means to exert this power and control over the victim,
and display dominance. Victims are often women and other
marginalized populations.
   Patriarchal Structures: Rape is the outcome of patriarchy,
social norms and social institutions systematically provide
privilege to men and subordinate women. This structural
inequality creates environments more conducive and tolerant
of sexual violence against women.
   Cultural Attitudes: Rape is the outcome of a culture that
objectified women and conduct victim-shaming, where
women are fearful to reports acts of sexual violence. These
cultural attitudes create an environment where rape is
normalized, and victims are not believed or are blamed for the
assault.
   The Psychopathological Perspective of rape Groth
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 333

(1979) takes the perspective that rape is based on two primary
assumptions.

   Rape is the result of idiosyncratic mental disease.
   Rape often includes an uncontrollable sexual impulse.
   Groth (1979) argues rape is entrenched in aspects of
"power" and "anger." While there are mixed reviews on the
explanatory power of this perspective, it is still cited as a
possible theoretical explanation of rape.
   The Integrated Theory of Rape Baron and Straus (1989)
discusses an "integrated theory' of rape, by blending
competing theories into one integrated theory of rape. Baron
and Straus (1989) combine aspects of feminist, social learning,
routine activities and social integration theories. Integrated
theoretical perspectives include:
   Structural and Cultural Influences:
   Structural Factors: The role of structural factors such as
economic inequality and social disorganization. Communities
with a high amount of poverty and unemployment are more
likely to have higher instances of rape due to increased stress,
frustration and weakened social control.
   Cultural Norms: Cultural norms that support traditional
viewpoints of masculinity and femininity play a tremendous
role in fostering rape. Societies that support male dominance
and aggression while devaluing women and supporting female
submission create environments were rape is more common.
   Social Learning Perspective:
   Behavior Modeling: Using social learning theory,
334 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

individuals learn violent and aggressive behavior, including
acts of sexual violence. These acts are learned by observing
and imitating others, especially when violent behaviors are
rewarded or go unpunished. Television, media and other
cultural portrayals of sexual violence and aggression may also
be modeled.

   Reinforcement: Any behavior that is rewarded (directly or
indirectly) is likely to be repeated. In societies where rape is
not punished or where offenders receive minor sentences the
behavior is reinforced.

   Routine Activities:
   Opportunity Structures: Baron and Straus also draw
from routine activities theory, which posits that the likelihood
of rape increases when there is a convergence of motivated
offenders, suitable targets, and lack of capable guardianship.
For example, social situations such as parties or bars where
individuals may be intoxicated can create opportunities for
rape to occur.
   Victim Vulnerability: Factors that make individuals more
vulnerable to being targeted, such as being alone, intoxicated,
or in unfamiliar settings, are also considered.
   Social Disorganization:
   Community Breakdown: Social disorganization theory
suggests that communities with weak social institutions, such
as family, education, and law enforcement, experience higher
rates of crime, including rape. In such environments, social
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 335

norms are less likely to be enforced, and deviant behavior,
including sexual violence, becomes more prevalent.

   The Evolutionary/Biological Perspective takes the
perspective that natural selection and "sexual selection" are
evolutionary perspectives of human beings. Thornhill and
Palmer (2000) argue rape is a matter of evolutionary
adaptation. They argue throughout history males that were
predisposed to rape might have possessed reproductive
advantages by increasing the odds of passing their genes when
consenting opportunities were limited. This perspective
assumes rape is a behavior that could have been selected for
under certain environmental pressures because it increases
reproductive success, although there is a social and personal
loss to the victim. Thornhill and Palmer (2000) go on to state
rape is more likely to be committed by males who are unable
to secure mates through conventional means. They argue that
men with lower socio-economic status or those who lack
resources and status may view rape as a reproductive strategy.
This theory has been criticized stating it "normalizes" or
minimizes responsibility to the offender for rape.

   Child Sexual Abuse
   Child Sexual Abuse is a broad topic including a variety
of civil and criminal offenses in which an adult engages in
(or exploits) a child in an sexual manner. Child sexual abuse
includes sexual activity with a minor, exploitation of a minor
for sexual gratification, or exploiting a minor for sexual
purposes for profit. Child sexual abuse is viewed as a
336 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

repugnant, deplorable crime which finds almost no support
in society. These offenses are often underreported, partly due
to the potential young age of the victim and/or inability to
report. Even if families or loved ones discover the abuse, they
may be hesitant to report this abuse to authorities. To add to
this problem, use of the internet, social media and other online
platforms have made this issue more severe and accessible in
recent decades. Some statistics from Crimes Against Children
Research Center show:

   1 in 5 girls and 1 in 20 boys is a victim of child sexual abuse.
   Self-report studies show that 20% of adult females and
5-10% of adult males recall a childhood sexual assault or sexual
abuse incident.
   During a one-year period in the U.S., 16% of youth ages 14
to 17 had been sexually victimized.
   Over the course of their lifetime, 28% of U.S. youth ages 14
to 17 had been sexually victimized.
   Children are most vulnerable to CSA between the ages of 7
and 13.
   https://victimsofcrime.org/child-sexual-abuse-statistics/
   Child sexual abuse offenders are not necessarily easy to
identify. Some of the demographic characteristics include
being male, having a fixation on children or young people,
sexual abuse and victimization as a child themselves. These
characteristics should be viewed in context however, as most
people who were abused as children do not abuse children as
adults. There may be reporting error and/or minimizing of
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 337

female child sexual abuse also, as people may not view a female
child sexual "abuser" in the same manner as a male child sexual
"abuser."

   Robbery
   Robbery is counted as a violent crime as it generally
involves threats of force or use of force in its commission.
Robbery is an act where the offender actively attempts to take
the property of another. Robberies can happen almost
anywhere, with robberies occurring on the street often being
referred to as mugging. According to a report from the US
Sentencing Commission (2022), robbery offenders are a small
but increasing proportion of the federal criminal caseload
(increase from 1.9 percent to 2.3 percent from 2012 to 2021).
Hobbs Act robbery, carjacking and bank robbery accounted
for a majority of robbery convictions over a 10-year period.
Robbery offenders typically are male (89%), racial minorities,
have criminal histories and offending patterns that are more
extensive and serious than other violent offenders. Robbery
offenders are prone to use violence and threats of violence
using weapons and threats of use of force against victims
according to the US Sentencing Commission (2022). Findings
include 78% of robberies involve dangerous weapons, with
firearms being most commonly used. A whopping 90% of
robberies involved a threat of physical force against the victim,
and in 26% of cases physical force was used against the victim.
Victims sustained some type of bodily injury in 12% of
338 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

robberies. All statistics are from the US Sentencing
Commission (2022).

Year Total Robberies Robbery Rate per 100,000

2020 243,600  73.9

2010 367,832  119.3

2000 408,016  144.0

1990 639,271  256.3

1980 565,836  251.1

1970 349,860  171.5

1950 26,855   17.3

1930 9,268    7.3
                                 CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 339

Image source pixabay.com
Assault
Assault is the most common type of violent crime. Assault
340 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

also is a "beginning" or starting point for more serious
incidents of violence. As a definition assault is broad and
includes various types of assault including sexual, vehicular,
domestic, aggravated battery, assault bodily injury and
misdemeanor assault. We will discuss "aggravated" and
"simple" assault.

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Aggravated Assault is defined as an attack for the purpose
of inflicting severe bodily injury, often using a weapon or
means to cause severe bodily injury or death. Most commonly
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 341

aggravated assault uses firearms, knives or other weapons that
can cause severe injury or death. Aggravated assault is
commonly correlated to personal disagreements and disputes,
gang related activities and robberies. The potential of a
stranger assault exists with aggravated assault. Being in the
"wrong place at the wrong time" and being victimized for
possessions, may cause great fear and worry for these types
of assaults. Muggings would be a potential example of these
types of stranger assaults.

Year Total Aggravated Assaults  Aggravated Assault Rate per
                                100,000

2020 921,505 279.7

2010 780,231 252.3

2000 910,744 324.0

1990 1,122,367 451.9

1980 854,103 379.5
342 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

1970 229,480 112.4

1950 154,320 102.0

1930 28,771 23.3

Simple Assault is defined as attacks without a weapon that
results in minor injuries and/or threats of harm. Simple
assaults do not involve severe bodily harm. Most commonly
incidents of simple assault include pushing, hitting or
slapping, punching of victims, but also includes verbal threats
of violence without use of a weapon. Simple assaults are often
interpersonal disputes between parties over personal disputes,
minor altercations and domestic conflict. Injuries in simple
assaults are generally less severe than aggravated assault, injuries
do not pose a threat to life or overall long-term health. Family
and personal relationships may face issues and complications,
ending in the potential for simple assault. Simple assaults are
commonly committed against known victims and the
potential exists to escalate to aggravated assault. Domestic
violence could be a good example, it may begin as a simple
assault and escalate to aggravated assault. Most commonly the
reported victim in domestic violence is female.
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 343

Year Total Simple Assaults Simple Assault Rate per 100,000
2020 4,475,577 1,358.3
2010 3,752,944 1,214.8
2000 4,043,770 1,437.0
1990 4,496,877 1,810.0
1980 2,579,040 1,144.4
1970 1,148,120 562.3
1950 518,090 342.4
1930 135,135 109.5

Stalking
344 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

   According to the Victims Connect website
https://victimconnect.org/learn/types-of-crime/stalking/,
stalking is defined as "a course of conduct directed at a
specific person that would cause a reasonable person to feel
fear. Unlike other crimes that involve a single incident, stalking
is a pattern of behavior. It is often made up of individual
acts that could, by themselves, seem harmless or noncriminal,
but when taken in the context of a stalking situation, could
constitute criminal acts." Stalking can be worrisome for the
victim and may be complicated for the offender. The offender
may not know they are harassing or scaring the victim, which
makes stalking a complex crime. Attached below are some of
the patterns of behavior according to the Victims Connect
website which may constitute stalking
https://victimconnect.org/learn/types-of-crime/stalking/.

   Repeatedly calls your phone, including hang-ups.
   Follows you and shows up wherever you are.
   Sends unwanted gifts, letters, texts, or emails.
   Damages your home, car, or other property.
   Monitors your phone calls or computer use, possibly
through spyware.
   Uses technology, like hidden cameras or global positioning
systems (GPS), to track where you go.
   Drives by or lingers near your home, school, or work.
   Threatens to hurt you, your family, friends, or pets.
   Performs other actions that control, track, or frighten you.
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 345

   Uses other people to try to communicate with you, like
children, family, or friends.

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Hate Crimes
   In 1990 the US Congress passed the Hate Crimes
Statistics Act, which required the Attorney General to collect
data "about crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based
on race, religion, sexual orientation, or
ethnicity." https://ucr.fbi.gov/hate-crime/2010/resources/
hate-crime-2010-about-hate-crime This act made it possible to
track the frequency and patterns in hate crime statistics and
to observe changes to these statistics over time. Most recent
statistics (2022) (for single-bias incidents) included the
following frequencies. As is shown in the table below a
majority (59.1%) of single-bias incidents were directed at race/
ethnicity/ancestry. This is followed by religion (17.3%) and
sexual orientation (17.2%). Actual reported numbers are
346 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

shown below these statistics titled "Bias Motivation
Categories."

   Regarding hate crimes, it is important to identify the theory
that not all hate crimes are reported, also that crimes that occur
may not be counted as a hate crime. For an act to be considered
a hate crime at the federal level, a crime motivated by bias (race,
color, ethnicity, religion, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender, gender identity, disability) must be committed. If not
crime is committed but there is an act of prejudice, this act
would be labeled Bias or a Hate Incident.
https://www.justice.gov/hatecrimes/learn-about-hate-crimes
                 CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 347

Race/Ethnicity/  59.1%
Ancestry

Religion         17.3%

Sexual Orientation 17.2%

Gender Identity  4.0%

Disability       1.5%

Gender           0.9%

Bias Motivation Categories 2022 2021

Race/Ethnicity/ Ancestry 6,567 6,643

Religion         2,042 1,590

Sexual Orientation 1,944 1,707

Gender Identity 469 342

Disability       171 152

Gender           95 96

Total            11,288 10,530

From the Justice Department web site, estimates of 250,000
hate crimes were committed each year between 2004 and 2015
in the US. Most of these hate crimes were not reported to
348 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

law enforcement. https://www.justice.gov/hatecrimes/learn-
about-hate-crimes

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Mass or "Spree" Killers
   Mass or Spree Killers are killers who kill more than one
person potentially in more than one location. According to
the FBI (2020) Mass killers are single incident killers, killing
their victims in a single incident and in one location. Their
goal is to kill as many people as possible in a short time period.
They tend to target public places such as schools, workplaces
and public venues. Mass killers meticulously plan their attacks,
including location, time and weapons needed. Mass killers
typically have suicidal tendencies and expect to die during the
attack, either by suicide or police intervention. Mass killers are
often motivated by a personal vendetta or grievance and have
desire for notoriety and media attention. Many mass killers
suffer from psychological issues, such as severe depression and/
or psychosis. Many mass killers have a history of social isolation
                                     CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 349

and difficulty in social or professional integration. Examples
include:

   Columbine High School (1999): Eric Harris and Dylan
Klebold killed 13 people and injured 24 in a planned attack
on their school, driven by a desire for revenge against perceived
bullies and a fascination with violence.

   Las Vegas Shooting (2017): Stephen Paddock opened fire
on a concert from his hotel room, killing 60 people and
injuring over 400. His motives remain unclear, but the attack
was meticulously planned.

   Orlando Nightclub (2016): Omar Mateen killed 49
people and wounded 53 in a shooting at Pulse nightclub. His
attack was driven by a combination of personal issues and
extremist ideology.

   Spree Killers commit multiple murders in more than one
location in a short period of time. The killing spree is usually
within days or weeks of each other. According to the FBI
(2020) spree killers are not planful, they tend to act impulsively
and not make a plan. Spree killers tend to have high mobility,
moving to different locations to kill people. Spree killers often
begin with a "triggering event", which leads to an escalation of
violence. Many spree killers feel a sense of desperation in their
personal lives or social circumstances. Spree killers are more
inclined to target specific groups or individuals and to have
personal vendettas. Examples include:

   Andrew Cunanan (1997): Cunanan's killing spree lasted
three months, during which he murdered five people,
350 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

including fashion designer Gianni Versace. His motives
included personal vendettas and financial desperation.

   Charles Starkweather (1958): Over two months,
Starkweather killed 11 people in Nebraska and Wyoming,
often with his girlfriend Caril Ann Fugate. His motives were
rooted in personal dissatisfaction and a desire to rebel against
societal norms.

   John Allen Muhammad and Lee Boyd Malvo (2002):
Known as the D.C. snipers, they killed 10 people and injured
three over three weeks in the Washington, D.C., area. Their
motives included personal grievances and a desire to instill fear.

   Serial Killers
   Serial Killers are murderers who generally kill over a period
of time, generally killing one person at a time. Serial killers
tend to specialize in their killing, concentrating on certain
characteristics of victims (age, race, body build, hair and eye
color, students, prostitutes, professional people) to fulfill their
needs through killing. Many have something that has been
referred to as a "dark need" or "dark passenger", meaning a
compulsion to kill that pushes them to kill at certain times.
This need may be satisfied for years for some killers, others
need to kill more frequently to gain their "release" from the
dark "need or passenger." This time period is also referred to
as the "cooling off period." Many serial killers know what they
are doing is wrong, they also understand killing is risky from a
legal standpoint. According to Hickey (2015) serial killers are
ritualistic and follow specific patterns of killing. Many prefer
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 351

a "personal" touch with killing, so they prefer strangulation,
stabbing or other methods that allow control and enhance
pleasure for the killer. If aspects of their ritual or preferred
method of killing are missed, the killer may not achieve
"release" or the "cooling off period." Serial killers often kill in
a specific geographic area, although some have been known to
move frequently.

   In terms of psychological patterns of serial killers, according
to Ressler and Shachtman (1992) and Hickey (2015) many
have childhood trauma which contributes to their killing. This
trauma may include physical, emotional and/or sexual abuse,
which contributes to their violent tendencies. Many serial
killers display patterns of antisocial personality disorder,
lacking empathy and having very little regard for social and
cultural norms. They may be superficially charming and
manipulative, but many have a difficult time building and
maintaining relationships. Hickey Ressler and Shactman
(1992) and Hickey (2015) discuss issues of fantasies and
control in their killings. Many serial killers have elaborate
fantasies about killing, which some assume a "perfect kill" will
stop their cycle of killing. As the killer obsesses and fantasizes
about their kill constantly, no kill is typically as good as their
fantasies.

   As many serial killers feel inadequate, their killing provides
them an avenue to exert power and control. Asserting
dominance over others is important to them, as is the need
for sexual gratification. Many serial killers have a strange
352 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

perspective regarding killing and sexual arousal and
gratification. Some like Jeffrey Dahmer included sexual acts
with the corpses of people he had killed. Mission oriented
killers are also somewhat common. Mission oriented killers
believe it is their job to rid the world of certain people (i.e.
prostitutes), so killing to them is somewhat good and noble.
Visionary killers are often the most unpredictable, killing
because they hear or see voices or visions to kill. David
Berkowitz or the "Son of Sam" killer is a good example of this.

   The need to kill seems to take a compulsive and addictive
track with serial killers. As discussed by Hickey (2015), there
appears to be a psychological compulsion to kill in many serial
killers. This overwhelming compulsion to kill builds over time
until it becomes described as a "need" that becomes irresistible.
Hickey (2015) also suggests the act of killing itself may have
addictive qualities, providing a sense of a "high" or euphoria to
the killer. This may make it difficult for the serial killer to stop
killing, even if the risks of doing so become high. Over time the
severity and frequency of killing can increase, which increases
the risk of detection and making a mistake for the serial killer.
Like a drug, killing may only provide a brief relief or respite,
the need to kill again may come at shorter intervals for the killer
(FBI's Behavioral Analysis Unit, 2010).
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 353

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Many serial killers are adaptable and live in "plain site" in
society. They may come across as a bit strange or lacking in
social skills, or perhaps they are congenial and friendly like Ted
Bundy. Many work jobs, have family or other commitments
they satisfy consistently and attempt to portrait themselves as
upstanding citizens.
   Attached are links to websites highlighting serial killers.
Please feel free to examine this website and seek out what
interests you. Some killers of note to investigate would include:
   Ted Bundy
   BTK Killer
   Green River Killer
   Ed Gein
   John Wayne Gacy
   Eileen Wuornos
354 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

   Jeffrey Dahmer
   https://serialkillersinfo.com/
   Summary
   This chapter is very dense, covering various aspects of crimes
against persons. As the statistics demonstrate, violence and
crimes against persons are a relatively consistent phenomenon
in US society. These offenses and patterns of offenses change
from year to year and decade to decade, however the
perspective that crimes against persons are constantly
increasing are statistically not accurate. Crimes against persons
are a significant area of worry for many citizens, with fear of
violence being a consistent concern for many US citizens.
   References
   Anderson, E. (1999). Code of the street: Decency, violence,
and the moral life of the inner city. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company.
   Brownmiller, S. (1975). Against our will: Men, women, and
rape. New York: Simon & Schuster.
   Burgess, G. H. (2007). Assessment of rape culture in a
college community. Affilia: Journal of Women and Social
Work, 22(3), 311-320.
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
(2019). National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS).
   Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins:
Intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against women
of color. Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241-1299.
   FBI. (2020). Active shooter incidents in the United States.
                                      CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS | 355

   Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2010). Serial murder:
Multi-disciplinary perspectives for investigators.

   Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Uniform Crime
Reporting (UCR) Program. (2021). Crime in the United
States 2020: Expanded homicide data table 8: Murder victims
by weapon, 2016-2020.

   Felson, R. B., & Staff, J. (2010). The effects of alcohol
intoxication on violent versus other offending. Criminal
Justice and Behavior, 37(12), 1343-1360.

   Fagan, J., & Browne, A. (1994). Violence between spouses
and intimates: Physical aggression between women and men
in intimate relationships. In A. J. Reiss & J. A. Roth (Eds.),
Understanding and preventing violence, volume 3: Social
influences (pp. 115-292). Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

   Groth, A. N. (1979). Men who rape: The psychology of the
offender. New York: Plenum Press.

   Hickey, E. W. (2015). Serial murderers and their victims.
   Hooks, B. (2000). Feminism is for everybody: Passionate
politics. Cambridge, MA: South End Press.
   Katz, J. (1988). Seductions of crime: Moral and sensual
attractions in doing evil. New York: Basic Books.
   Kelly, L. (1988). Surviving sexual violence. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
   Luckenbill, D. F. (1977). Criminal homicide as a situated
transaction. Social Problems, 25(2), 176-186.
   Messerschmidt, J. W. (1993). Masculinities and crime:
356 | CH. 11 CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

Critique and reconceptualization of theory. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.

   National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA). Alcohol-related fatal injuries: Fact sheet.

   Ressler, R. K., & Shachtman, T. (1992). Whoever fights
monsters: My twenty years tracking serial killers for the FBI.

   Thornhill, R., & Palmer, C. T. (2000). A natural history of
rape: Biological bases of sexual coercion. MIT Press.

   Wolfgang, M. E. (1958). Patterns in criminal homicide.
University of Pennsylvania Press.

   Wolfgang, M. E., & Ferracuti, F. (1967). The subculture of
violence: Towards an integrated theory in criminology. London:
Tavistock Publications.

   U.S. Sentencing Commission. (n.d.). Federal robbery:
Prevalence, trends, and factors in sentencing.
https://www.ussc.gov/research/research-reports/federal-
robbery-prevalence-trends-and-factors-sentencing.

   VictimConnect Resource Center. (n.d.). Types of crime:
Stalking. https://victimconnect.org/learn/types-of-crime/
stalking/.
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 357

12.

CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST
PROPERTY AND VICE
CRIMES

   Jennifer Moreno and Jeff Bry

                               Ch. 12
            Crimes Against Property and Vice Crimes
   Introduction
   Crimes against property are a substantial percentage of
activity surrounding the Criminal Justice System. Fear of
victimization in property crimes is significant, from people
purses and wallets, to vehicles, homes, bicycles, personal
technology and numerous other items. In this chapter we will
examine the dimensions of property crimes, examining various
facts and statistics about varying types of property crimes.
358 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   Figure 8.1 Photo of socialite Paris Hilton in Monaco 2019.
   Between October 2008 and August 2009, a group of seven
teenagers committed a notorious amount of property crime,
so much so that it was turned into two movies and a docu-
series. This group of friends from Calabasas, California broke
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 359

into the homes of several celebrities in the Hollywood Hills
and took about $3 million in clothing, jewelry, and cash. If
there was a celebrity whose style they liked, they decided to
"go shopping" in that person's home and take whatever they
wanted. The home addresses were all available publicly on
celebrity-tracking websites. Also, each of the celebrities posted
their public event schedules on social media, so the group
knew when a home would most likely be empty.

   They hit socialite Paris Hilton's home at least five times
(figure 8.1). The first time they went there, the front door was
unlocked, and they also found a key under the welcome mat
making the following visits even easier. The burglaries were not
reported to police (maybe Hilton did not notice the missing
items) until almost $2 million worth of clothing, jewelry, and
cash was taken in a single break-in.

   The group also burglarized actor Rachel Bilson at least three
times, taking up to $300,000 worth of property. They also
stole from the homes of actor Orlando Bloom and model
Miranda Kerr, actors Brian Austin Green and Megan Fox, and
actor Lindsay Lohan. They had plans to hit over 50 celebrity
homes. Once caught, all members of The Bling Ring were
charged with residential burglary among other charges.

   In this chapter, we will talk about the property crime of
burglary, along with other property crimes and public order
crimes. However, you can already note an important difference
in the crimes we are discussing here compared to those in the
360 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

last chapter - during each of these crimes, the owner of the
property was not present.

   Licenses and Attributions for Chapter Overview and
Learning Objectives

   "Chapter Overview and Learning Objectives" by Jennifer
Moreno is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   Figure 8.1 Photo of socialite Paris Hilton in Monaco 2019
by Gil Zetbase, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

   Previous/next navigation
   Previous: Chapter 8: Property Crimes and Crimes Against
Public Order
   Next: 8.2 Property and Public Order Crimes
   "A healthy community is not crime-free, but it manages and
contains crime, adjusting to it and preventing it from gaining
the upper hand."
   Marcus Felson, criminologist and originator of routine
activities theory
   Property Crimes and Public Order Crimes
   In this chapter, we will again go over broad categories of
crimes - property crimes and public order crimes. Crimes
against people have very clear victims and it can be easy to trace
the impact of those violent offenses. Also, while anyone can
commit crimes against people, it is most often not a random
act by a stranger. There is commonly some level of relationship
between the offender and the victim in murder, assault, rape,
and robbery. Of course, this is not always the case, but it is
more common than when we talk about property crimes and,
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 361

especially, public order crimes. Property crimes and public
order crimes are also considered smaller or less harmful than
violent crimes, which means they also have lesser punishments
compared to crimes against people. These crimes are still a
violation, though, and the law requires that the person who
commits them be held accountable. The punishments can
range from simple fines all the way up to time in prison. Let's
look at the different types of property crimes first, then we will
talk about crimes against the public order.

   Licenses and Attributions for Property and Public
Order Crimes

   "Property and Public Order Crimes" by Jennifer Moreno is
licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   A property crime is interfering with someone's property
in the form of damage or destruction. It can also include
taking, using, or disrupting the owner's use of that property
in any way. Property is typically defined as real property or
personal property. Real property is fixed property like land or
real estate and is often legally represented through the use of
titles or deeds. Personal property is a broad category, consisting
of anything movable a person owns (laptop, cell phone,
vehicle, pencil, pets) or intellectual property (ideas or other
intangible things created by a person).

   Ownership is a vital component of property crimes.
Determining who has the right of ownership, meaning who
would be considered the victim if something is taken or
damaged, requires investigating proof of ownership.
362 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

Ownership can be established very clearly through receipts,
deeds, or titles showing proof of purchase (or some other legal
documents, too), but also sometimes a little less clearly
through location or evidence of use. For example, someone
may be able to show a photograph of an item in their home as
proof of ownership.

   In addition to ownership, the value of property is
important. The item's worth helps law enforcement and the
courts decide how bad of a crime this was and how big of
a victim the owner really is. Basically, if someone steals your
bicycle then you are considered less victimized than if someone
stole your car. The more money something stolen or damaged
is worth, the more serious the level of property crime.

   Mens Rea in Property Crimes
   In order for someone to be charged with a property crime,
mens rea must be established. It must be shown somehow that
the offender had some awareness that they were messing with
property that did not belong to them. This awareness is what
demonstrates both the intent and the conscious decision to
impose their control over something they knew they do not
own.
   As a reminder, The Model Penal Code (the guide used to
define laws) divides criminal intent into four "states of mind":
purposely, knowingly, recklessly, and negligently. The law in
property crimes, such as theft, requires evidence of specific
intent, or a mens rea of purposely or knowingly performing
the criminal action. Higher-order mental states like purposely
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 363

and knowingly show volition, which means that a person
made a choice.

   The more clearly it can be shown that stealing was not just
borrowing (it was meant to be permanent) and that the
damage was total (it cannot be fixed), the more serious the
property crime is considered under the law. In other words, the
offender must clearly intend the criminal act of stealing and
must also intend to never return the stolen property (Itin v.
Ungar, 2000). Proving this aspect of the crime takes away any
possible defense that they were just "borrowing" the property
and intended to return it after they were done using it. After
all, borrowing is not a crime. It may just be inconsiderate and
that is not illegal.

   Actus Reus in Property Crimes
   Because property crimes cover many types of "interference"
with property, the criminal actions that constitute a property
crime are also varied. In general, the most recognizable type
of property crimes are those that fall under the umbrella of
"theft." Those crimes require that property be taken or stolen.
However, other actions that count as theft could also include
keeping someone's property from them (withholding it),
moving someone else's property without permission, receiving
property that you have no right to have (accepting stolen
property), or selling property you have no right to sell (selling
stolen property). In this example, all of these would be the
actus reus of theft. More examples of the actus reus of property
crimes are entering a property without permission, remaining
364 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

on property without permission, damaging property, or
destroying property.

   Licenses and Attributions for Property Crimes
   "Property Crimes" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed under
CC BY 4.0.
   Public Order Crimes
   Crimes against the public order are tricky. These are all
about laws that have been created to punish anyone who does
not live or behave in the way those who created the laws want
them to live or behave. Public order crimes are those
designed to directly address violations of what has been
determined to be "acceptable social conduct" and
"community behavior standards." Public order crimes are
often controversial and highly debated because they
criminalize actions that not all people agree are the only
acceptable ways to behave in society. The goal of public order
crimes is to keep people from disrupting smooth social
operation and peace. Lawmakers have determined that certain
behaviors are harmful and detrimental to the good of society,
making those behaviors worthy of being restricted.
   Particular to public order crimes is the concept of a
victimless crime.This is a crime that involves only the
offender, who is technically only hurting themselves. Because
participation in a victimless crime is a choice and lacks
involvement of anyone outside oneself, there is no victim to
protect and no harm to prevent. However, others argue that
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 365

the public order laws are necessary to represent society's
obligation to uphold moral standards.

   Public order crimes rest on the fine line between individual
and constitutional rights, and the government's interest in
making sure no one becomes overzealous or dangerous in
exercising those rights. The careful enforcement of public
order crimes is balancing the rights of citizens to engage in
behaviors that are legal and constitutionally afforded, but in
a way that does not sacrifice safety and security of society at
large.

   Because public order laws often criminalize things like
obscene gestures, threats, and fighting words, they can be
challenged regarding constitutional rights under the First
Amendment. The amendment protects free speech,
specifically, "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the
freedom of speech..." (U.S. Const. amend. I). However, some
public order crimes do exactly that, so how is that allowed?
Well, the catch is that not all speech is protected under the
First Amendment. It is constitutional and completely legal to
regulate (make laws regarding) obscenity, true threats, and
fighting words. You can probably imagine how different
people would disagree over what is considered obscene or
inappropriate and worthy of being controlled by the law. For
this reason, any law or act criminalizing speech or expression is
thoroughly scrutinized, must be very carefully written, and has
to be supported by an unarguable public interest.

   A controversial example of this very issue came up in 2022
366 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

when Florida Governor Ron DeSantis signed into law what is
now being referred to as the "Don't Say Gay" bill. The new law
states, "Classroom instruction by school personnel or third
parties on sexual orientation or gender identity may not occur
in kindergarten through grade 3 or in a manner that is not
age-appropriate or developmentally appropriate for students
in accordance with state standards" (HB 1557, 2022).

   While the debate over whether this is actually in the public
interest rages on, court battles are addressing the language.
The law is written in such a way that it is broad, vague, and
confusing. For example, what if a child in a first-grade
classroom comes from a family in which both parents are of
the same sex? Is that child not allowed to discuss their own
home and family life? Are only children of heterosexual
couples allowed to talk about their families? What if a book
has a character in it who is a member of the LGBTQ+
community? Must the book be banned, or parts of the book
skipped or not discussed? Also, are only teachers in
heterosexual couples allowed to display a family photograph
on their desks? This law is a good example of how public order
crimes are often controversial and hotly debated because they
criminalize actions that not all people in society agree are the
only acceptable ways to behave or speak or live.

   Another example of public order crimes walking the fine
line of trying to avoid violating anyone's First Amendment
rights but also trying to maintain public order is the protests
that took place in Portland, Oregon during the summer of
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 367

2020.There were large demonstrations in downtown Portland
over police violence in response to the death of George Floyd
at the hands of police officer Derek Chauvin, another in a long
line of Black men killed by White police officers.

   The First Amendment protects free speech, but also, "the
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and petition the
Government for a redress of grievances" (U.S. Const. amend.
I). Protesting, holding up signs with messages, marching
through the streets, calling out specific chants, and
proclaiming outrage are all perfectly legal. However, while
almost all of the protestors were demonstrating peacefully and
safely, a small portion chose to either take advantage of the
situation (police being busy with the protests and distracted)
or chose to act out their frustrations through damaging
behaviors. Those who engaged in graffiti, vandalism, looting,
or threatening language committed public order and property
crimes.

   Mens Rea in Public Order Crimes
   Determining mens rea in public order crimes relies on a
concept called the reasonable person standard. The
reasonable person standard is based on a hypothetical guess
as to what the average person would do in public or think
about a particular behavior in public. If a reasonable person
would be offended by a behavior, or would refrain from
behaving a certain way knowing the impact the behavior
would have on the people around them, then the offensive
behaviors could be considered a public order crime. In this
368 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

way, the mens rea of an offender can be evaluated based on
what a reasonable person would have been thinking, in
addition to any literal evidence as to what the offender was
actually thinking (like something they said out loud or posted
on social media). Typically, public order crimes require that
a person specifically intended to cause a disruption, did
something knowing that it could cause a disruption, or was
aware of the disruptive nature of their actions.

   Actus Reus in Public Order Crimes
   Offensive conduct is a category of behaviors that a
"reasonable person" would deem disruptive or dangerous to
society and is used to determine actus reus in public order
crimes. Public order laws are specific in defining actions that
constitute violations so that only conduct that is of compelling
government interest is regulated, or at least that's the goal. We
will talk about the different types of public order crimes and
which behaviors can be considered criminal in the next section.
   Licenses and Attributions for Public Order Crimes
   "Public Order Crimes" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.
   As the goal is to maintain a peaceful society, public order
crimes address areas of disorderly conduct, unlawful assembly
or riot, actions related to homelessness, all areas of
prostitution, and drug and alcohol related offenses.
   Disorderly Conduct
   Disorderly conduct, also called disturbing the peace, is
a very broad, very vague catch-all bucket for any behaviors
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 369

that can be considered offensive in an attempt to address most
disruptive annoyances and dangers a person may experience.
Disorderly conduct laws list particular actions but are often
written in a vague manner regarding the concept of what a
"reasonable person" would do or would tolerate.

   The actus reus of disorderly conduct laws include
disruptions like causing excessive noise, engaging in alarming
or threatening behavior, obstructing traffic, creating
hazardous conditions, or engaging in fighting. The mens rea of
disorderly conduct laws rests heavily on what is going on in
a particular situation. For example, when the criminal act is a
loud and unreasonable noise, the quality of the noise is judged
in the setting where the noise occurred. Music heard outside a
bar downtown late at night is to be expected. However, music
heard from someone's backyard when they are having a small
party may be considered unreasonable noise if the rest of the
neighborhood is typically a very quiet area. Considering the
context in order to figure out the mens rea, one has to
determine the intent of the person committing the offense.

   The mens rea element required for disorderly conduct in
many jurisdictions is to purposely cause public inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm, or the reckless intent to cause a risk
thereof. Is a person hosting a small party in the backyard of
their home in a quiet neighborhood playing music too loudly
with the intention of inconveniencing, annoying, or alarming
their neighbors? If they are, that is criminal. If they are not, it
is simply inconsiderate.
370 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   Unlawful Assembly and Riot
   Unlawful assembly as a public order crime requires
elements like assembling or meeting of a group with the
specific intent to purposely commit a breach of the peace,
some other unlawful act, or riot. This is different from a
constitutionally protected protest or demonstration because
the behaviors involved are not peaceful and could instead be
harmful.
   When a crowd is asked by law enforcement to leave from
a location because they are behaving in a way that is likely to
cause substantial harm or serious annoyance, their refusal to
obey is the crime of failure to disperse. Refusing to obey law
enforcement in this manner can also be called interfering with
a peace officer.
   When the group behavior escalates to a dangerous level, it
is considered a riot. A riot is characterized by the amplified
energy and risk inherent in the gathering of a group behaving
in a violent, aggressive, or out-of-control manner. A riot can
be the result of a lawful or unlawful assembly that escalates,
or can occur spontaneously without any planning. For group
behavior to be considered a riot, it must include the use of
force or violence, which are not constitutionally protected
behaviors of assembly or expression.
   The attack on the United States Capitol on January 6, 2021
is an extreme example of a riot. In protest to the results of
the election, over 2,000 individuals stormed the building,
vandalized and looted offices, and made threats to government
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 371

employees. Their actions were violent as they assaulted several
members of the Capitol Police force and news reporters. Five
people died as a result of the riot, 138 police officers were
injured, four responding officers died by suicide within seven
months of the attack, and over $2.7 million in damage was
done. Investigations and charges related to this riot continue
with over 900 rioters facing criminal charges as of late 2022.

   Vagrancy and Loitering
   People experiencing homelessness are often targets of crimes
against the public order. Some argue it is public perception
of the potential for increased criminal activity and diminished
health and safety of an area that drives vagrancy and loitering
laws to try to keep homeless groups out of certain
neighborhoods. Vagrancy is homelessness and is
demonstrated by a person who appears to be transient
(moving from place to place) without a clear way to support
themselves (unemployed) (figure 8.3).
372 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   Figure 8.3 Photograph of Portland street showing tents used
by people experiencing homelessness

   Historically, vagrancy laws were broadly written to allow
law enforcement considerable discretion in arresting the
unemployed, gamblers, drug addicts, alcoholics, and those
who frequented houses of prostitution or other locations of
"ill repute." The claim is that vagrancy laws could incapacitate
individuals before they engaged in criminal activity, to ensure
the safety and security of any given area.

   In 1972, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down a Florida
vagrancy statute in Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville. The
Court said the law, which prohibited night walking, living off
one's spouse, and frequenting bars or liquor stores was invalid
because it was so vague and it violated the Fourteenth
Amendment. This amendment protects citizens from any laws
that deprive them from "life, liberty, or property, without due
process of the law; nor deny to any person within its
jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws" (U.S. Const.
amend. XIV). After the decision in Papachristou v. City of
Jacksonville (1972), many states changed their vagrancy laws to
focus more on specific behaviors that could be criminalized,
like loitering.

   Loitering is technically just standing around without a
purpose. Under the law, however, loitering is defined by
behaviors (the actus reus) of wandering around or remaining in
one area with the specific intent to gamble, beg, or engage in
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 373

prostitution. Loitering is considered especially bad if it is near
a school or a transportation facility.

   Many jurisdictions also criminalize panhandlingor begging.
Laws around panhandling run the risk of criminalizing speech
because they are saying someone cannot ask another person for
money. For this reason, lawmakers have to be careful not to
violate anyone's First Amendment rights to freedom of speech.
The laws are generally written to expressly prohibit aggressive
conduct or conduct that blocks public access or the normal
flow of traffic.

   One relatively new approach to preventing individuals
experiencing homelessness from congregating in cities,
affecting the quality of life of residents, the prosperity of
businesses, and the experience of tourists are sit-lie laws. Sit-
lie laws prohibit sitting or lying on public streets and sidewalks
and, as a result, force individuals to move about. This prevents
anyone from blocking access to businesses, roadways, or
transportation facilities. Basically, the old vagrancy laws that
prohibited wandering around looking unemployed, and the
loitering laws prohibiting hanging out somewhere without a
purpose, can now prevent sitting or lying down instead. These
laws are being challenged in the courts already because they
target the poor, addicted, and unemployed.

   Seattle, Washington, was the first city in the United States to
enact a sit-lie ordinance in 1993 that prohibited sitting or lying
on a public sidewalk between the hours of 7 a.m. and 9 p.m.
374 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

in Seattle's downtown area. The ordinance was attacked, but
ultimately upheld in 1996.

   In 2021, Los Angeles, California enacted a more
comprehensive ordinance that banned sitting, lying, or
sleeping on public streets and sidewalks at all times and in all
places within Los Angeles city limits. Section 41.18 of the Los
Angeles Municipal Code (LAMC) prohibits sitting, lying, or
sleeping:

   Anywhere that impedes any passage protected by the
Americans with Disabilities Act such as ramps on and off
sidewalks,

   Within ten feet of a driveway or loading dock,
   Within five feet of a building entrance or exit,
   Anywhere that impedes the right of way for any activity for
which the City has issued a permit,
   Within 500 feet of a property designated for a sensitive use
(such as public park or library),
   Within 500 feet of a designated overpass, underpass, freeway
ramp, tunnel, bridge, pedestrian bridge, subway, wash,
spreading ground, or active railway,
   Within 1,000 feet of a homeless shelter or support center,
   Within 500 feet of a school or day care center, and
   Anywhere else the City has posted a sign prohibiting sitting,
sleeping, or lying down.
   This ordinance was originally struck down in 2006 because
it was determined to be unconstitutional. However, it is now
back and even more thorough. The court's decision in 2006
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 375

is the same as the argument against the law now - that
individuals experiencing homelessness in Los Angeles far
outnumber the amount of space available in homeless shelters,
so the law punishes people for conduct that is involuntary.
Although many claim this law constitutes cruel and unusual
punishment, especially because no alternatives are provided to
help people experiencing homelessness in the area, it remains
active as of late 2022.

   Vice Crimes: Crimes Involving Prostitution
   Prostitution is engaging in sexual activity in return for
payment. Every state except Nevada criminalizes prostitution.
In Nevada, legal prostitution must follow specific guidelines
and can occur only in a licensed house of prostitution.
However, street prostitution, called pandering, is illegal even in
Nevada.
   Theactus reuselement required for prostitution varies,
depending on the jurisdiction. In many states, prostitution is
offering, agreeing to, or engaging in sexual conduct for money,
property, or anything of value. Agreeing and engaging in are
both considered prostitution, meaning the prostitute and the
prostitute's client could be prosecuted for and convicted of
prostitution in most jurisdictions. Patronizing a prostitute is
the act of buying sexual conduct, or being the customer. This
part of the transaction has not always been punished.
Although illegal, most customers, or "johns" were typically
allowed to leave while the prostitute alone was arrested and
punished. This started to change in the 1990s when
376 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

jurisdictions saw that addressing only one side of the equation
was not working, and concerns were raised about human
trafficking.

   Laws also criminalize pimping, which is the organizing and
facilitating of prostitution. A pimp (or madam, if female)
usually also collects part of the money earned by the
prostitutes they manage. As understanding grows about
human trafficking for sex, enforcement of all elements of
prostitution (including those that happen over the internet)
are increasingly monitored and prosecuted.

   The mens rea element required for prostitution is
eitherstrict liability (the act itself is enough without
determining any mental state) or the specific intent to engage
in prostitution. The fact that the criminal action occurred is
enough to demonstrate that the crime was committed and
what someone was thinking or what they thought they were
doing is irrelevant.

   Vice Crimes: Drug and Alcohol Crimes
   All states and the federal government criminalize the
manufacture or cultivation, possession, sale, and useof certain
drugs. Many modern statutes focus on rehabilitation for
nonviolent drug offenders, rather than incarceration, because
this has proven effective in reducing reoffending and freeing
up space in jails and prisons for offenders who pose a greater
security risk to society. In addition, marijuana has been
legalized by many states for medicinal or recreational purposes,
but is still illegal at the federal level.
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 377

An additional problem with use of incarceration for drug
offenses has been learned from the "War on Drugs." The War
on Drugs did not significantly reduce drug use, although it
did result in an increase in use of prison and incarceration
(especially in populations of color). Some evidence of trends in
the war on drugs include:

  · Prison Population Growth: The U.S. prison
      population exploded from about 200,000 in 1970 to
      over 2 million by 2000, making the U.S. the country
      with the highest incarceration rate in the world.

  · Drug Offense Arrests: A significant proportion of the
      prison population consisted of people convicted for
      drug offenses, particularly low-level possession and
      distribution. By 2020, nearly half of federal prisoners
      were incarcerated for drug-related offenses.

  · Racial Disparities: African Americans and Latinos
      were disproportionately impacted, often facing longer
      sentences due to policies like the sentencing disparity
      between crack and powder cocaine.

  · Economic Costs: The War on Drugs has cost the U.S.
      over $1 trillion since its inception, much of it spent on
      enforcement and incarceration.
378 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   From Author Jeff Bry: "A significant issue with using
jail and prison (specifically of people who sell drugs, or
use certain types of drugs) is it does not reduce demand
and/or need for the drugs. Also as the risk to drug
dealers of incarceration increases, or the amount of
specific drugs are reduced from the streets, this only
tends to increase the cost (price) of the drug. As the cost
of the drug increases, the amount of crime people need
to commit to gain the drug also increases. The literature
demonstrates prevention, early intervention and
diversion programs to be more beneficial in reducing
drug use."

   Federal criminal statutes targeting illegal drugs are part of
the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act
of 1970, commonly known as the Controlled Substances Act,
which was drafted by a commission striving for uniformity
in state and federal laws. For the purpose of drug crimes, the
states and the federal government categorize illegal drugs in
drug "schedules." The schedules generally focus on the
harmful or addictive qualities of the drug, with Schedule I
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 379

drugs being the most harmful or addictive. The remaining
schedules reflect less harmful or addictive drugs, including
drugs that are legal with a prescription. Any drugs identified in
these government lists are called scheduled drugs.

   The government cannot criminalize the status of being a
drug addict but there is no constitutional barrier to punishing
criminal acts involving controlled substances. In most
jurisdictions, the manufacture (creation) and possession
(ownership) of scheduled drugs is illegal. Possession is typically
gradedbased on the quantity possessed, the drug's
classification in the schedule, and whether or not the
possession is for the purpose of distribution, with the penalties
ranging from a misdemeanor for simple possession to a serious
felony for possession with intent to sell.

   The sale (exchanging drugs for money), distribution (giving
drugs to others to sell), or trafficking (moving drugs across
state lines) are all public order crimes. These criminal offenses
are generally considered felonies, with more severe penalties
for drugs in a higher schedule, the sale of larger quantities,
a sale by an adult to a minor, or a sale near school grounds.
Scheduled drug use, also "called being under the influence of
a controlled substance," is typically a misdemeanor with more
severe penalties for habitual offenders.

   Licenses and Attributions for Types of Public Order
Crimes

   "Types of Public Order Crimes" by Jennifer Moreno is
licensed under CC BY 4.0.
380 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   Figure 8.3 Photograph of Portland street showing tents used
by people experiencing homelessness Loren Kerns from
Tigard, Oregon, USA, CC BY 2.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

   One can illegally interfere with or damage someone else's
property in the manner of theft, burglary, criminal damage, or
arson. Each of those are described here along with their unique
mens rea and actus reus.

   Theft
   Theft is commonly thought of as "stealing." The words
"larceny" and "theft" are often used interchangeably, as well
as sometimes "robbery" or "burglary," though these are
variations of the same type of crime. Robbery refers to theft
from an actual person while using a real or perceived threat.
In this chapter, we will look at the types of theft that do
not involve the presence of a victim.
   Theft is a broad term for a property crime that covers
several different ways of messing with (interfering with)
property belonging to someone else that ruins their ability to
use it themselves. Theft includes stealing but also any other
deprivation of propertyfrom an owner. This deprivation can
be withholding, moving, or receiving of stolen property.
   The mens rea for theft laws is the intent to deprive an owner
of their property. The actus reus for theft laws is stealing
property or services. For example, stealing a car counts, but so
does using someone else's login for a streaming service.
   Physically taking an item is considered the crime of general
theft. The actual act of taking an item has two main
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 381

components. First, the person committing the theft must gain
control over the item. Then, they must move the item. This
is called asportation. Because theft requires physically taking
something, it usually only applies to personal property and
services, but not always. Real property (like a house) is really
hard to steal and move somewhere else, so cases involving real
property are rare.

   Theft is a broad crime that can have many other variations
in the law that address specific types:

   Shoplifting (stealing from a retail store)
   Embezzlement (a white-collar crime)
   Motor vehicle theft (stealing a vehicle)
   Burglary (theft from a residence, or even overstaying at a
hotel or rental property)
   Theft of services (stealing utilities or using streaming
subscriptions without paying for them)
   Robbery (forcible theft from a person)
   Theft laws and levels are based on the value of the property
or service stolen. It is probably obvious to say higher-value
thefts are more serious and lower-value thefts are less serious.
The seriousness determines the punishment for the crime.
   Grand theft is the biggest, highest level and is reserved for
the theft of property with substantial value. Petty theft is the
smallest, lowest level and is reserved for the theft of property
with very low value.
382 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

Year Total Larceny-Theft Incidents Rate per 100,000

2020 4,606,324  1,398.0

2010 6,159,795  1,993.0

2000 7,056,545  2,550.1

1990 7,945,670  3,139.0

1980 8,086,155  3,563.5

1970 4,653,200  2,288.8

1960 1,646,380  909.2

1950 843,900    566.8

1930 431,943    346.7

Shoplifting
   Shoplifting is a crime of significant concern for retailers,

from the perspective of shoppers but also the people they
employ. Mary Owen Cameron has conducted substantial
research regarding shoplifting, including a comprehensive
examination of shoplifting behavior including categorizing
offenders into typesets. Cameron (1964) in her work "The
Booster and the Snitch", found two categories of shoplifters.
The "booster" is a professional shoplifter, making a
substantial amount of their living shoplifting. The "snitch" is
the occasional amateur shoplifter. Key findings of Cameron's
(1964) pivotal study include:
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 383

   Motivations: Cameron identified that while boosters steal
for financial gain, snitches often shoplift due to psychological
or social reasons, such as peer pressure, a desire for excitement,
or an impulsive response to temptation.

   Demographics: Snitches are typically more diverse in age
and socioeconomic background, whereas boosters often
belong to organized groups and have a history of criminal
behavior.

   Patterns: Shoplifting incidents are influenced by factors
such as store layout, security measures, and social
environments. Amateur shoplifters often steal items of lesser
value compared to professional shoplifters.

   According to Cameron (1964), shoplifters are
different based upon their background and
demographics. "Boosters" are more likely to steal for
financial gain, "snitches" are more likely to shoplift for
excitement or based upon impulse and/or temptation.
"Snitches" are more diverse in age and background,
"boosters" tend to have a history of criminal behavior
and may use shoplifting to supplement their income.
Cameron (1964) also notes shoplifters and their
behaviors are influenced by various factors; including
the store layout, environmental issues and security.
"Boosters" generally steal more expensive items,
"snitches" steal less expensive items.

   David Farrington (1973) also found interesting
evidence regarding shoplifting. Farrington (1973) found
384 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

two key elements, opportunity and situational factors
tend to effect shoplifting. Farrington (1973) discusses
situational factors, such as opportunity based upon low
security and/or easy access to goods. These factors are
critical in effecting the decision to steal. Farrington
(1973) also discusses demographic characteristics,
finding (similar to Cameron) shoplifters are diverse in
terms of backgrounds, but does note that many are
adolescents. Farrington (1973) also found evidence that
if the economy improves, shoplifting tends to decrease.
If the economy struggles, shoplifting tends to increase.
Social attitudes towards shoplifting and store security
measures are also important variables in shoplifting.

   Burglary
   Burglary, like that discussed in the Chapter Overview, is
often associated with theft because it is thought to involve
the act of stealing. This is only partially true. Burglary is
interfering with the use of real property. But remember,
interfering can take many forms which includes theft but also
includes remaining on property without permission, using
property without permission, or entering property without
permission. The differences are small but important.
   The actus reus required for burglary varies, but typically
includes the concept of unlawful or uninvited entry. Basically,
it is illegal to enter any structure or vehicle at any time of day if
you are not supposed to be in there. Some jurisdictions include
"remaining" as a factor of the entry. That means "breaking and
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 385

entering" is one thing, and "breaking, entering, and staying for
a bit" is even worse. When we talk about criminal breaking-in,
it is generally any physical force used to enter the burglarized
area--even pushing open a closed door. (Commonwealth v.
Hallums, 2004). Entry is a partial or complete intrusion of
either the offender, the offender's body part, or a tool or
instrument (People v. Nible, 1988). In some jurisdictions, the
entry must be unauthorized, (State v. Hall, 2000), while in
others, it could be lawful (People v. Nunley, 1985). The mens
rea element required for burglary is typically knowingly
entering with the specific intent to commit a crime.

   Burglary is put into degrees (first- through fourth-degree).
The level is determined based on the seriousness of the actus
reus in combination with the mens rea. For example,
prosecutors will look at the use or possession of a weapon,
the entry into a residence, dwelling, or building where people
are present, the commission of burglary at nighttime, or the
infliction of injury or death. Second- and third-degree burglary
are usually felonies, although less serious than first-degree
burglary as with other types of crimes.

   2020: Burglary incidents totaled 1,035,314 with a rate of
314.2 per 100,000 population.

   2010: There were 2,159,878 burglary incidents, resulting in
a rate of 702.2 per 100,000 population.

   2000: Burglary incidents were slightly lower at 2,050,992,
with a rate of 728.8 per 100,000 population.
386 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   1990: The number of burglary incidents peaked at
3,073,200, with a high rate of 1,231.1 per 100,000 population.

   1980: There were 3,795,200 burglary incidents, with a rate
of 1,684.1 per 100,000 population.

   1970: Burglary incidents totaled 2,222,140, resulting in a
rate of 1,098.8 per 100,000 population.

   1950: There were 454,400 burglary incidents, with a rate of
299.2 per 100,000 population.

   1930: The earliest year on record shows 255,748 burglary
incidents, with a rate of 204.7 per 100,000 population.

   Source Uniform Crime Reports (www.fbi.com)
   These statistics illustrate the changing trends in burglary
incidents over the decades, reflecting various social, economic,
and law enforcement factors influencing crime rates.
   Criminal Damage
   Criminal damage means it is a crime to damage or destroy
property or tamper with property. It also includes using
deception or a threat that leads to a loss of property. Criminal
damage is sometimes also called "vandalism" or "criminal
mischief" in some jurisdictions.
   The actus reus required for criminal damage is the physical
interference with property: damaging, destroying, interfering
with, or tampering. Criminal damage typically requires
committing actions against the property of another (or
property that is government owned) without permission.
   The mens rea for criminal damage varies, depending on the
jurisdiction and the amount of harm caused. The criminal
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 387

intent could be purposely, knowingly, reckless, or negligent. It
is generally a less serious offense either because the defendant
inflicts damage to property in a "safe" or nonviolent manner or
because the criminal intent is less vicious and directed toward
an inanimate object instead of a person.

   Some examples of criminal damage could be shattering
someone's car windshield with a golf club out of anger,
throwing a brick through someone's living room window to
scare them, stabbing a tire with a screwdriver, hitting a mailbox
with a baseball bat, or throwing someone's cell phone. In each
of these examples, the person doing the damage is doing so
on purpose. These are not accidents. Accidental damage to
property is not a crime.

   Criminal damage is one variation of property crime that
addresses a very specific type of interference with property.
Graffiti is another type of criminal damage to property that
is very specifically, applying graffiti to something. Any kind
of tagging with spray paint, markers, or any other tool is
388 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

considered criminal damage (figure 8.2).

   Figure 8.2 Photograph of graffiti in Portland, Oregon.
   The different levels or degrees of criminal damage are
decided by the extent of the property damage and the state
of mind of the offender. There is such a wide range in this
category of crimes that criminal damage can be a felony,
misdemeanor, petty misdemeanor, or violation, all depending
on the extent of the damage or the criminal intent.
   Arson
   Another type of criminal property damage is arson. Arson
is the intentional or malicious (intending to do harm) burning
of property with fire or explosion. Laws in most jurisdictions
criminalize burning almost anything, including the offender's
own property in many instances. However, for the burning of
one's own property to count as actual arson, the offender must
have acted with the specific intent or purpose to defraud (such
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 389

as burning down your own home and trying to make it look
like an accident so you can get the insurance money).

   The actus reus required for arson is typically setting fire to
or burning real or personal property. This could include
buildings, structures, land, and vehicles. The mens
rea required for arson in many jurisdictions is intentionally
burning or damaging property (doing it on purpose). First-
degree arson may focus on arson of a place where people live
and second-degree arson focuses more on arson of other
property.

   Other factors that are considered when deciding the level or
degree of arson are if anyone was injured or killed, the extent
of the property damage, and the value of the property that
was burned. For arson, even smoke damage without burning
or charring can be enough to lead to an arson charge.

   Licenses and Attributions for Types of Property
Crimes

   "Types of Property Crimes" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.

   Figure 8.2 Photo of graffiti in Portland, Oregon Loren
Kerns from Tigard, Oregon, USA, CC BY 2.0, via Wikimedia
Commons.

   Previous/next navigation
   Previous: 8.3 Property Crimes
   Next: 8.5 Public Order Crimes
   License
390 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

Introduction to Criminology Copyright © by Taryn

VanderPyl. All Rights Reserved.

Conclusions

Property crimes and public order crimes cover most of the

offenses that are not directly against another person. These

are most often lower level crimes with smaller punishments

than the crimes against people discussed in Chapter 7 and

the larger crimes we will be discussing in Chapters 9 and 10.

However, the crimes covered in this chapter are also the ones

that occur most often compared to the larger crimes. Everyone

is more likely to be witness to or victimized by smaller offenses

like stolen property, vandalism, or a public disturbance. In

fact, you may already have personal experience with one of the

offenses in this chapter.

Application Exercises

Learn about the marijuana laws in different states and

discuss their value. https://www.cnet.com/news/politics/

marijuana-laws-by-state-is-weed-legal-where-you-

live/#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20National%20Confe

rence,New%20Jersey%2C%20New%20Mexico%2C%20New

Review the State of Homelessness: 2022 Edition report

from the National Alliance to End Homlessness and click on

different states on the interactive map to learn more about

homelessness  in           the   United               States.

https://endhomelessness.org/homelessness-in-america/

homelessness-statistics/state-of-homelessness/

Discussion Questions
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 391

   What is the difference between burglary and robbery?
   How are vandalism and graffiti different? What are other
examples of similar crimes?
   What might the mens rea and actus reus be in various
property crimes and crimes against public order?
   How are constitutional rights protected in laws regarding
actions that are considered public order crimes?
   What is the "reasonable person" standard for public order
crimes and how is that determined?
   What is the difference between a protest and a riot? Can one
lead to the other? Why might that happen?
   What are arguments in favor or against laws regarding
behaviors related to homelessness? Are these laws effective? If
so, in what ways?
   What are the various crimes linked to the act of
prostitution? Why do you think "johns" were not prosecuted
until into the 1990s?
   What are arguments you have heard for legalizing some
scheduled drugs?
   Key Terms
   Arson
   Asportation
   Burglary
   Criminal damage
   Disorderly conduct
   Loitering
   Offensive conduct
392 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

   Property crime
   Prostitution
   Public order crimes
   Reasonable person standard
   Right of ownership
   Riot
   Scheduled drugs
   Sit-lie laws
   Theft
   Unlawful assembly
   Vagrancy
   Victimless crime
   Volition
   Summary
   A property crime is interfering with someone's property in
the form of damage or destruction. It can also include taking,
using, or disrupting the owner's use of that property in any
way. Determining who has the right of ownership requires
investigating proof of ownership. In addition to ownership,
the value of property is important. Theft is a broad term for
a property crime that covers several different ways of messing
with (interfering with) property belonging to someone else
that ruins their ability to use it themselves. Burglary is entering
any structure or vehicle at any time of day if you are not
supposed to be in there and are there to commit a crime.
Criminal damage means it is a crime to damage or destroy
property or tamper with property. It also includes using
         CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES | 393

deception or a threat that leads to a loss of property. Criminal
damage is sometimes also called "vandalism" or "criminal
mischief" in some jurisdictions. Arson is the intentional or
malicious (intending to do harm) burning of property with
fire or explosion.

   Public order crimes are those designed to directly address
violations of what has been determined to be "acceptable social
conduct" and "community behavior standards." Particular to
public order crimes is the concept of a victimless crime, which
is a crime that involves only the offender, who is technically
only hurting themselves. Public order crimes rest on the fine
line between individual and constitutional rights. The
reasonable person standard is based on a hypothetical guess as
to what the average person would do in public or think about
a particular behavior in public. If a reasonable person would
be offended by a behavior or would refrain from behaving a
certain way knowing the impact the behavior would have on
the people around them, then the offensive behaviors could be
considered a public order crime. As the goal is to maintain a
peaceful society, public order crimes address areas of disorderly
conduct, unlawful assembly or riot, actions related to
homelessness, all areas of prostitution, and drug and alcohol
related offenses.

   Vagrancy is homelessness and is demonstrated by a person
who appears to be transient (moving from place to place)
without a clear way to support themselves (unemployed).
Loitering is technically just standing around without a
394 | CH. 12 CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND VICE CRIMES

purpose. Sit-lie laws prohibit sitting or lying on public streets

and sidewalks and, as a result, force individuals to move about.

Prostitution is engaging in sexual activity in return for

payment. All states and the federal government criminalize the

manufacture or cultivation, possession, sale, and use of certain

drugs. The sale (exchanging drugs for money), distribution

(giving drugs to others to sell), or trafficking (moving drugs

across state lines) are all public order crimes. Scheduled drug

use, also "called being under the influence of a controlled

substance," is typically a misdemeanor with more severe

penalties for habitual offenders.

Resources

The National Human Trafficking Hotline website provides

statistics,  resources,            and    help        at

https://humantraffickinghotline.org/

Find resources and help for homelessness in your

community at https://www.hud.gov/findshelter

Licenses and Attributions for Conclusion

"Conclusion" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed under CC BY

4.0.

Cameron, M. O. (1964). The Booster and the Snitch:

Department Store Shoplifting. Free Press of Glencoe.

Farrington, D. P. (1973). Shoplifting: An Occasional

Crime. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 1(4), 397-418.
     CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                    CRIME | 395

13.

CH. 13 CYBERCRIME,
WHITE-COLLAR CRIME,
ORGANIZED CRIME

   Jennifer Moreno and Jeff Bry

                               Ch. 13
       Cybercrime, White-Collar Crime, Organized Crime
   Introduction
   Cybercrime, white-collar crime and organized crime are
often misunderstood (and overlooked) areas of crime and the
criminal justice system. Street crimes, property crimes and
violent crimes often gain more attention and notoriety by
news sources and public attention and interest. While these
crimes may be less of a focus in society, they play a substantial
role in crime in the United States and globally. This chapter
will discuss these areas of crime, providing insight into their
prevalence and possible sources of causation.
   True Crime Stories: The Entertainment Factor of
Crime
396 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME
CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                               CRIME | 397
398 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                            CRIME | 399

   Figure 9.1 Photo collage of Anna Sorokin's mugshot (a.k.a.
Anna Delvey), Elizabeth Holmes at TechCrunch Disrupt
conference in 2014, actor Rami Malek as Eliot Alderson in
Mr. Robot, and actor Anthony Gallo on the set of Sons of
Anarchy.
400 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

   The dramatization of white-collar crime, cybercrime, and
organized crime is popular in the entertainment industry. The
exploits of savvy or vicious criminal minds make for thrilling
stories for those not directly impacted by the outcomes.

   Inventing Anna (Netflix) follows the mystery of alleged
German heiress Anna Delvey, a young woman who convinced
New York's rich and elite she was a hip, up-and-coming
entrepreneur. She played up family wealth, socioeconomic
status, and extensive business networking. Delvey claimed to
be financially secure and backed by investors and a wealthy
father. She wove a complicated web of overextended credit,
fraudulent business plans, financial lies, and precarious
business agreements before the truth of her actual lack of
money toppled her entire scheme.

   The Dropout (Hulu) explores the rise of Theranos, a billion-
dollar health technology company, and its CEO, Elizabeth
Holmes. Holmes promoted an innovative blood-testing
technology, promising to revolutionize the field of medical
diagnoses. An investigative report exposed doubts about the
technology and illuminated how Holmes misled and
defrauded investors and the government through false and
exaggerated claims about the technology. Holmes was later
convicted of defrauding investors, wire fraud, and conspiracy
to commit wire fraud. She was recently sentenced to eleven
years in prison.

   Mr. Robot (Prime Video) is the fictional story of Elliot
Alderson who is a cybersecurity engineer for his day job and
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 401

a vigilante hacker for his side hustle. Alderson joins a group
trying to take down corporate greed by encrypting data of
a giant financial company, canceling all consumer debt. The
show was widely praised by cybersecurity firms for its technical
accuracy. They hired a team of ethical hackers and experts to
conduct "real" hacking scenes that were recorded for the show.
Of course, those scenes were not so real that they actually
canceled out all consumer debt.

   The list of TV shows and movies on organized crime, both
real and fictional, is too long for this chapter. The idea of
the mob or the mafia has always been a fan favorite. Classics
like The Godfather in 1972, Scarface in 1983, and Goodfellas in
1990 continue to feed the glamor associated with criminal
enterprises. Sons of Anarchy (2008-2014) brought the concept
of motorcycle gangs into the arena of organized crime as well.
We can't seem to get enough of watching the outlaw
lifestyle...from the comfort of our law-abiding homes.

   It is the categories of crimes in each of these shows and
movies that will be covered in this chapter. Although real life is
often less glamorous than depicted on the big screen, these are
still crimes that carry a lot of intrigue.

   Licenses and Attributions for Chapter Overview and
Learning Objectives

   "Chapter Overview and Learning Objectives" by Jennifer
Moreno is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   Figure 9.1 Photo collage of Anna Sorokin's mugshot (a.k.a.
Anna Delvey), State of New Jersey, Copyrighted free use, via
402 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

Wikimedia Commons; Elizabeth Holmes at TechCrunch
Disrupt conference in 2014, Photo by Max Morse for
TechCrunch TechCrunch, CC BY 2.0, via Wikimedia
Commons; actor Rami Malek as Eliot Alderson in Mr. Robot,
Rabih, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons; and actor
Anthony Gallo on the set of Sons of Anarchy, Punkinfo, CC
BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

   Greed, the Internet, and Prohibition
   "He who wishes to be rich in a day will be hanged in a year."
   Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) Italian painter, engineer,
scientist, theorist, sculptor, and architect
   There have always been people who try to find a faster,
easier road to riches. As Leonardo da Vinci said, though, in
the opening quote, it rarely works out well for them. It is
a different perspective to look at the same circumstances as
the rest of society but see an opportunity to get away with
something for personal gain, no matter the harm to others.
Laurence Peter (1919-1990), a Canadian writer and educator
lamented, "It's strange that men should take up crime when
there are so many legal ways to be dishonest."
   White-collar crime is as old as greed itself, cybercrime is as
old as the internet, and organized crime is as old as Prohibition
(although this has existed globally arguably since the earliest of
civilizations). In each case, people see an opportunity to take
advantage of others for their own ego and financial benefit.
We will cover all of these unique crime areas in the following
sections.
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                            CRIME | 403

   Licenses and Attributions for Greed, the Internet, and
Prohibition

   "Greed, the Internet, and Prohibition" by Jennifer Moreno
is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   White-Collar Crimes
   The image of white-collar crime was traditionally a man in a
business suit who worked in finance and stole from his clients
or the company. Although this still applies, the category of
white-collar crimes (sometimes also referred to as "corporate
crimes") is broad enough to include all those crimes
committed in the corporate world to exploit others for
financial gain. These crimes use concealment or deceit within a
business relationship or enterprise to defraud others.
   The term "white-collar crime" was coined in 1939 by
sociologist Edwin Sutherland, who defined it as a "crime
committed by a person of respectability and high social status
in the course of his occupation" in a speech entitled "White
Collar Criminality" delivered to the American Sociological
Society. Comparatively, "blue collar" workers were considered
the uniformed laborers who worked in plants, mills, and
factories, not in a position to pull off corporate espionage.
Sutherland also claimed it was the blue collar workers who
got their hands dirty in crime, historically associated with the
direct, more violent crimes of assault, homicide, robbery, and
vandalism.
   Attached is a document from the US Department of Justice
highlighting measurement of white-collar crimes using the
404 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) system. https://ucr.fbi.gov/
nibrs/nibrs_wcc.pdf

   Much of Sutherland's work was to separate and define the
differences in blue-collar street crimes like arson, burglary,
theft, assault, rape, and vandalism, which he blamed on
differential association. Instead, Sutherland explained that
white-collar criminals are opportunists, who learn to take
advantage of their circumstances to accumulate financial gain.
They are educated, intelligent, affluent, and confident
individuals whose jobs involve unmonitored access to large
sums of money (Sutherland, 1939).

   In many ways, the distinction between "white" and "blue"
collar crime is becoming less clear as technology and societal
changes provide increasing access and opportunity for online
entrepreneurship. However, white-collar crime is still largely
considered a more sophisticated and higher esteemed type of
crime committed by masterminds and strategic professionals
rather than "criminals." The intellectual sophistication
attributed to white-collar crime is one of the greatest myths
contributing to the characterization of white-collar criminals
as not "real" criminals. Instead, white-collar criminals are often
portrayed as savvy, misunderstood masterminds rather than
serious threats.

   Increasingly, however, the perception of white-collar crime
has expanded beyond Wall Street and the boardrooms of
corporate conglomerates. With technological advancements
and the movement of business into the hands of citizens
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                            CRIME | 405

through investment and banking apps, cryptocurrency, online
businesses, and internet sales, white-collar crime finds itself
frequently alongside traditional blue-collar financial crimes
like the physical thefts of robberies.

   Because of the tendency for the larger-scale, widespread
impact of corporate crime as part of a global economy,
corporate crime in the United States is investigated and
prosecuted more commonly at the federal level through
agencies like the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), and
the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI). Common to all
types of white-collar crimes is transactional depth,
concealment of criminal exploits through often complex and
convoluted financial bookkeeping, digital manipulation, and
strategic maneuvering. These agencies are more likely to have
the tools and personnel necessary to track components of
crimes at this level of intensity.

   Mens Rea in White-Collar Crime
   Mens rea in white-collar crimes require that the offender
have specific knowledge and intention to produce financial
gain. This awareness is what demonstrates both the desire and
motivation to do the actions necessary to facilitate financial
gain. This mens rea may seem a little confusing since it aligns
with the mental state of almost everyone in business, which
is to try to make money. When paired with the actus reus,
however, it is quite different.
   Actus Reus in White-Collar Crime
406 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

   Actus reus in white-collar crimes requires that the offender
act in a way that demonstrates concealment or exploitation
against a victim who trusted or relied upon them and their
actions. This violates the fiduciary relationship, which is one
in which someone holds a legal or ethical relationship where
they are trusted with managing the money or assets of another
person. Showing concealment or exploitation by the offender
is often accomplished by demonstrating the actions of lying,
exaggerating, down-playing risk, breach of duty,
misrepresentation, or misusing fiduciary responsibilities or
authority.

   Types of White-Collar Crimes
   White-collar crimes traditionally include forgery, fraud,
embezzlement, money laundering, extortion, and bribery. We
will discuss each of these crimes in this section. Some
additional white-collar crimes are tax evasion and insider
trading. Simply put, tax evasion is trying to avoid paying your
taxes and insider trading is buying or selling in the stock
market using confidential information that gives you an unfair
advantage (figure 9.2).
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 407

   Figure 9.2 Photograph of Dennis Levine, a former
investment banker convicted of insider trading in the 1980s.

   Forgery
   Forgery is the practice of producing or using a fake version
of a real document to try to get some benefit. This could
involve modifying part of a document (like trying to change
the birthdate on a driver's license) or creating a completely new
fake document from scratch and trying to pass it off as the real
version (such as a fake birth certificate).
   When forgery involves money, it is called counterfeiting.
When forgery involves personal data and documents, it is often
accomplished by acquiring information through theft (actual
theft of a wallet or mail), phishing (seeking data through
email), skimming (stealing dating through ATMs or card
408 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

swiping devices), or other forms of computer and data hacking
we will discuss in the section on cybercrime.

   The basic criminal components of forgery are the actus
reus of making, altering, using, or possessing a fake version of
a real document. The document does not have to be changed
very much for it to still be considered forgery. The standard is
a "material" alteration, changing the nature of the document
to such an extent that it changes the legal or original purpose.
The mens rea is the intent to assume a benefit through deceit.
The presentation of the fake version with the intent to deceive
is key to the crime of forgery.

   Forgery can be treated as a felony or misdemeanor
depending on the extent to which the fake version was altered
and the purpose of the forgery.

   Fraud
   Fraud is a broad term that covers a wide variety of behaviors
designed to deceive for the purposes of gaining some benefit,
usually money. Fraud can take many forms, including:
   Medical fraud (faking an injury or illness to wrongfully
obtain prescription medications)
   Tax fraud (lying about income or deductions to manipulate
tax laws for financial gain)
   Voter fraud (assuming the identity of a legally registered
voter to unlawfully cast a ballot in an election)
   Insurance fraud (making an insurance claim for property
that was intentionally damaged or destroyed in order to get
money)
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                            CRIME | 409

   The fundamental criminal components to fraud are the
actus reus of deceit, paired with the mens rea of the offender of
seeking a benefit.

   Like forgery, fraud can be treated as a felony or
misdemeanor depending on the extent of the fraud, how
much money was involved, what was done to accomplish the
fraud, or the amount of deceit involved in committing the
fraud.

   Embezzlement
   Embezzlement involves using officially obtained financial
assets for purposes outside the scope of their intended use,
usually for personal gain. In other words, when money is
contributed toward a fund for a specific reason, but is used
for a different purpose, that is embezzlement. Examples of this
are when someone with access to a pension fund or charitable
donations spends the money on something for themselves
instead of the pensions or the charity for which it was
intended.
   Embezzlers can take funds in small amounts over time, can
intend to pay the assets back, can borrow or manipulate assets,
and can use assets transactionally that appear as legitimate.
There are many different ways to skim funds off the top, but it
eventually adds up and can cause great harm to those who were
counting on that money.
   The basic criminal components of embezzlement are the
actus reus of misusing assets, paired with the mens rea that the
offender was entrusted with the assets and that they used their
410 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

position of trust to purposefully misuse the assets for their
personal benefit. Embezzlement is a direct violation of
fiduciary responsibility.

   Embezzlement can be treated as a misdemeanor or felony,
depending on the amount of the misused assets.

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: How is white-collar crime viewed and treated?
   "White-collar crime is treated much differently that
street crime, even though in some aspects it can be just
as dangerous if not more than street crime is or how
dangerous people believe street crime to be. White-collar
crime can have a significant impact on society. It often
involves financial fraud, embezzlement, or corporate
misconduct. This kind of crime can harm individuals,
businesses, and even the economy as a whole. It can tear
down the financial system which in turn can lead to
economic instability. It can also cause individuals and
businesses to face financial losses because of the varying
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 411

results which can create significant hardships for the
victims and people affected by these white-collar crimes.
I truly believe it's extremely important to fight against
these white-collar crimes just as much as our justice
system does for street crimes. I definitely think that the
justice system doesn't criminalize white-collar criminals
nearly as much as they do street criminals, and I think
that needs to change. Instead of just fining people who
are committing white-collar crimes and taking them to
civil court take them to criminal court where they can
be charged with heavier sentences; because the only way
to stop these criminals from committing these crimes
and cause lots of potential harm to society and specific
people is the set the precedent of high sentences for these
crimes."

   Money Laundering
   Money laundering is taking illegally obtained, or "dirty"
money and making the money appear "clean" by running the
money through recognized channels and businesses to make
the money appear legitimately earned and sourced.
   The criminal components to money laundering are the
actus reus of the steps in the laundering process which include
placement, layering, and integration. Placement is putting the
"dirty" money into the financial system (which could be a
bank deposit or taking it into a legitimate business as supposed
income). The next step, layering, is a complicated process of
hiding the "dirty" money among the clean money by creating
412 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

complicated transitions that make it hard to track. Finally, the
"dirty" money is returned to the source but now appears to
be legitimate income or profit instead of a gain from criminal
activity.

   The criminal act is paired with the mens rea of knowing
the origin of the money and initiating the money laundering
process to conceal that origin to further the criminal
enterprise. Money laundering can be treated as a misdemeanor
or a felony depending on the number of illicit transactions
involved in the layering and the total of the assets being
laundered.

   Money Laundering with Drug Cartels
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 413

   Figure 9.3 Photograph of Jason Bateman, who played Marty
Byrde on Ozark.

   Like the examples of shows, movies, and docu-series in the
True Crime Stories discussed in the Chapter Overview, money
laundering became more widely known thanks to a popular
show, Ozark. In this wildly popular Netflix series, a fictional
family becomes involved in a money laundering scheme with a
Mexican drug cartel. Character Marty Byrde, who was simply
a financial advisor, ultimately chooses to move his family to
414 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

Lake of the Ozarks and get deeper involved with local crime
and the drug cartel (figure 9.3).

   Some real life examples also involve drug cartels, but it seems
to be banks that have paid the biggest price. HSBC, the biggest
bank in Europe, was fined $1.9 billion in 2012 because they
allowed approximately $8 billion to be laundered through
their banks over a seven year period by one Mexican drug
cartel, one Columbian drug cartel, and possibly even terrorist
organizations.

   Similarly, Wachovia Bank, which is now part of Wells Fargo,
was fined $160 million for allowing a Mexican drug cartel to
launder roughly $390 million through their bank between
2004 and 2007.

   Extortion
   Extortion involves situations where a person is threatened
with some kind of harm unless they do a specific action or
provide a benefit to the offender. Because extortion involves
the pursuit of a benefit and the offender taking the benefit
through threatened harm, extortion is a type of theft. The
offender uses fear to motivate the victim and facilitate the
taking. In the case of extortion, the threatened harm can
include a threat to inflict a personal injury, a threat to accuse
someone of a crime, a threat to reveal a secret, or any threat
to cause personal, reputational, financial, or physical harm.
A new common example is occurring over the internet with
someone setting up another person to send embarrassing or
private photos or videos, then threatening to send those items
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 415

out to all their social media contacts unless they pay a certain
amount. The use of technology to commit this extortion
makes it also fall under the umbrella of cybercrime, which we
will discuss in this chapter as well.

   The basic criminal components to extortion are the actus
reus of making the threat, paired with the mens rea of the
offender of seeking a benefit. Extortion is typically considered
nonviolent in that the threat is of future harm to the victim.
An immediate threat of harm would align the act more with
robbery. Extortion is generally treated as a felony in most
jurisdictions.

   Bribery
   Bribery is often compared to extortion, however, while
extortion involves threatening harm to gain a benefit,
bribery specifically involves financial incentive to gain a
benefit. Typically, financial incentives are offered to people in
positions of power who are capable of giving a benefit to the
other. Interestingly, while extortion tends to characterize one
person as a clear victim trying to avoid harm and another as
the offender threatening the harm, bribery recognizes both the
person offering the bribe and the one taking the bribe both as
offenders.
   The basic criminal component to bribery is the quid pro
quo relationship, meaning each party engages in both the terms
and benefits of the bribe agreement ("You scratch my back, I'll
scratch yours" agreements). Bribery consists of actus reus on
both sides of the bribe by the person making the offer and
416 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

the person making the choice to accept or negotiate the offer.
Both parties accept the potential to benefit from the bribery
agreement. This duality is also present in the mens rea in that
each party makes an affirmative choice to engage in the bribe
agreement, each intending to receive a benefit. Demonstrating
that choice and intent to receive a benefit is often difficult to
prove. Often one party claims they only accepted the bribe
to avoid harm. Bribery is typically considered nonviolent in
that the bribe is usually of financial origin. Bribery is generally
treated as a felony in most jurisdictions.

   Licenses and Attributions for White-Collar Crimes
   "White-Collar Crimes" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed
under CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 9.2 Photograph of Dennis Levine, a former
investment banker convicted of insider trading in the 1980s,
Ken Rutkowski, is in the Public Domain, via Wikimedia
Commons.
   Figure 9.3 Photograph of Jason Bateman, who played Marty
Byrde on Ozark, MTV UK, CC BY 3.0, via Wikimedia
Commons.
   Cybercrime
   Cybercrime is the use of computer technology to commit a
crime. Cybercrime has evolved and become more sophisticated
as a result of advancements in computer technology. As
technology advances, so do the crimes involved.
   There are two types of cybercrimes: those that are cyber-
dependent and those that are cyber-enabled. Cyber-
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 417

dependent crimes require the use of computers or computer
technology to commit the crime. Cyber-enabled crimes are
those that can be facilitated by computers or computer
technology, but do not necessarily require it.

   Cybercrimes have practically nonexistent jurisdictional
boundaries. The expanse of online networks and complexity
of routers, internet protocols, network pathways, and global
infrastructure make investigating and prosecuting cybercrimes
very difficult. To make detection even more challenging,
cyberthreats are vast, opportunistic, and cunning in design,
making legitimate cybercommunications hard to differentiate
from cybercrime.

   Mens Rea in Cybercrime
   Mens rea in cybercrimes require that the offender have
specific knowledge of computer networks, information
technology, or technological prowess, and have the intent to
use this knowledge to facilitate the commission of a crime.
This knowledge of technology is what demonstrates the cyber
component of a cybercrime.
   Actus Reus in Cybercrime
   In cybercrime, the actus reus is the use of computer
technology to commit a crime. Specifically taking advantage
of online systems, technological infrastructures, and cyber
networks is what characterizes the criminal actions.
   Types of Cybercrimes
   With advances in technology, cybercrime is not only
relatively new, but it has also affected the manner in which
418 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

long-existing crimes may be committed. Extortion is a good
example of this advancement. What used to be done on a
smaller scale can now ruin a person's career and personal life
because the secret they want to protect can be instantly shared
on a massive scale.

   Figure 9.4 Photograph of former Congressman Anthony
Weiner at the New York City Gay Pride Parade in 2009.

   Former U.S. Representative Anthony Weiner is a prime
example of someone widely sharing secrets he wanted to keep
hidden. In 2011, Weiner used his Twitter account to send
sexually explicit photos of himself to women, which were then
leaked to the media. This act cost him his seat in Congress.
Later, he was caught in another sexting scandal after returning
to politics. During his run for mayor of New York City, he sent
sexually explicit photos and sexting messages to more women
and even a 15-year old girl. With these revelations, he lost both
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 419

his political career and his marriage. Weiner has since served
approximately two years in a federal prison and is now a life-
long registered sex offender.

   Although it is debatable whether he is actually a victim in
this case, this example shows how quickly harmful
information can be spread with the use of technology. There
are now cyber variations to all sorts of crimes that have been
committed for centuries. This is in addition to the new types
of crimes that have come into existence with different
technologies like the use of viruses to corrupt computer
systems or steal personal data. This is an area that is constantly
and quickly evolving, causing all manner of unique challenges
for law enforcement.

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: What are methods to protect personal and/or
companies information?
   "Since becoming a bank teller I have become more
aware of technology when it comes to crime. I am
420 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

assigned monthly online seminars, by my boss, which
pertain to safeguarding our technology and software. I
personally have started applying these practices to my
daily life. I have stopped automatically saving passwords
on every website, and I do not save any debit card
information. I only use a reloadable debit card with very
minimal amounts of money on it to purchase anything
online. I have also started creating harder passwords that
I do not repeatedly use for everything.

   The most common type of scam, and the most
dangerous, I encounter at my bank are phishing emails.
They are very easy to create, and they are very easy to
accidentally click. It does not take an advanced computer
engineer to know how to work a phishing email, and if
my work computer was compromised, they would have
access to hundreds of bank accounts.

   I am actually very thankful that I started working
at the bank, because I have learned so much about
safeguarding technology."

   Cyber Variations of Traditional Crimes
   Social networking has created relational opportunities not
previously experienced in society. Where traditional crimes
were once committed based on opportunity or with specific
motive against a particular person, online environments have
created an artificial means of connecting people, sometimes for
the sole purpose of perpetrating a crime against another.
   Most existing crimes can be planned, solicited, conspired, or
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 421

attempted online. For a crime to be considered a cybercrime,
it must be substantially accomplished through the use of
cybertechnology. When a crime has moved beyond being
cyber-enabled with the use of technology to a cyber-dependent
necessary use of technology, it will more readily be designated
a true cybercrime.

   Common cyber variations of traditional crimes include:
   Online predators
   Fraudulent sales or theft
   Threats, intimidation, or bullying
   White-collar crimes as online financial schemes
   Network engineering and manipulation
   Cyber versions of fraud are those that illegally obtain
personal information and data for illegal use and benefit of
the offender. Cybercriminals design elaborate programs called
viruses that can infect personal devices (computers or cell
phones), creating ways to steal sensitive private data and
information. The programs get onto our personal devices by
looking like well designed, legitimate, or harmless links, sites,
or downloads. Once a victim opens the attachment, clicks the
link, or downloads the picture or program, the cybercriminal
has almost unrestricted access to an unsuspecting victim and
their information.
   Common network engineering and manipulation schemes
include:
   Spoofing and phishing (schemes aimed at tricking people
into providing sensitive information to scammers)
422 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

   Ransomware (malicious software, or malware, which looks
safe but once downloaded, prevents someone from accessing
computer files, systems, or networks in exchange for a financial
ransom)

   Cyberterrorism and cyberattacks
   Larger scale cybercrimes that are more sophisticated and
destructive in nature include those that are designed to wipe
out massive online infrastructure and technology availability.
Electromagnetic pulses powerful enough to neutralize entire
power grids, disrupting internet and online technology are the
talk of modern warfare and terrorism. Also, the collection of
private data and information threatens national security and
the right to privacy.
   Cyberterrorism can include:
   Bringing down major websites, including social media
platforms
   Unauthorized access to disable or modify communications
the control military or other critical technology
   Bringing down critical infrastructure systems like the power
grid or water treatment plants
   Spying on rival nations to gather intelligence
   The Center for Strategic and International Studies
maintains a list of significant cyber incidents that have been
identified since 2006 and include losses of over $1 million.
The list is publicly available on their website at
https://www.csis.org/programs/strategic-technologies-
program/significant-cyber-incidents.
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 423

   Licenses and Attributions for Cybercrime
   "Cybercrime" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed under CC BY
4.0.
   Figure 9.4 Photograph of former Congressman Anthony
Weiner at the New York City Gay Pride Parade in 2009, Boss
Tweed from New York, CC BY 2.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Organized Crime
   The rise in organized crime is an example of unintended
consequences of what people thought were good intentions.
In the early 1900s, an influential group determined that
alcohol was causing too many problems in society and should
it be abolished. Eventually, that movement led to the 18th
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution (U.S. Const. amend.
XVIII). By 1920, it became illegal to conduct production,
importation, transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages.
With a complete ban (or prohibition) on alcohol, others saw
this as an opportunity for personal gain. Illegal production
and sale of alcohol, which was called "bootlegging" as well as
the sudden creation and growth of "speakeasies" (secret bars)
meant big business for those willing to take the risk. This
special opportunity is often credited with the prominent rise
of organized crime syndicates and the solidification of
organized crime in this country.
   Organized crime consists of gangs, mobs, mafia, or any
sort of criminal syndicates that are an association of
individuals who work together to make money through illegal
means. They work to gain power, influence, and money
424 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

usually through criminal activity that includes corruption and
violence. There is often a tight-knit family mentality or even
blood ties that keep members from turning on one another.
The structures and make-up vary, as well as the legal and illegal
activities of each group, often with international ties.
However, when we talk about organized crime, these are
typically groups that operate at a much higher level than
smaller street gangs.

   Despite the variety across groups, the U.S. Department of
Justice has identified the following features as common to all
types of organized crime (OCGS, 2021):

   Reliance upon violence, threats of violence, or other acts of
intimidation;

   Exploiting political and cultural differences between
nations;

   Gaining influence in government, politics, and business
through corrupt means;

   Holding economic gain including investment in legitimate
business; and

   Insulating leadership from prosecution through
hierarchical structure.

   The Organized Crime and Gang Section (OCGS) of the
Department of Justice is a specialized group of prosecutors
charged with developing and implementing strategies to
disrupt and dismantle the most significant regional, national,
and international organized crime groups and violent gangs
(OCGS, 2021).
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 425

   The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Interpol, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the National
Security Council, and international agencies around the world
all work together to combat organized crime. The main
enforcement efforts are directed against international
organized crime groups, which pose serious threats to the well-
being of Americans and the stability of our economy.
International organized crime (IOC) promotes corruption
and violence, jeopardizes our border security, and causes
untold human misery. IOC undermines the integrity of
banking and financial systems, commodities and securities
markets, healthcare systems, and internet commerce.

   OCGS attorneys prosecute organized crime cases in
cooperation with United States Attorney's offices across the
country. These cases involve a broad spectrum of criminal laws,
including extortion, murder, bribery, fraud, money
laundering, narcotics, and labor racketeering. In addition,
OCGS reviews all proposed federal prosecutions under the
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
(RICO) law and provides extensive advice to prosecutors
about the use of this powerful statute. The RICO Act is a
federal law designed to combat organized crime in the United
States that was passed in 1970. Interestingly, it was originally
designed to address corruption within leadership of labor
unions, but was quickly expanded to prosecute criminal
organizations of varying types.

   The RICO Act is distinct in that it includes conspiracy,
426 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

which allows the connections among crimes that may appear
unrelated. Previously, crimes would have to be prosecuted in
a way that allowed them to only be grouped by the person
who was carrying them out. RICO changed that in a very
significant way. Through RICO, prosecutors can tie together
seemingly unconnected activities that have the same goal of
furthering the criminal syndicate and bust not only the person
carrying out the crime, but the one who ordered them to do
so. By bundling these crimes together, RICO allows law
enforcement to take down the boss calling the shots, ordering
their underlings to actually commit the crimes while they keep
their hands clean (Remember that last feature identified by
the Justice Department of "insulating leadership from
prosecution through hierarchical structure."). All these crimes
can be linked together in a way that demonstrates the existence
of a criminal enterprise and prosecutors can go directly to the
head of that group. Also, RICO allows for a condition of
no further contact with others involved in the same
"racketeering" enterprise, making it difficult for members of
criminal organizations to continue their work together.

   9.5.1 RICO and the Mafia
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 427

   Figure 9.4 FBI Booking photo of John Gotti, head of the
Gambino crime family.

   In the fifty years that RICO has existed, it has reportedly
been a key tool in taking down notorious mob bosses.

   In 1977 and 1978, The Cowboy Mafia across Texas,
Tennessee, and Florida got busted for importing marijuana
on shrimp boats. Twenty-six members were convicted and the
boss was brought down under RICO.

   In 1979, RICO was used to go after Sonny Barger and the
Hell's Angels motorcycle gang. It didn't quite work, at least
not the first time. Prosecutors keep coming after them.

   In 1980, the head of the Genovese crime family was taken
down by RICO. Then, prosecutors went after the heads of
five more Mafia families in New York City and successfully
convicted them as well.
428 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

   In 1984, the Key West Police Department, including
Deputy Police Chief Raymond Cassamayor and several high-
ranking officers, were convicted using RICO for running a
protection racket for cocaine smugglers.

   In 1992, John Gotti and Frank Lacascio of the Gambino
crime family were convicted under RICO (figure 9.4). Later,
in the mid-1990s, the Lucchese crime family faced the same
fate.

   Then, in 2004, Bonanno crime family boss Joseph Massino
was busted by RICO and agreed to cooperate with law
enforcement to flip on more of the crime syndicate (ratting on
his own family) in order to keep himself off death row.

   Mens Rea in Organized Crime
   Mens rea for organized crime requires that the offender have
specific knowledge and intention to promote and further the
goals of the criminal syndicate and recognition that the
objectives of the organization are superior to the desires or
potential consequences for the individual. In other words,
members will do anything for the good of the group, no matter
the risk involved. They are 100% devoted, far and above their
own individual interests or concerns.
   Actus Reus in Organized Crime
   Along with the mens rea, organized criminals must commit
any criminal action as part of an ongoing criminal enterprise.
Commonly, those crimes are financially motivated in nature,
like fraud, money laundering, or counterfeiting, but more
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 429

vicious and dangerous criminal syndicates commonly
participate in murder, human trafficking, and drug smuggling.

   Types of Organized Crimes
   Organized crimes are any crimes that are committed in
compounding number and seriousness, specifically performed
with the overall goal of furthering the criminal enterprise to
exert power, control, and influence.
   While individual members of the organized crime unit can
be investigated and prosecuted for basic violations of criminal
law, the greater aspiration in the fight against organized crime
is the prosecution of high-level bosses, the illumination of
complex criminal networks, and the dismantling of highly
coordinated, dangerously exploitative criminal syndicates.
   Organized crime enterprises commit basic crimes at all
levels, but they tend to rely on more complex criminal ventures
including:
   Drug dealing and trafficking
   Human and migrant smuggling or trafficking
   Exotic wildlife smuggling
   Illegal firearms trafficking
   The sale of stolen goods and artifacts
   These crimes provide revenue for organized crime
syndicates. While the distribution and sale of illicit items is
common, more complex versions of these crimes help increase
the power and income of the group. Computer technology
has also created a new frontier for organized criminals. Crimes
once limited by the physical location of the group can now
430 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

occur worldwide via the internet, social media platforms, and
dark web operations.

   Offenses at the organized crime level are generally treated as
a felony in most jurisdictions. More specifically, the combined
size and complexity of the crimes on a large scale, common
to organized criminals, increases the crimes from lower-level
offenses to major inter-jurisdictional schemes - especially
under RICO.

   Licenses and Attributions for Organized Crime
   "Organized Crime" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed under
CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 9.4 FBI Booking photo of John Gotti, head of the
Gambino crime family, FBI New York, Public domain, via
Wikimedia Commons.
   Conclusion
   Although white-collar crime, cybercrime, and organized
crime are sensationalized in the media, television shows, and
movies, they actually cause a significant amount of harm.
Technology continues to change the way in which crime is
committed in each of these areas, making it important to use
caution and stay informed of tips for personal safety. Perhaps
one benefit of watching the shows and movies on these topics
(beyond simply for entertainment) is to learn more about how
these crimes have occurred in the past so we can work to
prevent them in the future.
   Application Exercises
   Watch the TEDTalk "Where is cybercrime really coming
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 431

from?" to hear security expert Caleb Barlow explain the
challenges of and suggested solutions for cybercrime, then
discuss whether you agree with his ideas.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FqrLUtIFVjs

   Discuss various shows and movies on the topics of white-
collar crime, cybercrime, and organized crime. What
stereotypes or "tropes" are in the shows? Are these accurate?

   Discussion Questions
   Which types of white-collar crime do you think would be
the hardest to prosecute and why?
   Why is cybercrime especially difficult to investigate and
stop?
   Why is prohibition linked to the start or rapid growth of
organized crime?
   What is the goal of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations (RICO) Act and how is it used?
   Why do you think shows or movies about white-collar
crimes, cyber crimes, and organized crime are so popular?
What is appealing about these stories?
   Key Terms
   Bribery
   Counterfeiting
   Cyber-dependent
   Cyber-enabled
   Cybercrime
   Embezzlement
   Extortion
432 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

   Fiduciary
   Forgery
   Fraud
   Money laundering
   Organized crime
   Phishing
   Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
(RICO)
   Skimming
   White-collar crimes
   Summary
   The category of white-collar crimes is broad enough to
include all those crimes committed in the corporate world to
exploit others for financial gain. Forgery is the practice of
producing or using a fake version of a real document to try
to get some benefit. Fraud is a more generalized term
encompassing a wide variety of behaviors designed to deceive
for the purposes of gaining some benefit, usually money.
Embezzlement involves using officially obtained financial
assets for purposes outside the scope of their intended use,
usually for personal gain. Money laundering is taking illegally
obtained, or "dirty" money and making the money appear
"clean" by running it through recognized channels and
businesses to make the money appear legitimately earned and
sourced. Extortion addresses situations where a person is
threatened with some kind of harm unless the victim does an
             CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
                                                                             CRIME | 433

action or provides a benefit to the offender. Bribery involves
financial inducement to gain a benefit.

   Cybercrime is the use of computer technology to facilitate
the commission of a crime. Any existing crime can be planned,
solicited, conspired, or attempted online. For a crime to be
considered a cybercrime, it must be substantially accomplished
through the use of cybertechnology. Common cyber-
variations of traditional crimes include online predators,
fraudulent sales or theft, threats, intimidation, or bullying,
and online financial schemes. Cyber versions of fraud are those
that illegally obtain personal information and data for illegal
use and benefit of the offender. Spoofing and phishing are
schemes aimed at tricking people into providing sensitive
information to scammers. Ransomware is malicious software,
or malware, which looks safe but once downloaded, prevents
someone from accessing computer files, systems, or networks
in exchange for a financial ransom.

   Organized crime consists of gangs, mobs, mafia, or any sort
of criminal syndicates that are an association of individuals
who work together to make money through illegal means.
They work to gain power, influence, and money usually
through criminal activity that includes corruption and
violence. The RICO Act is a federal law designed to combat
organized crime in the United States that was passed in 1970.
This law allows for prosecution of the heads of criminal
organizations, even when they do not commit the crimes
themselves. Organized crime enterprises commit basic crimes
434 | CH. 13 CYBERCRIME, WHITE-COLLAR CRIME, ORGANIZED
CRIME

at all levels, but they tend to rely on more complex criminal
ventures including drug dealing and trafficking, human and
migrant smuggling or trafficking, exotic wildlife smuggling,
illegal firearms trafficking, and the sale of stolen goods and
artifacts.

   Resources
   The Organized Crime and Gang Section (OCGS) of the
Department of Justice provides news alerts about all their
work related to organized crime and the prosecution of
criminal syndicates at https://www.justice.gov/criminal-ocgs/
ocgs-press-room/2022.
   The FBI provides resources on how to protect yourself from
cybercrime at https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/cyber.
   Licenses and Attributions for Conclusion
   "Conclusion" by Jennifer Moreno is licensed under CC BY
4.0.
   References
   Organized Crime and Gang Section [OCGS]. (2021).
International organized crime. https://www.justice.gov/
criminal-ocgs/international-organized-crime
   Sutherland, E. (1939). The white collar criminality. Paper
presented to the annual meeting of the American Sociological
Society in Philadelphia, PA.
   U.S. Const. amend. XVIII
     CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 435

14.

CH.14 TERRORISM AND
MASSIVE IMPACT
CRIMES

   Curt Sobolewski and Jeff Bry

                               Ch. 14
               Terrorism and Massive Impact Crimes
   Introduction
   Terrorism and other massive impact crimes cause
substantial fear, worry and distress globally. These crimes tend
to affect society tremendously, bringing change to law, policy
and response in various societies (not just those directly
affected). This chapter will examine massive impact crimes,
exploring the correlates of and responses to these crimes.
436 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

   True Crime Stories: Mass Shootings in America

   Figure 10.1 Montage of some of the deadliest mass
shootings in the United States. Clockwise from top left: The
2017 Las Vegas Shooting, the 2016 Orlando nightclub
shooting, the 2007 Virginia Tech shooting, the 2012 Sandy
Hook Elementary School shooting, and the 2019 El Paso
shooting.

   As we will discuss in this chapter, a mass shooting is defined
as an event in which three or more people were shot (not
counting the shooter). The Gun Violence Archive, an
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 437

independent data collection and research group, keeps daily
track of all gun violence in the United States dating back to
2014. Specific to mass shootings, 2022 is one of the top three
deadliest years since the organization began tracking these
data. As of December 21st, 2022, there were 636 mass
shootings in this country. In the year 2021, there were a total
of 690, and in 2020, there were 610. These last three years
are setting a frightening trend, doubling the number of mass
shootings for the years 2014-2019 that had an average of 348
per year (GVA, 2022).

   The largest mass shooting in terms of number of deaths
and injuries in U.S. history occurred in Las Vegas, Nevada
on October 1, 2017. Twenty-two thousand fans were in
attendance at the Route 91 Harvest Music Festival on the Las
Vegas Strip when 64-year-old Stephen Paddock opened fire on
the crowd. Paddock fired over 1,000 shots from inside his hotel
room, a corner suite on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay
Resort and Casino. Over the course of one week leading up to
the shooting, he moved an arsenal of firearms in 22 suitcases
into two suites. These weapons included 14 AR-15 rifles, 8
AR-10 rifles, one bolt-action rifle, and one revolver. Some of
the AR-15 rifles were also equipped with bump stocks that
allowed them to fire in rapid succession, and 12 of them had
100-round magazines. On September 30th, he placed a "do
not disturb" sign on the doors of both of the suites. For 10
minutes, Paddock fired indiscriminately into the crowd at the
concert as they tried to escape to safety. When police breached
438 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

the door of the hotel suite after the shooting, Paddock was
found dead from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to his head.
His motive for the mass shooting remains unknown.

   Shootings like this, although on a smaller scale, have become
part of American culture. No other country in the world
experiences mass shootings with the type of frequency that we
do here in the United States. This phenomenon is not only not
getting better, it appears to be getting far worse and gaining
momentum.

   License and Attributions for Chapter Overview and
Learning Objectives

   "Chapter Overview and Learning Objectives" by Curt
Sobolewski is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   Figure 10.1 Montage of some of the deadliest mass
shootings in the United States. Clockwise from top left: The
2017 Las Vegas Shooting, the 2016 Orlando nightclub
shooting, the 2007 Virginia Tech shooting, the 2012 Sandy
Hook Elementary School shooting, and the 2019 El Paso
shooting, created by JoleBruh, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia
Commons.

   "The source of every crime is some defect of the
understanding; or some error in reasoning; or some sudden
force of the passions."

   Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), English philosopher
   In this book, we have talked about different types of crime
categories: those against people, property, or the public order.
We also talked in Chapter 9 about the unique offenses of
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 439

white-collar crime, cybercrime, and organized crime. In this
chapter, we will wrap up the book with a look at massive
impact crimes. These are the types of crimes that have many
victims who are all connected through tragedy, affecting the
community, society, policies, and even laws. This chapter
focuses on mass murders and terrorism, as well as the efforts by
law enforcement to interrupt these crimes.

   This chapter, as in all the chapters in this book, may include
triggers for some readers. Please take care of yourself as needed
while reading about these massive impact crimes.

   License and Attributions for Mass Murder and
Terrorism

   "Mass Murder and Terrorism" by Curt Sobolewski is
licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   Mass Shootings
   Many contemporary mass murder single events are also
termed mass shootings because of the use of firearms to kill
or injure the greatest number of people in the shortest amount
of time. These killings all happening in the same location and
at the same time is what distinguishes mass murder from serial
killing or serial murder and also from spree murder. These
include shootings at schools, workplaces, or public locations or
events.
   The origin of mass shootings in this country is tough to pin
down because it was not formally tracked until it became more
common. In 1949, Melvin Collins opened fire from inside
a boarding house and killed eight people before then killing
440 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

himself in Chester, Pennsylvania. Later that same year,
Howard Unruh went on what has since been named his "walk
of death" where he shot and killed 13 people and wounded
four more during a 20-minute walk down a crowded street in
Camden, New Jersey. Howard Unruh is considered the "father
of mass murder" despite not being the first. This is credited to
the fact that he lived to tell the police all about his motives and
plans. He also received a significant amount of coverage in the
media, making his murders famous.

   Years later, on August 1st, 1966, Charles Whitman
committed what many consider to be the first mass shooting
(despite Collins and Unruh who came before him). From atop
the clock tower on the University of Texas campus in Austin,
Whitman shot and killed 16 people.

   School Shootings
   Shootings in schools where students arrive heavily armed
ready to kill their classmates and teachers have gone from being
extremely rare to becoming frighteningly common. The
incident most often referenced as the one that started this
horrible trend is the massacre at Columbine High School on
April 20th, 1999. Two high school seniors from the school,
Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, murdered 12 students and
one teacher, and injured another 21 people. They then killed
themselves in the school library. Columbine was, at the time,
the deadliest school shooting in U.S. history and has since
inspired countless others to commit similar horrific acts.
   Even though Columbine was not the first school shooting
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 441

in the United States, it changed how we saw safety in schools
in our society. Schools now routinely practice lockdowns and
have active shooter drills. Students and teachers alike are all
very aware of the possibility of a school shooting on their
campus.

   Figure 10.3 President George W. Bush talks with former
Columbine High School student Craig Scott during a panel
discussion on school safety in 2006.

   In Oregon, there have been two very significant school
shootings, one of which occurred shortly before Columbine.
On May 20th, 1998, 15-year-old freshman Kipland "Kip"
Kinkel murdered his parents in their home in Springfield,
Oregon. The next day, he went to school as usual at Thurston
High School. He wore a trench coat to hide the five weapons
he carried. This was a move later copied by the two shooters at
Columbine. Kinkel had two hunting knives, a rifle, a 9x19mm
Glock 19 pistol, and a .22-caliber Ruger MK II pistol. He
442 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

also had 1,127 rounds of ammunition. He began shooting
right as he arrived at the school patio, then continued into
and across the cafeteria shooting even more. During this short
walk, Kinkle fired a total of 50 rounds, killed two students
and injured another 25 before being tackled and held down by
seven students until the police arrived. He repeatedly begged
other students and police officers to kill him. He pled guilty
and was sentenced to 111 years in prison without the
possibility of parole.

   Kinkel was suffering from undiagnosed paranoid
schizophrenia and had an obsession from an early age with
weapons and explosives. He reported that the voices in his head
made him believe that he had to kill his parents and everyone
at school.

   The second large school shooting in Oregon happened at
Umpqua Community College on October 1st, 2015. Twenty-
six-year-old Chris Harper-Mercer arrived at his writing class
that morning, firing a warning shot in the hallway as he
approached the classroom. Using two handguns, Harper-
Mercer was strategic about which students in class he shot and
was reported to have taunted some in the process. He shot and
killed the professor and eight students, plus injured another
eight before killing himself. He forced one student to sit in
the corner and watch all the shooting, giving her a package to
deliver to the police on his behalf. The package contained his
manifesto citing other mass killers and ranting about his hatred
of women.
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 443

   The U.S. Secret Service National Threat Assessment Center
(NTAC) analyzed 41 K-12 school shootings that occurred in
the United States between 2008 and 2017. They looked at
motives, behaviors, and situational factors related to the
shooters to learn how future attacks may be prevented. They
reported the following key findings (NTAC, 2019):

   There is no consistent profile of a school shooter. They have
varied in age, gender, race, grade level, academic performance,
and social characteristics.

   There is no consistent profile of schools that have been
attacked. The schools have varied in size, grade-level, location,
and type.

   There is no single motive of school shooters. The most
common is a grievance with classmates, but have also included
anger toward school staff, failed romantic relationships, or
other personal issues. Some school shooters were also
motivated by the desire to kill, being suicidal, and wanting
fame or notoriety.

   Most attacks on schools are done using firearms. Those
firearms were usually gotten from home.

   Most school shooters demonstrated psychological
(depression, suicidal ideation), behavioral (defiance,
misconduct), or developmental symptoms (delays, cognitive
deficits).

   Half of the school shooters showed an interest in violence
(such as being preoccupied with the Columbine shooting or
Hitler).
444 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

   All school shooters had experienced stress in relationships
with peers or romantic partners within six months of the
attack (half of them within two days of the attack).

   Almost all school shooters had negative home lives, such
as divorced parents, domestic abuse, or drug use in the
household.

   Most school shooters had been victims of bullying.
   Most school shooters had previously gotten into trouble
in school and many had prior contact with law enforcement
through the school.
   All the school shooters exhibited some manner of
concerning behavior in the days leading up to the attack. Most
of them had told someone of their intent to attack the school.
   Our ability to predict and intervene is getting only
marginally better. The signs are too often only clear in
hindsight after it is too late.
   Licenses and Attributions for Mass Murder
   "Mass Murder" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed under CC
BY 4.0.
   Figure 10.2 1982 Mugshot of Gary Ridgway (the Green
River Killer), King County Sheriff's Office, Public domain, via
Wikimedia Commons.
   Figure 10.3 President George W. Bush talks with former
Columbine High School student Craig Scott during a panel
discussion on school safety in 2006, Kimberlee Hewitt, Public
domain, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Terrorism
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 445

   The notion of terrorism was forced into the general
consciousness of every single American on September 11,
2001 (figure 10.4). For many in the United States, it was the
first time they experienced a terrorist attack on a large scale,
even though there have been terrorist attacks in the United
States throughout the country's history. Prior attacks were of a
scale such that average Americans could go on with their daily
lives without being directly affected. That all changed on 9/11
and has continued to evolve ever since.

   The quote "one man's terrorist is another man's freedom
fighter" is attributed to multiple sources, including Gerald
Seymour and Darrell Trent (1974, 1976).

   Figure 10.4 The Twin Towers of the World Trade Center
burning before they collapsed on September 11, 2001.

   Defining Terrorism
446 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

   Although we all have a general concept of what constitutes
terrorism, it is actually somewhat narrowly defined. You may
have seen arguments in the news over whether or not certain
tragic events (like many mass murders) should be labeled as
terrorism.

   The State Department uses the following definition when
determining what counts as terrorism (Title 22, Chapter 38
U.S. Code § 2656f(d)(2)):

   Terrorism: Premeditated, politically motivated violence
perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational
groups or clandestine agents

   According to this definition, the event is planned in advance
and is committed for the purpose of sending a political
message. Also, the victims are people not engaged in fighting
a war, but they are attacked as though they are the enemy by
people who see them as such.

   The FBI defines terrorism in two distinct ways -
international and domestic (FBI, 2022):

   International terrorism: Violent, criminal acts
committed by individuals and/or groups who are inspired by,
or associated with, designated foreign terrorist organizations or
nations (state-sponsored)

   Domestic terrorism: Violent, criminal acts committed by
individuals and/or groups to further ideological goals
stemming from domestic influences, such as those of a
political, religious, social, racial, or environmental nature

   The common thread across these definitions is violence and
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 447

motive. Simply put, terrorist groups or individuals carry out
violent acts against innocent victims to send a specific message.

   Terrorism can be international or domestic, and within
domestic terrorism can be right-wing or left-wing. Both right-
wing and left-wing extremists want to bring down the
government, but for different reasons. Sociologist Mark
Blumberg studied extremists groups and presented his findings
to the American Society of Criminology in 1986. He argued,

   "Leftists usually have urban backgrounds, are highly
educated, and include blacks. Extreme right-wing
groups consist entirely of white Christians and are often
blue-collar and poorly educated. Both types of groups
exploit legitimate political issues to attract members.
They both also recruit from the military and prison
populations. Their criminal offenses are similar and
include bombings, murder of law enforcement officers,
and attacks on government installations. Both types of
groups pose a danger to the United States and need to be
monitored."

   Domestic Terrorism - Right-Wing Extremism
   The Right-Wing terrorist's goal is to fight change from what
they consider to be traditional American values. For this
reason, the focus is commonly on resistance to progress
regarding race/ethnicity, religious beliefs, reproductive rights,
sexual orientation and gender identity, and immigration. In
this perspective, white men are in control, women are
subservient, and anyone outside of their preferred
448 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

heterosexual, cis-gendered, native-born collective is seen as a
problem.

   Figure 10.5 Far-right "Three Percenters" patrol
Emancipation Park at the Charlottesville "Unite the Right"
Rally.

   In 2019, Congress passed the "Domestic Terrorism Act" in
which they stated, "White supremacists and other far-right-
wing extremists are the most significant domestic terrorism
threat facing the United States" (Domestic Terrorism Act,
2019). The groups listed in this bill are characterized by traits
identified by scholars over two decades earlier as "extremist
paramilitary groups oriented toward survivalism, outdoor
skills, guerilla training, and outright sedition" (Hoffman,
1987). The Domestic Terrorism Act was created in response
to a series of deadly far-right-wing domestic terrorist attacks.
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 449

Some recent examples cited in the Act include (Domestic
Terrorism Act, 2019):

   August 5, 2012 - mass shooting at a Sikh gurdwara in Oak
Creek, Wisconsin - one white supremacist shot and killed 6
members of the gurdwara

   April 13, 2014 - mass shooting at a Jewish community
center and assistend living facility in Overland Park, Kansas -
one neo-Nazi shot and killed 3 civilians

   June 8, 2014 - ambush of police in Las Vegas, Nevada - two
supporters of the far-right-wing "patriot movement" shot and
killed two police officers and one civilian

   June 17, 2015 - mass shooting at the Emanuel AME
Church in Charleston, South Carolina - one white
supremacist shot and killed 9 church members

   November 27, 2015 - mass shooting at a Planned
Parenthood clinic in Colorado Springs, Colorado - one anti-
abortion extremist shot and killed one police officer and two
civilians

   March 20, 2017 - murder of one African-American man in
New York City - one white supremacist traveled to New York
to seek out and kill Black men

   May 26, 2017 - attack in Portland, Oregon on public transit
- one white supremacist killed two men and injured a third
who were defending two young women being targeted by the
white supremacist with anti-Muslim hate speech

   August 12, 2017 - attack in Charlottesville, Virginia at a
protest - one white supremacist killed one civilian and injured
450 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

another nineteen by driving his car through a crowd that was
protesting a neo-Nazi rally (figure 10.5)

   October 24, 2018 - mass shooting at a grocery store in
Jeffersontown, Kentucky - one white man shot and killed two
African-American people

   October 27, 2018 - mass shooting at the Tree of Life
Synagogue in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania - one white nationalist
shot and killed eleven members of the congregation

   This Act calls for the authorization of offices to monitor,
analyze, investigate, and prosecute domestic terrorism that will
be responsible for the production of an annual report on
domestic terrorism; identification of training requirements
and resources; and the creation of joint terrorism task forces,
fusion centers, and an interagency taskforce (Domestic
Terrorism Act, 2019).

   Ku Klux Klan (KKK)
   A classic example of a right-wing extremist terrorist group
is the Ku Klux Klan (KKK). The KKK started in Tennessee
in 1865 and consisted of former Confederate soldiers who
pledged to fight oppression from the North. Instead of
accepting the end of the Civil War, the former soldiers
continued to fight for the cause they believed in, seeking
vengeance through the violence and intimidation. They were
a vigilante group that intimidated southern Blacks and Whites
who supported civil rights. After the Jim Crow Laws that
secured the domination of Southern Whites, the KKK
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 451

informally disbanded but would have a significant revival in
the 1920s with a focus on fighting immigration.

   The KKK claimed to be a white Christian movement. They
were anti-Black because of the belief that the Civil War had not
ended and slavery should still be in place, and anti-Catholic
since so much of the political power in the North was wielded
by urban Catholic immigrants. As the KKK progressed in their
hate campaign, they included Jews in the 1920s because of
large waves of immigration to the United States following
World War I. Including the two newest immigrant groups in
the United States (Catholics and Jews) illustrates how the
KKK's hate increased because of a fear of immigration to the
United States and losing their own dominance as a result. The
KKK promoted White America and nationalism. They viewed
themselves as 100% American and 100% White Protestant.
They used dichotomies such as South vs. North, rural vs.
urban, and religious vs. secular to divide the United States and
focus their hate. The third rise of the KKK was during the
civil rights movement of the 1960s, focusing on preserving
segregation despite unfavorable court rulings. Although not
often in the public eye any longer, the KKK still operates to
support their mission and that of like-minded organizations.

   The focus of many of these groups is the concept of "white
genocide," which is the belief that Whites in the United States
are being systematically replaced and destroyed because of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and immigration policy. However, in
their desire to form a "white ethnostate" they claim their desire
452 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

for separation is not because of hate but rather because of the
love of the members of their own race.

   Though white nationalism was believed to be on the decline
in the United States, it has once again reared its ugly head
following the presidential election in 2016. Since then, there
has been an increase in white nationalist violence and an
attempt for white supremacist, right-wing groups to become
more mainstream with their ideology and beliefs that can
influence future action.

   In the 1990s, there were two incidents (Ruby Ridge and
the Branch Davidians) that fueled these movements. Groups
in the "patriot movement" used these incidents as examples
of government overreach and their need to bring down this
oppressive regime. The patriot movement is a term that
encompasses all right-wing extremist groups, nationalist
movements, militias, sovereign citizens (those who do not
recognize the U.S. government as having authority over them),
and tax protesters (those who refuse to pay taxes). These
groups are also fans of conspiracy theories, which we will
discuss later in this chapter.

   Ruby Ridge
   On August 21st, 1992, federal agents came onto the
property of Randy Weaver in Idaho to arrest him on a warrant
for weapons charges. Instead of giving in to the arrest, Randy
Weaver, his wife and children (one son and three daughters),
and family friend Kevin Harris staged a resistance. During an
11-day siege, Weaver's 14-year-old-son Sammy, wife Vicki, and
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 453

dog Striker were all killed. All of the federal law enforcement
agencies involved in the siege later faced disciplinary
repercussions and were all found guilty of serious wrongdoing.

   The same agencies, and even some of the same personnel,
committed similar harms only six months later outside of
Waco, Texas.

   Branch Davidians
   On February 28th, 1993, with the belief that the Branch
Davidians (a self-contained religious group living on a rural
compound just outside of Waco, Texas) were stockpiling
weapons at their ranch, the FBI and ATF raided the
compound (figure 10.6). During the initial raid, there was a
shootout in which four federal agents were killed, setting off
a 51-day standoff. On April 19th, 1993, the joint government
agencies rammed the building with tanks and launched a tear
gas assault on those inside. The structure caught fire and 76
Branch Davidians (including 28 children) were killed in the
flames.
   Again, the federal agencies were found to have made
grievous mistakes that have since fueled right-wing extremist
groups and conspiracy theorists, adding to the narrative that
the government is an evil entity.
454 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

   Figure 10.6 Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Texas.
   Oklahoma City Bombing
   It is claimed that the events at Ruby Ridge and Waco were
the fuel that fired domestic terrorists Timothy McVeigh and
Terry Nichols who bombed the Murrah Federal Building in
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (figure 10.7). The Murrah Federal
Building housed several federal government offices and a
daycare center for their children. McVeigh, with the bomb-
building support of Nichols, detonated a bomb inside a truck
full of explosives that he had parked in front of the building.
The explosion killed 168 people (including six children) and
injured another 680. McVeigh was later quoted as saying, "I
didn't define the rules of engagement in this conflict. The
rules, if not written down, are defined by the aggressor. It was
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 455

brutal, no holds barred. Women and kids were killed at Waco
and Ruby Ridge. You put back in [the government's] faces
exactly what they're giving out. ...I wanted the government to
hurt like the people of Waco and Ruby Ridge had."

   Both McVeigh and Nichols were former military, and both
became radicalized after Ruby Ridge and Waco. The
importance of each of their military service should not be
overlooked. In 2009, the Department of Homeland Security
issued a report warning that disgruntled military veterans are at
risk of recruitment and radicalization by right-wing extremists
that will try to exploit their skills and knowledge they have
obtained from their military training. When the report was
released, Republican John Boehner demanded that the agency
apologize to veterans. However, the report states a trend that
did not begin with Timothy McVeigh and Oklahoma City
and could be traced back to the Civil War and the creation
of the Ku Klux Klan. The report contained further warnings
of the belief that white supremacists were learning military
techniques in the U.S. armed forces to later be used against
American civilians.
456 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

   Figure 10.7 Oklahoma City bombing.
   Conspiracy Theories
   The patriot movement spreads anti-government conspiracy
theories, supporting their belief that the government has been
infiltrated and subverted, making it no longer legitimate
(which also means the laws are not legitimate and do not apply
to them).
   Some of the more popular conspiracy theories in the
movement include:
   New World Order - A secretive power elite has a global
agenda to rule the world through an authoritarian one-world
government. When this happens, followers of the patriot
movement must be prepared for mass hysteria and ready to
launch an apocalyptic militia uprising to protect themselves.
   9/11 - The collapse of the Twin Towers and World Trade
Center were the result of controlled demolitions by the U.S.
government instead of the impact and fire causing the
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 457

buildings to collapse. Some even place full responsibility for
the 9/11 attacks on the U.S. government, believing they were
secretly behind the whole thing.

   QAnon - A group of Satanic, cannibalistic, pedophiles are
operating a global child sex trafficking ring made up of
members of the Democratic party, Hollywood actors, business
tycoons, and medical experts. The claim is also that there is
a pedophile sex trafficking ring run in the basement of a
Washington, D.C. pizzeria.

   Chemtrails - The water condensation trails (chemtrails)
that are formed by engine exhaust behind airplanes and look
like lines or streaks of white clouds are filled with chemical or
biological agents. These chemicals are responsible for weather
modification, psychological manipulation, human population
control, and more.

   There is an extensive list of conspiracy theories supported
by the right-wing extremist groups in the patriot movement.
They may seem like harmless lies, but they lead to terroristic
behavior that is dangerous. For example, the QAnon claim
that there was a pedophile sex trafficking ring run out of the
basement of a Washington, D.C. pizzeria (otherwise known as
"Pizzagate") ended with a man traveling to the Comet Ping
Pong pizzeria from North Carolina and shooting a rifle inside
the restaurant. The restaurant owner and staff also received
death threats from people who fell for this conspiracy theory.

   QAnon believers, along with several groups under the
umbrella of the patriot movement, were responsible for the
458 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

attack on the U.S. Capitol Building on January 6th, 2021.
There were five deaths during the attack, four officer deaths
by suicide following the attack, and 138 police officers injured.
The outlandish claims of these conspiracy theories are far from
harmless and should be taken seriously.

   Domestic Terrorism - Left-Wing Extremism
   Left-Wing Extremists in the United States are associated
with the goal of overthrowing the government not to create
their own like the right-wing extremists, but rather to replace
the capitalist system with communist or socialist societies. The
left-wing terrorist claims they are fighting for equality, human
rights, animal rights, and environmentalism by creating
significant change in society, albeit through violent means.
Left-wing extremism has also been called anarchist terrorism
for their uprising against the ruling class and claims to offer
hope to those who are marginalized by the wealthy and
powerful.
   The Weather Underground
   The Weather Underground was the most active and well-
known leftist extremist group committed to political violence
in the late 1960s and early 1970s. They were a group of
primarily college-educated individuals who were inspired by
communist ideologies and embraced violence as a way to
protest the Vietnam War, racism, and other social issues.
   The Weather Underground was a splinter group from the
more significant Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). The
SDS was a nonviolent student group that saw the inequality
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 459

that was present in the United States and believed our
government was not paying attention and even creating
marginalized groups throughout the country. The members of
the SDS grew up in white suburban America and saw their
parents live comfortable lives at the expense of the poor in their
society.

   Black Liberation Army
   The Black Liberation Army was a Black nationalist
paramilitary group that fought for revolution from 1970 to
1981. They promoted war against the U.S. government for
the liberation of Black people. They are responsible for several
bombings, killings of police officers, killings of drug dealers,
robberies, and prison breaks.
   Some members of the Black Liberation Army are still on
the FBI's Terrorism Most Wanted List. For example, Joanne
Chesimard fled after escaping from prison while serving a life
sentence. According to the FBI (2022),
   On May 2, 1973, Chesimard, who was part of a
revolutionary extremist organization known as the Black
Liberation Army, and two accomplices were stopped for a
motor vehicle violation on the New Jersey Turnpike by two
troopers with the New Jersey State Police. At the time,
Chesimard was wanted for her involvement in several felonies,
including bank robbery. Chesimard and her accomplices
opened fire on the troopers. One trooper was wounded and
the other was shot and killed execution-style at point-blank
range. Chesimard fled the scene, but was subsequently
460 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

apprehended. One of her accomplices was killed in the shoot-
out and the other was also apprehended and remains in jail.
In 1977, Chesimard was found guilty of first degree murder,
assault and battery of a police officer, assault with a dangerous
weapon, assault with intent to kill, illegal possession of a
weapon, and armed robbery. She was sentenced to life in
prison. On November 2, 1979, Chesimard escaped from
prison and lived underground before being located in Cuba in
1984. She is thought to currently still be living in Cuba.

   May 19th Communist Organization (M19CO)
   May 19th Communist Organization (M19CO) was a
revolutionary organization active during 1978 to 1985. It was
formed by former members of The Weather Underground and
the Black Liberation Army, also including members of the
Blank Panthers. May 19th marks the birthdays of both
Malcolm X and Ho Chi Minh. Their goals were to free
political prisoners in U.S. prisons, to steal from the wealthy
to fund their operations, and commit bombings and other
terrorist acts against the U.S. government. They planned to
eventually move the United States from a capitalist economy
to a communist society. During their final few years, they
committed several bombings and robberies.
   Some members of M19CO are still on the FBI's Terrorism
Most Wanted List. For example, Donna Joan Borup is on the
run following a violent anti-apartheid demonstration at JFK
International Airport in New York on September 26th, 1981.
According to the FBI (2022),
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 461

   During the riot, Borup allegedly tossed a caustic substance
into the eyes of a Port Authority Police Officer, leaving him
partially blind. At the time, Borup was a member of the May
19th Communist Organization, a Marxist-Leninist
organization which advocated the armed revolution and
violent overthrow of the United States Government. Borup,
along with some accomplices, was arrested and released on bail
pending trial in May of 1982. On May 20, 1982, an arrest
warrant was issued for Borup after she failed to appear for
her trial on a Queens County indictment which charged her
with riot in the first degree and assault in the first degree. On
September 14, 1982, a federal arrest warrant was issued for
Borup in the Eastern District of New York and she was charged
with unlawful flight to avoid prosecution.

   United Freedom Front
   The United Freedom Front was founded on Marxist
ideologies of anti-materialism and anti-classism. Active in the
1970s and 1980s, this group is responsible for at least twenty
bombings and nine bank robberies. They targeted large
corporations, courthouses, and military facilities with their
bombs.
   Antifa
   Antifa (short for antifascist action) is a political movement
consisting of various small groups and individuals united by
their militant opposition to fascism, racism, and other right-
wing extremist ideologies. While most of their activism is non-
violent, they are also responsible for harassment, property
462 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

damage, and digital activism like public shamings on the
internet. The public "outing" is to let people know their
neighbor is a Nazi or to let employers know they have hired a
white supremacist.

   Figure 10.8 November 28, 2020 - St. Paul, Minn. -- A man
with an ANTIFA patch on the back of his vest arrives at the
Proud Boys, Trump, Stop the Steal rally.

   Members tend to subscribe to anarchist, communist, and
socialist views and work to prompt a revolution that
overthrows the current U.S. government to destroy the
formalization of authority, capitalism, fascism, and the state
(figure 10.8). Fascism supports a military-style dictatorship
that denies individual rights and does not allow for any
opposition. Antifa wants the exact opposite - no centralized
government and full individual rights. Some argue antifa is just
as dangerous as their right-wing counterparts because of the
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 463

anti-government stance, whether they are fighting for positive
causes or not.

   International Terrorism
   In addition to acts carried out by domestic right-wing and
left-wing extremist groups, we also have to be on the lookout
for threats from international terrorist organizations. The
attacks on September 11th, 2001 were the largest incidents of
international terrorism in the history of the United States. In
a coordinated attack, two hijacked planes flew into the World
Trade Center towers in New York City killing 2,759 people
and injuring another 8,700. Another hijacked plane flew into
the Pentagon killing another 189 people and injuring 200. A
final plane that was heading for the White House instead
crashed into a field in Pennsylvania (thanks to passengers
onboard who overtook the hijackers) killing another 45
people. Nineteen militants from the Islamic extremist group
al Qaeda were responsible for these suicide attacks that forever
changed how law enforcement approaches terrorism.
   Of particular note is that some of these terrorists lived in
the United States for more than a year before the attacks and
had even taken flying lessons at American commercial flight
schools. Others were able to sneak into the country shortly
before the attacks. They also easily smuggled box cutters and
knives onto the flights, which they used to hijack each of the
planes. This may be hard to imagine for anyone who did not
experience airline travel prior to 9/11.
   Although 9/11 was the largest and the one that caused the
464 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

most changes in our everyday lives (which will be discussed
more in Law Enforcement Responses below), it is far from the
only international terrorist attack we have experienced in this
country. Following are just some of the recent examples:

   On October 31st, 2017 in New York City, 29-year-old
Sayfullo Habibullaevic Saipov drove a truck into people on
a bike path, killing 8 and injuring 12 "in the name of ISIS "
according to a note he brought to the attack.

   On June 12th, 2016, 29-year-old Omar Mateen shot and
killed 49 people and injured another 53 people at a nightclub
in Orlando, Florida. He called 911 during the shooting to take
credit and claim allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Bachdadi, leader of
the terrorist group ISIS.

   On December 2nd, 2015, Syed Rizwan Farook and
Tashfeen Malik killed 14 people and injured 22 others at a
holiday party for employees of the San Bernardino County
Department of Public Health where Farook was an employee.
The FBI determined Farook and Malik had become radicalized
over the internet, becoming committed to jihadism and
martyrdom. After visiting Saudi Arabia in the years leading
up to attack, the two stockpiled weapons, ammunition, and
bomb-making equipment, along with a support system of like-
minded family and friends.

   On November 5th, 2009 at the Soldier Readiness Center at
Fort Hood in Texas, Nidal Hasan killed 13 and injured 44 in a
shooting motivated by his devotion to the Yemen-based Imam
Anwar al-Awlaki.
               CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 465

   International Terror Groups
   The U.S. Department of State lists ISIS, al-Qaeda, and
Hezbollah as groups who continue to plot against the United
States (figure 10.9). The FBI lists the following individuals on
the Terrorism Most Wanted list:
   #1: Abd Al Rahman Al Maghrebi, member of Al-Qaeda
known for committing acts of terrorism against the United
States
   #3: Sajid Mir, chief planner of attacks in Mumbai that killed
six Americans in the name of the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT)
terrorist organization
   #4: Abdullah Shair Khan, member of Taliban and Haqqani
Networks
   #6: Ahlam Ahmad Al-Tamimi, participated in 2001
terrorist attack of pizza restaurant in Jerusalem that killed 15
people, including to Americans
   #12: Liban Haji Mohamed, provided material support to
Al-Qaeda and is a member of the Al-Shabaab terrorist
organization
   #14: Raddulan Sahiron, committed kidnapping in the name
of terrorist organization Al Harakat al Islamiyyah, also known
as the Abu Sayyaf Group
   #15: Shaykh Aminullah, provided material support to Al-
Qaeda, the Taliban, and anti-coalition militias, part of
Pakistan-based terrorist group Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT)
   #16: Ahmad Abousamra, took multiple trips to Pakistan
466 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

and Yemen where he tried to get military training to kill
American soldiers overseas

   #18: Jehad Serwan Mostafa, member of al-Shabaab, a
Somalia-based terrorist organization

   #19: Jaber A. Elbaneh, provided material support to Al-
Qaeda

   #20: Abd Al Aziz Awda, one of the original founders and
the spiritual leader of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) and
has conspired to commit bombings, murders, extortions, and
money laundering

   Figure 10.9 Terrorist Group ISIS.
   Of these Top 20 on the FBI's Terrorism Most Wanted list,
notice there are only 11 listed here. That is because the other
9 are wanted for acts of domestic terrorism. Of those wanted
for international terrorism listed here, the groups identified
are Al-Qaeda, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT), Taliban, Haqqani, Al-
Shabaab, Al Harakat al Islamiyyah (also known as the Abu
               CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 467

Sayyaf Group), and Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ). Anti-
American and anti-Western sentiment is common across all
of these groups. For this reason, law enforcement must keep
watch on all of them at all times.

   Licenses and Attributions for Terrorism
   "Terrorism" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed under CC BY
4.0.
   Figure 10.4 The Twin Towers of the World Trade Center
burning before they collapsed on September 11, 2001,
National Park Service, Public domain, via Wikimedia
Commons.
   Figure 10.5 Far-right "Three Percenters" patrol
Emancipation Park at the Charlottesville "Unite the Right"
Rally, Anthony Crider, CC BY 2.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Figure 10.6 Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Texas,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Public domain, via
Wikimedia Commons.
   Figure 10.7 Oklahoma City bombing, usacetulsa, CC BY
2.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Figure 10.8 November 28, 2020 - St. Paul, Minn. -- A man
with an ANTIFA patch on the back of his vest arrives at the
Proud Boys, Trump, Stop The Steal rally, Chad Davis from
United States, CC BY 2.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Figure 10.9 Terrorist Group ISIS, State USA, CC BY-SA
4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
   Law Enforcement Response
   Regarding protecting Americans from terrorist attacks,
468 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

former President George W. Bush said, "On the morning of
9/11, we saw that the terrorists have to be right only once
to kill our people, while we have to be right every time to
stop them" (U.S. White House Office of the Press Secretary,
2006). Although terrorist attacks happened on U.S. soil prior
to September 11th, 2001, it was that catastrophic event that
changed the way in which this country began to combat terror.

   Changes Made as a Result of 9/11
   After the attacks on 9/11, the United States realized that
it needed to develop a much better national security strategy.
This centered on the creation of the Department of Homeland
Security. On October 8th, 2001, President George W. Bush
issued an executive order establishing the Office of Homeland
Security and the Homeland Security Council. The hope of
creating this new office was to make the fight against terrorism
more centralized and to provide coordination among agencies.
Their task is to prevent and disrupt future terrorist attacks,
protect Americans, key resources and the infrastructure, and
continue to strengthen the foundation to ensure long-term
success. Specifically, they provide "a concerted national effort
to prevent terrorist attacks within the United States, reduce
America's vulnerability to terrorism, and minimize the damage
and recover from the attacks that do occur" (Office of
Homeland Security, 2002).
   Also, with the passage of the Aviation and Transportation
Security Act in November 2001, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) was established. The TSA provides
               CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 469

security for all types of transportation; recruits, assesses, hires,
trains, and deploys security officers for commercial airports;
and includes screening of all checked luggage. The creation
of the TSA dramatically changed the traveling experience in
this country. Security screenings to the level they are today
(removing shoes, no liquids over a certain size, scanning
laptops, etc.) are all new since 9/11.

   After the September 11th attacks, Congress quickly
responded by passing the Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA PATRIOT Act) on October
26th, 2001. Under this Act, national security agencies were
given nearly unchecked freedom to monitor phone calls, text
messages, emails, and any other communications of anyone
they suspected of criminal behavior for any reason at all. For
this reason, there has been a fear of the encroachment on civil
liberties and freedoms given to U.S. citizens by the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights.

   Despite privacy concerns, the Act continues. The main
focus is on monitoring suspicious activity through the
collection of communications information and data;
conducting foreign intelligence investigations; controlling
money laundering, and funding and enhancing national
border security. President Barack Obama approved a four-year
extension of expiring portions of the USA PATRIOT Act in
May 2011. The provisions extended were the government's
authority to conduct roving wiretaps, their access to personal
470 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

records of terrorism suspects, and permitting the government
to investigate foreigners even when they have no known
affiliation with terrorist groups.

   On June 1, 2015, the USA PATRIOT Act expired. The
next day, the USA Freedom Act was enacted, restoring several
provisions of the original USA PATRIOT Act. However, the
National Security Agency's (NSA) controversial collection of
phone data of Americans who have no association with
terrorist groups was ended by a vote in the Senate.

   Current Threats
   The FBI is one of the agencies tasked with combating
terrorism in the United States. This includes all types of mass
murders, domestic terrorism, and international terrorism.
They report that threats have evolved since 9/11 and, out of
necessity, so has their approach. Specifically, they point to
"lone offenders" and the internet and social media as the
biggest cause for concern today (FBI, 2022). According to
their website,
   Lone offenders: Terrorist threats have evolved from large-
group conspiracies toward lone-offender attacks. These
individuals often radicalize online and mobilize to violence
quickly. Without a clear group affiliation or guidance, lone
offenders are challenging to identify, investigate, and disrupt.
The FBI relies on partnerships and tips from the public to
identify and thwart these attacks.
   The Internet and social media: International and domestic
violent extremists have developed an extensive presence on the
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 471

Internet through messaging platforms and online images,
videos, and publications. These facilitate the groups' ability to
radicalize and recruit individuals who are receptive to extremist
messaging. Social media has also allowed both international
and domestic terrorists to gain unprecedented, virtual access
to people living in the United States in an effort to enable
homeland attacks. The Islamic State of Iraq and ash-Sham
(ISIS), in particular, encourages sympathizers to carry out
simple attacks wherever they are located--or to travel to ISIS-
held territory in Iraq and Syria and join its ranks as foreign
fighters. This message has resonated with supporters in the
United States and abroad.

   As terrorism (domestic and international) continues to
evolve, so must the efforts to stop these horrific acts.

   Licenses and Attributions for Law Enforcement
Response

   "Law Enforcement Response" by Curt Sobolewski is
licensed under CC BY 4.0.

   Conclusion
   The massive impact crimes in this chapter are especially
frightening because they are so difficult to predict and prevent.
One of the goals of mass murder and terrorism is to make
everyday citizens live in fear. They want to disrupt our lives
to such a degree that we can no longer be happy unless we
give into their demands or adopt their political beliefs. The
frequent message regarding living in fear is that if we do that,
the terrorists and mass murderers win. Instead, we need to
472 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

keep living our lives, demonstrating our own values, loving our
families and friends, and working to make the world a better
place for everyone.

   Application Exercises
   Research right-wing or left-wing extremist groups in your
home town or area of interest.
   View the FBI's Terrorism Most Wanted list at
https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/terrorism/most-wanted and
compare those on the list in terms of alleged crimes, group
affiliations, and where they are now.
   Learn more about the Office of Homeland Security and
their coordinated efforts at https://www.dhs.gov/. Explore the
resources available on their website.
   Discussion Questions
   What are the different types of mass murders? What are the
factors that distinguish them?
   What are the definitions of terrorism and why, do you think,
is it important to be careful about what is actually labeled as
terrorism?
   What are the differences between the goals of right-wing
and left-wing of terrorist organizations?
   What is the general ideology of right-wing extremist groups?
How about left-wing extremist groups?
   Why, do you think, conspiracy theories are so popular
among the patriot movement? What is the harm in promoting
these theories?
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 473

   What can or should law enforcement do to prevent mass
murder and terrorism?

   Key Terms
   Fascism
   Mass murder
   Mass shooting
   Patriot movement
   Serial
   Serial murder
   Spree murder
   Terrorism
   White genocide
   Summary
   A mass murder is defined by the Federal Bureau of
Investigations (FBI) as an event in which three or more people
are killed (not including the killer). The types of mass murders
vary by the weapon used (such as a firearms, knives, explosives,
vehicles, or even airplanes), by the perpetrator (such as a lone
wolf, members of a cult, or religious extremists), by the
amount of time between killings (meaning all in one event or
with a "cooling-off period" between each murder), and also
by the motive (such as hate/bigotry, mental illness, religious
extremism, or politics). Serial is defined as it relates to a
criminal element as "repeatedly committing the same offense
and typically following a characteristic, predictable behavior
pattern." Serial murder is killing three or more people, but
with an emotional cooling-off period between each of the
474 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

murders. The cooling-off period between killings could be
anywhere from weeks to even years. Spree murder is, again,
killing three or more people, but in this case the time frame
can be up to 30 days allowing for some time between some
of the killings, and the murders typically occur during the
committing of an additional felony. Many contemporary mass
murder single events are also termed mass shootings because
of the use of firearms to kill or injure the greatest number
of people in the shortest amount of time. These killings all
happening in the same location and at the same time is what
distinguishes mass murder from serial killing or serial murder
and also from spree murder. These include shootings at
schools, workplaces, or public locations or events.

   Terrorist groups or individuals carry out violent acts against
innocent victims to send a specific message. Terrorism can be
international or domestic, and within domestic terrorism it
can be right-wing or left-wing. Both right-wing and left-wing
extremists want to bring down the government, but for
different reasons. The Right-Wing terrorist's goal is to fight
change from what they consider to be traditional American
values. In 2019, Congress passed the "Domestic Terrorism
Act" in which they stated, "White supremacists and other far-
right-wing extremists are the most significant domestic
terrorism threat facing the United States." The focus of many
of these groups is the concept of "white genocide," which
is the belief that Whites in the United States are being
systematically replaced and destroyed because of the Civil
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 475

Rights Act of 1964 and immigration policy. Left Wing
Extremists in the United States are associated with the goal of
overthrowing the government to replace the capitalist system
with communist or socialist societies. The left-wing terrorist
claims they are fighting for equality, human rights, animal
rights, and environmentalism by creating significant change in
society, albeit through violent means. Left-wing extremism has
also been called anarchist terrorism for their uprising against
the ruling class and claims to offer hope to those who are
marginalized by the wealthy and powerful.

   The attacks on September 11, 2001 were the largest
incidents of international terrorism in the history of the
United States. On October 8, 2001, President George W. Bush
issued an executive order establishing the Office of Homeland
Security and the Homeland Security Council. Their task is
to prevent and disrupt future terrorist attacks, protect
Americans, key resources and the infrastructure, and continue
to strengthen the foundation to ensure long-term success.
Also, with the passage of the Aviation and Transportation
Security Act in November 2001, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) was established. After the September
11th attacks, Congress quickly responded by passing the
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct
Terrorism Act (USA PATRIOT Act) on October 26, 2001.
Under this Act, national security agencies were given nearly
unchecked freedom to monitor phone calls, text messages,
476 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

emails, and any other communications of anyone they

suspected of criminal behavior for any reason at all. On June

1st, 2015, the USA PATRIOT Act expired. The next day, the

USA Freedom Act was enacted, restoring several provisions

of the original USA PATRIOT Act. The FBI is one of the

agencies tasked with combating terrorism in the United States.

This includes all types of mass murders, domestic terrorism,

and international terrorism. Specifically, they point to "lone

offenders" and the internet and social media as the biggest

cause for concern today. As terrorism (domestic and

international) continues to evolve, so must the efforts to stop

these horrific acts.

Resources

The FBI's Terrorism Most Wanted list is available at

https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/terrorism/most-wanted

The FBI provides guidance for How Citizens Can Protect

Themselves and Report Suspicious Activity at

https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/terrorism

Read more about efforts to counter terrorism by the U.S.

Department of State at https://www.state.gov/policy-issues/

countering-terrorism/

Licenses and Attributions for Conclusion

"Conclusion" by Curt Sobolewski is licensed under CC BY

4.0.

References

Annual country reports on terrorism, 22 U.S.C. §

2656f(d)(2)            https://uscode.house.gov/
                CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES | 477

view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-
title22-section2656f&num=0&edition=prelim

   Blumbergy, M. (1986). Comparative analysis of violent left-
and right-wing extremist groups in the United States. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of
Criminology in Atlanta, Georgia. https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/
virtual-library/abstracts/comparative-analysis-violent-left-
and-right-wing-extremist-groups

   Domestic Terrorism Act, 116 U.S.C. § 894 (2019).
https://www.congress.gov/116/bills/s894/
BILLS-116s894is.xml

   FBI. (2022). Terrorism. https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/
terrorism

   Gun Violence Archive [GVA]. (2022). Gun Violence
Archive. https://www.gunviolencearchive.org/

   Hoffman, B. (1998). Inside Terrorism. New York, NY:
Columbia University Press.

   Holmes, R. M., & Holmes, S. T. (2001). Mass murder in
the United States. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/mass-
murder-united-states

   Mother Jones - Mass Shootings Database, 1982 - 2022
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
1b9o6uDO18sLxBqPwl_Gh9bnhW-
ev_dABH83M5Vb5L8o/edit#gid=0

   Oxford English Dictionary [OED]. (n.d.). Oxford English
478 | CH.14 TERRORISM AND MASSIVE IMPACT CRIMES

Dictionary. Retrieved December 20, 2022 via Dictionary box
on Google.

   U.S. Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation
[FBI]. (2005). Serial murder: Multi-disciplinary perspectives
for investigators. https://www.fbi.gov/stats-services/
publications/serial-murder

   U.S. Secret Service National Threat Assessment Center
(NTAC). (2019). Protecting America's schools: A U.S. Secret
Service analysis of targeted school violence.
https://www.secretservice.gov/sites/default/files/2020-04/
Protecting_Americas_Schools.pdf

   U.S. White House Office of the Press Secretary. (2006,
September 7). President Bush discusses progress in the global
war on terror [Press release]. https://georgewbush-
whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2006/09/
20060907-2.html
     CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 479

15.

CH. 15 TREATMENT AND
PREVENTION OF CRIME

   Jeff Bry

                               Ch. 15
                Treatment and Prevention of Crime
   Introduction
   Throughout this textbook we have examined and discussed
aspects of crime, specifically criminal behavior and its
correlates. In this chapter we will explore approaches to
address criminal behavior. The two main approaches this
chapter will address include prevention of crime and
treatment of crime. Prevention of crime focuses on risk
factors of potential criminal behavior and addressing and
hopefully reducing these risk factors. Treatment of crime
focuses on known offenders and addressing deterring and/or
treatment of the behaviors/issues that create crime for the
individual.
   "An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure."
   Benjamen Franklin.
480 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   Photo source pixabay.com
   Prevention
   There are numerous approaches to prevention of crime, not
all of which are criminal justice-based programs. While these
programs may be designed to address multiple issues (besides
crime), they have been found to have a significant impact on
crime as well. Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development
https://www.blueprintsprograms.org/about/ is a repository
for many of the most promising prevention programs across
the country. This website highlights many promising and well-
known prevention programs, including their outcome
measures and statistics. Using the Blueprints for Healthy
Youth Development, we will examine some of the most
promising approaches to create healthy youth, with a focus on
prevention of crime. Keep in mind some of these programs are
designed to address other risk factors (such as healthy infants
and toddlers), but they may have substantial impacts on crime
also.
   Youth Mentoring/Big Brother Big Sister Programs
                 CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 481

   Youth Mentoring has been around for decades, it takes a few
forms and is used with various populations. Youth mentoring
is one of the most consistently successful prevention programs
available. Funding is consistently an issue with programs,
mentoring has passed the "test of time" in terms of consistency
and longevity. The most common approach (or at least most
often considered) is pairing a prosocial adult with an "at-risk"
youth. The term at-risk is fairly broad, but may include issues
such as poverty, school issues, lack of positive male or female
role models and early risky behavior such as shoplifting,
truancy, etc. The basic concept of youth mentoring is to pair
the at-risk youth with a positive, prosocial adult. This adult/
youth relationship is about spending quality time together,
which generally includes low-cost, no-cost activities the youth
can continue once the relationship ends. Activities could
include doing homework together, shooting baskets, being
outside and exploring nature, or any other positive activity that
people generally do together. The main focus of mentoring is
to provide a positive adult for the youth to spend time with,
build a positive relationship and learn from. Activities can be
diverse and may depend on the interest level of the adult and
the youth, but there is a strong focus on low cost to allow
the activity to continue when the match ends. Teaching and
modeling social skills, proper behavior in social settings and
how to deal with conflict and peers are examples of issues
potentially addressed in this relationship. Having a positive
482 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

adult to ask questions of, interact with and share issues/
concerns is also an important aspect of mentoring.

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: Which prevention or treatment program did you
find the most promising? What aspects of the program and/or
outcomes did you appreciate?
   "The Big Brothers- Big Sisters program caught my
eye. I find this program promising mentoring kids and
steering them out of trouble. This program's positive
effects on kids' futures shocked me. Some of the positive
impacts this program had on kids are a 46% reduction
in drug use, 27% less alcohol use, fewer acts of violence,
and better outcomes in academics, family engagement,
attitudes, and performance."
   While youth mentoring does have a small cost to it (roughly
$1,000 - $1500 per mentee per year), the benefits are
substantial and seem to far outweigh the cost. Selection and
training of mentors is fairly time consuming and also may be
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 483

somewhat expensive, including background checks and initial
and ongoing training. As mentees are children and adolescents,
safeguards must be put in place to ensure they are placed with
a safe adult mentor.

   According to youth.gov https://youth.gov/youth-topics/
mentoring/benefits-mentoring-young-people there are many
benefits of youth mentoring. Some of the most significant
include:

   -Increased high school graduation rates
   -Lower high school dropout rates
   -Healthier relationships and lifestyle choices
   -Better attitude about school
   -Higher college enrollment rates and higher educational
aspirations
   -Enhanced self-esteem and self-confidence
   -Improved behavior, both at home and at school
   -Stronger relationships with parents, teachers, and peers
   -Improved interpersonal skills
   -Decreased likelihood of initiating drug and alcohol use
(MENTOR, 2009; Cavell, DuBois, Karcher, Keller, &
Rhodes, 2009)
   Annual Cost per Youth: The cost to support a single
youth in the BBBS program is typically between $1,000 and
$1,500 per year. This cost covers recruitment, training, and
support of mentors, as well as ongoing supervision of the
mentor-mentee relationship.
   Citations:
484 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   Public/Private Ventures Study (1995): A study by
Public/Private Ventures found that youth in BBBS programs
were 52% less likely to skip school, 46% less likely to begin
using illegal drugs, and 27% less likely to begin using alcohol
compared to their peers.

   Big Brothers Big Sisters of America: The national
organization provides data on the effectiveness and cost of its
programs, showing that every $1 invested in BBBS yields
approximately $3 in benefits to society.

   From Author Jeff Bry:
   "Early in my career I worked at a private nonprofit
in a management role. My duties involved program
management and grant writing for a number of
programs, one of which was a youth mentoring program.
Part of my job was to provide initial training to youth
mentors, as well as quarterly training throughout the
year. We did pay our mentors a wage ($6-7 dollars an
hour) and also provided paid training. Initial training
was about 16 hours, while monthly staff meetings and
quarterly training involved an additional 25-30 hours
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 485

per year. This was a large obligation and was too much
for some people. They really wanted to work with kids,
but did not feel they could handle all of the initial and
ongoing training. Some people would go through the
initial training and decide the work was not for them, or
some did not pass the background checks to be a mentor.
My point is that mentoring is a very rewarding pursuit,
but it takes a large commitment and a significant amount
of dedication to be successful. In my experience, many
mentors went on to careers in probation, education,
human services etc. Others found that working with
people (or perhaps children specifically) was not for
them. In my opinion that is a good thing, as they could
pivot their education and approach in a different
direction before beginning a full-time position with
kids."

   Picture source pixabay.com
   Generation PMTO
   Generation PMTO is a family training program designed
486 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

to provide family management skills to reduce antisocial and
problematic behavior in children. Generation PMTO is a
group of theory based training interventions designed to
improve parenting, that can be implemented in a variety of
family contexts. Programming is designed to teach effective
parenting and family management skills with the intent to
reduce antisocial and problematic behavior in kids ages 3-16.
This programming is delivered in individual and group
formats, with programming provided in diverse environments
(homes, schools, clinics, homeless shelters, churches, etc.).
Length and duration of programming depends upon the needs
of the family, including spacing of programming to allow
families to practice what they are learning.

   The focus of Generation PMTO is to teach and coach
parents in effective parenting, including limit setting and
discipline, effective parenting strategies, skill encouragement,
monitoring, problem solving, and creating a positive
environment. Outcomes of the program include:

   -Reductions in coercive parenting and negative
reinforcement at posttest

   -Increases in positive parenting, effective parenting
practices, and adaptive functioning at posttest

   -Decreases in boys' noncompliance at posttest
   -Reduced maternal depression and child internalizing and
externalizing at 30-month follow-up
   -Reductions in poverty and greater rise out of poverty at
30-month follow-up
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 487

   -Lower levels and lower growth in teacher-rated
delinquency at nine-year follow-up

   -Reductions in average levels (but not growth) of deviant
peer association

   -Lower rates of arrest and delayed age at first arrest at nine-
year follow-up

   -Lower rates of police arrests among mothers at nine-year
follow-up

   -Increases in socioeconomic status levels among mothers at
nine-year follow-up

   Program Benefits (per individual): $2,475
Program Costs (per individual): $1,352
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$1,123
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
69%

   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
488 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.

   Life Skills Training (LST)
   Life Skills Training (LST) is a universal prevention program
designed to be delivered at the middle school level targeting
use of gateway drugs (alcohol, tobacco, marijuana) and also
violence. LST is a three-year prevention program, providing
youth with skill sets in personal self-management, social skills
and refusal/social resistance skills. LST provides 15 "core"
sessions in the first year, ten books sessions in the second year
and five boosters in the third year. Optional violence
prevention sessions are also available each year, three sessions
in year one, two sessions in year two and three. Sessions are
provided by classroom teachers. Each unit in the curriculum
has a major goal, measurable student objectives, lessons and
classroom activities. The overarching goal of LST is to provide
skill training for overall competence and concentration on
refusal/resistance skills to resist pressure to drink, smoke or
use illicit drugs. Personal Self-Management Skills components
provide skill building in examining self-image and how it effect
behavior, everyday decision making, goal setting and progress,
problem situations and methods to reduce stress and anxiety.
   LST instructors use interactive teaching approaches to
deliver the messaging, including demonstration and behavioral
rehearsal. Providing honest feedback and reinforcement
approaches in and out of the classroom are encouraged also.
Year two and three of programming are provided as reinforcers
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 489

to year one of programming. As the students age and grow
(and challenges may change and/or increase), programming
and skills are cited to address current issues students may be
facing. Outcomes of the program include:

   -Reduced cigarette smoking at posttest,
   -Reduced cigarette smoking and marijuana use at the three-
year follow-up,
   -Reduced polydrug use at the 6.5-year follow-up.
   -Reduced delinquency at posttest,
   -Reduced frequent fighting at posttest.
   -Lower substance use initiation at 1.5 years after baseline,
   -Lower cigarette initiation at 5.5 years after baseline,
   -Slower growth rates in cigarette initiation and drunkenness
at 5.5 years after baseline.
   Program Benefits (per individual): $1,419
Program Costs (per individual): $105
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$1,314
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
63%
   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
490 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.

   Multisystemic Therapy (MST)
   Multisystemic Therapy (MST) is a robust family and
community-based treatment that examines and addresses
multiple causes of serious antisocial behavior in youth
offenders. MST focuses on improving the real-world
functioning of young offenders by making changes to their
natural environments, including school, home and their
neighborhood. The approach concentrates on reducing
antisocial behavior while improving prosocial behavior and
their attributes. Therapy is provided to youth and their
families to address the causes of delinquency on a
comprehensive, individualized basis. Utilizing the strengths of
each system (school, family, neighborhood) to enact change,
MST addresses the many factors that are causative to
delinquency across each of the key systems the youth are
affected by. According to the needs of the youth and their
family therapy is varied and amended. Therapy sessions are
more intense at the start of treatment (daily if needed), then
begin to taper off (perhaps as infrequently as one meeting a
week) over the course of the treatment (3-5 months). Program
outcomes include:
                 CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 491

   -Decreased youth behavior problems
   -Improved family relations
   -Lower recidivism rates (re-arrested at least once) through
4-year follow-up.
   -Decreased youth internalizing symptoms
   -Increased social competence
   -Decreased out-of-home placements.
   -Reduced externalizing problems
   -Reduced absenteeism in school.
   -Reduced externalizing
   -Reduced oppositional defiant disorder
   -Reduced conduct disorder
   -Reduced property offenses
   -Increased relationship quality.
   -Reduced aggression and delinquency at posttest
   -Reduced psychopathic traits at posttest
492 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   -Reduced nonviolent offenses at the 18-month follow-up
assessment.

   Program Benefits (per individual): $25,554
Program Costs (per individual): $8,471
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$17,083
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
99%

   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 493

   In a Student's Own Words
   Question: Which prevention or treatment program did you
find the most promising? What aspects of the program and/or
outcomes did you appreciate?
   "Some of the programs that really spoke to me were
the Multisystemic Therapy (MST) program and Nurse-
Family Partnership program. The Multisystemic
Therapy program is a juvenile crime prevention program
made to improve a child's natural environment while
simultaneously decreasing anti-social behavior. I believe
that providing support and treatments as young as
possible can play a part in preventing specific behaviors.
This program targets children between the ages of 12
to 18, where kids and teenagers are the most
impressionable. I share similar reasonings for both
programs. The Nurse-Family Partnership can be a great
support for mothers, and can help prevent child abuse or
neglect."
494 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   Family Foundations
   Family Foundations is a prevention program with
foundational principles in childbirth education that is
designed to enhance coparenting quality among couples
expecting their first child. The program is designed to run once
a week with each two-hour session administered to groups of
6-10 couples. Programming includes four prenatal and four
postnatal sessions. Sessions are facilitated by a male-female
team of trainers and utilize the Family Foundations
curriculum. The female educators are childbirth educators and
male leaders have diverse experience including training and
work with families and leading groups.
   Programming focuses on coparenting approaches and
relationships of coparents, rather than romantic relationships
or parenting qualities. Programming concentrates on helping
parents to learn to work supportively, consistently addressing
conflict management, problem solving, emotional self-
management, communication and mutual support strategies.
Parenting approaches including understanding and
promoting attachment, children's self-regulation and
understanding temperament in their children. The four
prenatal classes provide insight to the couples regarding
themes and skills, while the four postnatal classes provide
follow up information to the themes once the couples have
experience as parents and coparents. Delivery methods are
psychoeducational and skills-based, providing presentations,
written worksheets, videotaped vignettes of other families and
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 495

group discussions. Couple communication and skills are a very
important component of these trainings. Outcomes include:

   -Fathers' coparental support, parenting-based closeness, and
parent-child dysfunctional interaction

   -Mothers' coparental support, depressive symptoms, and
anxiety

   -Father-reported infant soothability
   -Child duration of orienting
   -Mothers' coparenting competition, coparenting
triangulation, warmth to partner, parenting positivity,
coparenting inclusion, and negative communication
   -Fathers' coparenting competition, coparenting
triangulation, warmth to partner, parenting positivity,
coparenting warmth, and parenting negativity
   -Observed child self-soothing
   -Parent-reported parental stress, parental efficacy,
coparenting quality, parenting overreactivity, parenting
laxness, and physical punishment
   -Mother-reported child total behavior problems,
externalizing problems, aggression, and social competence
   -Mother-reported child internalizing problems and
attention/hyperactivity (boys only)
   -Greater observational family interaction and co-parenting
at posttest and long-term follow-up
   -Less parent-reported family violence at posttest
   -Greater parent-reported child soothability, duration of
496 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

orientation (i.e., attention span), and night-time sleeping at
posttest

   -Fewer parent-reported child internalizing behaviors at
long-term follow-up

   -Fewer parent-reported child nighttime wakings at long-
term follow-up

   -Higher observer-rated positive affect and lower negative
affect at seven-year follow-up

   -Lower observer-rated physical aggression toward objects at
seven-year follow-up

   -Greater observer-rated affection for mothers and fathers at
seven-year follow-up

   -Lower teacher-rated externalizing at seven-year follow-up
   -No specific cost/benefit analysis is provided for this
program.
   ParentCorps
   ParentCorps is a program designed for pre-kindergarten
students in schools and educational centers. These students are
primarily from low-income communities and are children of
color. The program is designed to assist important adults in the
children's lives (especially parents, caregivers and teachers) to
create safe, secure, nurturing and predictable environments at
home and in the classroom for the children. These important
adults are also taught relational and communication
approaches, especially between the parents and the teachers.
The delivery of ParentCorps includes three main components;
a parenting program for the families and their pre-
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 497

kindergarten students, professional learning for pre-
kindergarten teachers and support staff and a social-emotional
learning curriculum (classroom based) for the pre-
kindergarten students. Program outcomes include:

   -Improved Teacher-rated child behavior problems
composite (internalizing, externalizing, and overall adaptive
behavior)

   -Improved self-rated effective parenting practices
   -Higher standardized test scores at the end of kindergarten
   -Higher teacher-rated academic performance at the end of
second grade
   -Improved teacher-rated child internalizing and
externalizing problems at the end of second grade
   -Parent and teacher-rated effective parenting practices at the
end of kindergarten
   -No specific cost/benefit analysis is provided for this
program.
498 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   Picture source Pixabay.com
   The Nurse-Family Partnership (NFP)
   The Nurse-Family Partnership (NFP) is a program that
begins extremely early, beginning during pregnancy and
continues through the child's second birthday. Nurses work
with low-income expectant mothers who are having their first
child. The focus of the program is to improve the outcomes of
pregnancy, improve the development and health of the child
and also improve the mother's life-course development
through skill building and assistance from the nurse during
home visits. The visits are generally once every two weeks
lasting 60-90 minutes, the nurses are available for phone
consultation as needed by the mother.
   Aspects of the program include better prenatal care and
nutrition for the mother, while also working to reduce or
eliminate harmful substances such as cigarettes, drugs and
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 499

alcohol. Skill building in areas such as the stages of pregnancy
(including normal body and other changed) that accompany
pregnancy. Other instruction specific to appropriate well-
being and exercise, rest and good personal hygiene related to
obstetrical health are also provided by the nurse to the
expectant mother. The nurse also supports the expectant
mother by preparing her for labor, delivery and methods to
care for the newborn. Once the baby is born the nurse assists
and mentors the mother on proper approaches to care for and
support her new baby. These approaches may address issues
with breastfeeding, how to properly clean and care for her
baby, what and when to feed her child solid foods, how to
respond when her child is sick, also appropriate limit setting
and parenting approaches. As these mothers may lack a formal
and informal support system other women enjoy, the nurse
becomes a vital mentor and in some sense partner in the raising
of her child. As the child grows and changes, the nurse plays
a vital role in assisting mom with changes to her child and
methods to provide what her child needs to thrive and be
successful. Outcomes of the program include:

   -Less unintended subsequent pregnancies, and the interval
between first and second births

   -Less domestic violence among married or cohabiting
women

   -Increased maternal employment and use of welfare and
food stamps
500 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   -Less health-care visits and hospitalization for injuries and
illnesses for child

   -Less emotional vulnerability, particularly among children
born to mothers with low psychological resources

   -Improved language and mental development, particularly
among children born to mothers with low psychological
resources

   -Less child abuse and neglect, and behavioral problems
caused by use of alcohol or drugs

   -Improved intellectual functioning and receptive to
language (child)

   -Less behavioral problems at age 6
   -Improved relationship quality of mothers with current
partners
   -Less children's use of substances and internalizing mental
health problems at age 12
   -Among children, less arrests and convictions
   -Improved prenatal health, such as hypertension and use of
cigarettes
   -Improved responsive interactions with child
   -Improved parent social support
   Program Benefits (per individual): $16,993
Program Costs (per individual): $12,437
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$4,556
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
64%
                 CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 501

   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.

   From Author Jeff Bry:
   "Before beginning my full-time teaching career, my
last position was as Health Promotion and Protection
Director for a county Public Health department. One
of the programs we offered was a family home visiting
502 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

program that was part of the Nurse-Family Partnership
program. I learned much from the nurses who worked
in this program, one of the things that most sticks out
to me is how dedicated they were to their clients. Many
of these clients were young single women without much
resources, not much assistance or help from parents or
other people in their lives. These nurses became
surrogate mothers to these young women, answering
numerous questions about delivery, what to do when the
baby had a fever, breastfeeding and a variety of other
issues. They also provided assistance regarding writing a
resume, applying and interviewing for employment, they
were also a listening ear when their clients needed it.
This is an excellent program with substantial tangible
outcomes, as well as intangible outcomes that seem as
beneficial."

   Positive Action
   Positive Action (PA) is a program incorporated in the
schools that attempts to bring about school-wide climate
change and provides a detailed curriculum. Programming is
provided 2-4 times per week with approximately 140 15
minute lessons for students in grades K-6 and 82 15-20 minute
sessions for grades 7 and 8. Lessons are specific and scripted
for each grade level, all material are provided to teach the
curriculum including posters, music, games, puppets, and
other lesson materials. Students are also provided with
journals, activity books and other lesson aids. Content for the
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 503

program is included in six units and they are the background
of the program. The first unit teaches the basic philosophy
of the program and the Thoughts-Actions-Feelings about Self
Circle for the groups. Instruction is provided to the basics
of the nature and issues of positive and negative actions/
behaviors and their consequences. Units 2-6 teach the positive
actions for the social, emotional, physical and intellectual
areas. There are two school-wide climate development kids
(one for elementary, one for secondary) and a counselor's kit.
The information provided through the climate development
and counselor kits provide reinforcement to the classroom
curriculum by allows the entire school to coordinate efforts
and messaging, while also reinforcing positive actions.
Outcomes of the program include:

   -Improved school supportiveness
   -Improved school quality at one-year post-intervention.
   -School-wide reductions in grade retention, suspensions
and absenteeism and school-wide improvements in reading
and math after three program years, and these results were
maintained through one-year post-implementation
   -Lower likelihood at fifth grade to have engaged in self-
reported substance use, violence, and sexual activity.
   -Better youth social interaction skills
   -Higher socio-emotional and character development at
grades 5 and 8
   -Lower self-reported substance use at grades 5 and 8
   -Lower self-reported violence at grades 5 and 8, lower
504 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

parent-reported bullying at grade 8, and lower self-reported
bullying at grades 5 and 8

   -Lower depression and anxiety at grade 8
   -Lower unhealthy food consumption at grade 8
   -Lower school-level disciplinary referrals and suspensions at
grade 8
   -Better reading test scores at grade 8.
   -Lower disaffection with learning and higher teacher-rated
academic motivation at grade 8
   -Lower normative support for aggression at grade 8
   -Higher life satisfaction at grade 8
   -Better social interaction skills
   -Higher school and peer self-esteem at grade 8.
   Program Benefits (per individual): $31,159
Program Costs (per individual): $1,063
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$30,096
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
94%
   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 505

other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.

   Treatment
   Treatment Foster Care Oregon (TFCO)
   Treatment Foster Care Oregon (TFCO) is an alternative
and cost-effective option to group and residential treatment,
detention and other forms of incarceration and hospitalization
for adolescents who have chronic problems/issues. These
problems generally include issues such as chronic antisocial
behavior, emotional disturbances and delinquency. Families
are recruited in communities to provide this service, although
selection and training are fairly intense. Families are recruited,
trained and closely supervised to provide TFCO services,
where adolescents are placed in their homes to remain
members of the community. While these adolescents may have
enhanced personal and psychological issues, extensive training
and resources are provided to the families that provide this
service. Families are provided extensive training to provide
clear and consistent limits with follow-through of
consequences. Families are also taught to use positive
reinforcement for appropriate behavior and to provide a
mentoring relationship with the adolescent. Positive peers and
peer environments are also stressed in the training, to provide
supervision and mentoring of positive behavior and outcomes.
506 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

TFCO uses a behavioral modification program based upon
a three-level point system with structured daily feedback. As
youth earn points, they are given more freedom and autonomy
from adult supervision. Individual and family therapy is also
provided, case managers assist the families with providing this
service and provide supervision and support through daily
phone calls and weekly foster parent group meetings.

   In a Student's Own Words:
   Question: Which prevention or treatment program did you
find the most promising? What aspects of the program and/or
outcomes did you appreciate?
   "The Treatment Foster Care Oregon program caught
my eye the most. This program is described as a
therapeutic foster care program to reunite families and
reduce delinquency and teen violence. The program also
increases prosocial behavior and participation in
prosocial activities through behavioral parent training
and support for foster parents, family therapy for
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 507

biological parents, skills training and supportive therapy
for youth, and school-based behavioral interventions and
academic support. This program stuck out to me because
it appears to have good morals and has an overall great
goal. Teens in the foster care program are statistically
more likely to lead lives of crime and delinquency because
of the trauma and difficult background they come from.
This program's goal, to offer therapeutic sessions to
reduce teen violence and delinquency, seems like a great
thing for any teens in the foster care program. Also, the
fact that the program aims to reunite families is amazing.
The program seems great for reducing current crime and
delinquency in teens and the likelihood of it happening
in the future."

   There is a learning emphasis on teaching the adolescent
social and interpersonal skills and encouragement to
participate in sports, leisure activities and hobbies. Placement
in the foster homes in generally for about six months.
Aftercare services remain in effect for as long as the parents
wish, but usually last about a year. Outside of the benefits of
living in a therapeutic setting, living in a home with a family
is also a very large benefit. The adolescent gets to be part of a
family, attend a local school and participate in all a community
has to offer. This is generally a stark contrast to living in a
treatment facility or in an institutional setting. Outcomes of
this program include:

   -fewer days in locked settings at 12 months post-baseline
508 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

   -fewer criminal referrals at 12 months post-baseline
   -lower caregiver-reported delinquency at 12 months post-
baseline-
   -more time spent on homework at 12 months post-baseline
   -fewer days spent in locked settings at 24-months
   -fewer criminal referrals at 24-months
   -and lower self-reported delinquency at 24-months.
   -lower negative peer influence and frequency of problem
behaviors at three months
   -more time living with parents or relatives, fewer arrests, and
fewer criminal activities at 12 months
   -lower use of tobacco, marijuana, and other drugs at 18
months
   -lower violent offending at 24 months.
   -fewer pregnancies through 24 months
   -lower substance use through 24 months
   -lower depression and psychiatric symptoms through 24
months
   -lower depressive symptoms and arrests in young
adulthood.
   Program Benefits (per individual): $40,561
Program Costs (per individual): $9,443
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$31,118
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
93%
   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
                CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 509

All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.

   Multisystemic Therapy-Problem Sexual Behavior
   Multisystemic Therapy (MST) is an intensive and specific
family and community-based treatment approach that seeks to
address the causative elements of serious antisocial behavior
across the key systems which adolescents are embedded
(family, school, peers, neighborhood). MST for sexual
offenders (MST-PSB) provides a focus on elements of an
adolescent's social environment that are functionally related
to the problem sexual behavior, including reduction of parent
and youth denial about the sexual offenses and their
consequences. MST-PSB also promotes the development of
friendships and age-appropriate sexual experiences. MST-PSB
also promotes changing and modification of the adolescent's
belief system, perspective-taking skills and attitudes that may
have contributed to sexual offending. The MST-PSB approach
510 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

is modified to each individual family, which includes family
therapy for each family. The adolescent is also provided
individual therapy for a period of 5-7 months. Therapists have
3-5 families on their caseloads and a rotation of the care team is
available to respond to issues 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Outcomes of this program include:

   -less rearrests for sexual crimes (12.5% vs. 75%)
   -reduced mother, father and youth psychiatric symptoms
   -reduced youth behavior problems
   -improved family functioning
   -improved peer relationships
   -improved school grades
   -less person and property crimes
   -significantly less arrests for any crimes, sexual crimes, and
non-sexual crimes
   -significantly less days in detention facilities, incarceration,
and on probation
   -significantly less family civil suits relating to family
instability
   -significantly less deviant sexual interests and risk
   -significantly less delinquency at 18 and 24 months
   -significantly less substance use
   -significantly less youth-reported externalizing
   -significantly less out-of-home placement
   Program Benefits (per individual): $22,991
Program Costs (per individual): $14,794
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
                 CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 511

$8,197
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
59%

   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.

   Drug Courts Baltimore City
   The Baltimore City Drug Treatment Court is a drug court
designed for district and circuit court cases that are under the
auspices of the Baltimore City Division of Parole and
Probation. In terms of adjudication, District Court cases
handle misdemeanor charges, the Circuit Court handles
felony cases. In each court tracks of entry into the Drug Court
occur post-conviction. In summary clients enter the program
generally as a condition of their probation. During the
evaluation phase of the Drug Court, clients may also be
assigned based upon pre-conviction (diversion) methods. If
512 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

such is the case, clients typically enter the program
conditionally, if they successfully complete the program their
charges will be dropped.

   Drug Court participants must be at least 18 years old, live
in Baltimore City and must not have any prior or current
violent offenses. Public defenders make defendants aware of
the availability of drug courts, while the state's attorney
ensures client eligibility and meets with public defenders to
ascertain which clients would be best served by the Drug
Court. Clients assigned to the Drug Court complete both the
Psychopathy Checklist and the Addiction Severity Index.
Additionally, information is collected about each client's
medical history, drug history, employment history and status,
and aspects of family and social relationships. The Drug Court
judge makes the final decision regarding which clients are
accepted into the program and which are not.

   Drug Court programming includes intensive supervision as
well as drug testing, treatment and judicial monitoring over
a period of two years. Probation officers work closely with
participants and conduct two home visits per month and at
least three visits outside the home per month. Drug Court
clients must also provide verification of employment once a
month. As clients move through the phases of the drug court,
supervision and drug testing becomes less frequent. Most
clients (who successfully finish the program) do so after a
period of two to three years. Clients also receive substance
abuse treatment based upon their needs. These treatment
                 CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 513

approaches include outpatient counseling, methadone
maintenance, inpatient care and transitional housing.

   Judicial status hearings are held to allow a Drug Court judge
to follow and track a client's progress. Hearings are held once
every two weeks and include sanctions from the judge for
noncompliance and/or lack of progress or effort with their
treatment. Sanctions include increased status hearings, drug
screenings and probation visits. An example of a severe
sanction is probation revocation, where the client is
institutionalized. Program outcomes include:

   -Reduced likelihood of rearrest, in interim
   -Reduced number of new arrests and new charges, at
12-year follow-up
   No data is available regarding the cost/benefits of the
program.
   Functional Family Therapy (FFT)
   Functional Family Therapy (FFT) is a short-term family
based therapeutic program for delinquent youth who are at
significant risk of institutionalization. The program also
involved the youth's families. FFT is centered around
improving within-family communication, attributions, and
supportiveness, while working to decrease dysfunctional
patterns of behavior and negativity. Each family is assessed for
risk and given a protective family profile, while programming
targets youth compliance, parenting skills, and a wide-reaching
arena of cognitive, emotional and behavioral domains.
   Based upon the therapeutic nature of the program, it is
514 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

crucial FFT be implemented by a team of 3-8 Master's level
therapists, consisting of caseloads of 10-12 families. These
therapists should be supervised by a licensed clinical therapist.
Program outcomes include:

   -Reduced new drug charges
   -Reduced delinquent adjudications
   Program Benefits (per individual): $11,282
Program Costs (per individual): $4,084
Net Present Value (Benefits minus Costs, per individual):
$7,197
Measured Risk (odds of a positive Net Present Value):
72%
   Source: Washington State Institute for Public Policy
All benefit-cost ratios are the most recent estimates published
by The Washington State Institute for Public Policy for
Blueprint programs implemented in Washington State. These
ratios are based on a) meta-analysis estimates of effect size and
b) monetized benefits and calculated costs for programs as
delivered in the State of Washington. Caution is recommended
in applying these estimates of the benefit-cost ratio to any
other state or local area. They are provided as an illustration
of the benefit-cost ratio found in one specific state. When
feasible, local costs and monetized benefits should be used to
calculate expected local benefit-cost ratios. The formula for
this calculation can be found on the WSIPP website.
   Summary
   While use of jail and prison remain popular approaches to
     CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME | 515

dealing with crime, prevention and treatment offer a

substantial cost savings and "hope" for prevent and reduce

delinquency and crime. The programs and approaches

discussed in this chapter have been found to be "best practices"

in terms of preventing and treating criminal behavior. While

not each of these programs are specifically crime programs,

their approaches provide multiple benefits in terms of

treatment and prevention of crime.

References

Blakely, C. H., Menon, R., & Jones, D. J. (1995). Project

BELONG: Final report. College Station, TX: Texas A&M

University, Public Policy Research Institute. (PDF, 2 pages)

Cavell, T., DuBois, D., Karcher, M., Keller, T., & Rhodes,

J. (2009). Strengthening mentoring opportunities for at-risk

youth. Retrieved from http://www.mentoring.org/

downloads/mentoring_1233.pdf

(PDF, 4 pages)

Jekielek, S., Moore K. A., & Hair, E. C. (2002). Mentoring

programs and youth development: A synthesis. Washington,

DC:  Child       Trends.            Retrieved   from

http://www.mentorwalk.org/documents/mentoring-

synthesis.pdf

(PDF, 68 pages)

Herrera, C., Grossman, J. B., Kauh, T. J., Feldman, A. F.,

McMaken, J., & Jucovy L. Z. (2007). Making a difference

in schools: The Big Brothers Big Sisters school-based mentoring

impact study. Public/Private Ventures. Retrieved from
516 | CH. 15 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF CRIME

http://files.bigsister.org/file/Making-a-Difference-in-
Schools.pdf

   (PDF, 148 pages)
   LoSciuto, L., Rajala, A. K., Townsend, T. N., Taylor, A.
S. (1996). An outcome evaluation of across ages: An
intergenerational mentoring approach to drug prevention.
Journal of Adolescent Research, 11(1), 116-129.
   MENTOR. (2009). Elements of effective practice in
mentoring. Third Edition. Retrieved from
http://www.mentoring.org/downloads/mentoring_1222.pdf
   (PDF, 20 pages)
   Rhodes, J. & DuBois, D.L. (2006) Understanding and
facilitating youth mentoring. Social Policy Report: Giving
Child and Youth Development Knowledge Away. Retrieved
from http://www.srcd.org/sites/default/files/documents/
20-3_youth_mentoring.pdf
   (PDF, 20 pages)
   Tierney, J. P., Grossman, J. B., & Resch, N. L. (1995).
Making a difference: An impact study of Big Brothers Big
Sisters. Public/Private Venture. (PDF, 71 pages)
   U.S. Department of Labor. Office of Disability
Employment Policy. (n.d.). Cultivating leadership: Mentoring
youth with disabilities. Retrieved from http://www.dol.gov/
odep/pubs/fact/cultivate.htm
         SOURCES | 517

SOURCES

This is where you can write your sources/references.
