Introduction to Intellectual Property Law
INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
LAW

JASON RANTANEN
University of Iowa College of Law

Iowa City, Iowa
Introduction to Intellectual Property Law Copyright  2024 by Jason Rantanen is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Original matter copyright Jason Rantanen (2023) and is available for reuse under a CC BY-NC-SA license. CC BY-NC-SA license
does not extend to works of others used with permission. One Day on Design from Sarah Burstein, Sarah Wasserman Rajec, &
Andres Sawicki, Patent Law: An Open Access Casebook, used with permission. No copyright is claimed in works by the United States
or state governments.
CONTENTS

Introduction                                                            1

1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES                                  2

International News Service v. The Associated Press (1918)               4

2. THE NORMATIVE OBJECTIVES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS               13

John Locke, Two Treatises of Government Book II (1689)                  14

Jeremy Bentham, Manual of Political Economy (~1790-95)                  16

James Madison, FederalistPaperNo.43 (1788)                              17

Thomas Jefferson, Letter to Isaac McPherson (August 13, 1813)           18

U.S. Constitution, Article 1, Section 8, Clause 8                       19

3. PATENTS                                                              20

U.S. Patent No. RE 39,247                                               23

Bowman v. Monsanto Co. (2013)                                           35

4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY                                      41

Manning and another v. Cape Ann Isinglass & Glue Co. and others (1883)  45

In re Lister (Fed. Cir. 2009)                                           47

5. NONOBVIOUSNESS                                                       56

Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. (Fed. Cir. 2016)           58

6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS                                            77

Nautilus, Inc. v. Biosig Instruments, Inc. (2014)                       79
7. DISCLOSURE                                                             86

U.S. Patent No. 317, 676                                                  87

The Incandescent Lamp Patent (1895)                                       92

Amgen v. Sanofi (2023)                                                    100

8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT                                    110

U.S. Patent No. 4,677,798                                                 112

Phillips v. AWH Corporation (Fed. Cir. 2005)                              121

INTERLUDE: PATENT ELIGIBLE SUBJECT MATTER                                 139

9. DESIGN PATENTS                                                         142

Burstein, Rajec & Sawicki, One Day on Designs                             143

A. Scope                                                                  144

B. The Requirements of Patentability                                      158

10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND  173

FIXATION

Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service (1991)                176

11. THE IDEA/EXPRESSION DICHOTOMY                                         188

Baker v. Selden (1879)                                                    190

17 U.S.C. 102. Subject matter of copyright: In general                   195

12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS                       196

Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid (1989)                        198

Aalmuhammed v. Lee (9th Cir. 2000)                                        210

13. INTRODUCTION TO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT                                220

Nichols v. Universal Pictures (2nd Cir. 1930)                             222
14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT OWNER                       227

Pickett v. Prince (7th Cir. 2000)                                  230

15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE  236

Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. 510 U.S. 569 (1994)             238

16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS                                          255

Star Athletica, L.L.C. v. Varsity Brands (2017)                    257

17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS                        273

Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Prods. Co. (1995)                         275

Distinctiveness                                                    283

Zatarains, Inc. v. Oak Grove Smokehouse, Inc. (5th Cir. 1983)      284

18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS                                297

Two Pesos v. Taco Cabana                                           299

Wal-Mart Stores v. Samara Bros.                                    311

19. TRADE DRESS - FUNCTIONALITY                                    316

TrafFix Devices v. Marketing Displays (2001)                       317

20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT                                         323

Kemp v. Bumble Bee Seafoods, Inc. (8th Cir. 2005)                  326

21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY                    335

Matal v. Tam (2017)                                                341

22. PERMISSIBLE USES                                               355

Mattel Inc. v. MCA Records, Inc.                                   356

Jack Daniel's v. VIP Products                                      362
23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY                                                           373

Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co. (1977)                                374

24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET                                                383

Learning Curve Toys v. PlayWood Toys (7th Cir. 2003)                              386

Trade Secret Misappropriation Comprehension Check                                 401

25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS                                             402

E. I. DuPont deNemours v. Christophers (5th Cir. 1970)                            403

Uncle B's Bakery, Inc. v. Kevin O'Rourke and Brooklyn Bagel Boys, Inc. (N.D.      408
Iowa 1996)

26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION                                                            444

Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp. (1974)                                            445

Bonito Boats v. Thunder Craft Boats (1989)                                        455

TITLE 15                                                                          468

15 U.S.C.  1051. Application for registration; verification                      469

15 U.S.C.  1052. Trademarks registrable on principal register; concurrent        472
registration

15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1053 - 1056                                                          474

15 U.S.C.  1057. Certificates of registration                                    476

15 U.S.C.  1058. Duration, affidavits and fees                                   478

15 U.S.C.  1064. Cancellation of registration                                    480

15 U.S.C.  1065. Incontestability of right to use mark under certain conditions  482

15 U.S.C.  1114. Remedies; infringement; innocent infringement by printers       483
and publishers

15 U.S.C.  1115. Registration on principal register as evidence of exclusive     484

right to use mark; defenses

15 U.S.C.  1117. Recovery for violation of rights                                486
15 U.S.C.  1125. False designations of origin, false descriptions, and dilution   488
forbidden

15 U.S.C.  1127. Construction and definitions; intent of chapter                  492

TITLE 17                                                                           495

17 U.S.C.  101. Definitions                                                       496

17 U.S.C. 102. Subject matter of copyright: In general                            503

17 U.S.C. ㎣ 103, 104, 105. Subject matter of copyright: Compilations and          504
derivative works

17 U.S.C. 106. Exclusive rights in copyrighted works                              506

17 U.S.C. 106A. Rights of certain authors to attribution and integrity.           507

17 U.S.C. 107. Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair use                          509

17 U.S.C. 109. Limitations on exclusive rights: Effect of transfer of particular  510
copy or phonorecord

17 U.S.C.  110. Limitations on exclusive rights: Exemption of certain             512
performances and displays

17 U.S.C.  113. Scope of exclusive rights in pictorial, graphic, and sculptural   514

works

17 U.S.C. 201. Ownership of copyright                                             516

17 U.S.C.  202. Ownership of copyright as distinct from ownership of material     517
object

17 U.S.C.  203. Termination of transfers and licenses granted by the author       518

17 U.S.C.  301. Preemption with respect to other laws                             521

17 U.S.C.  302. Duration of copyright: Works created on or after January 1,       522

1978.

17 U.S.C.  305, 401, 402, 405, 407, 412                                           524

17 U.S.C.  504. Remedies for infringement: Damages and profits                    526

TITLE 18                                                                           528

18 U.S.C.  1831. Economic espionage                                               529

18 U.S.C.  1832. Theft of trade secrets                                           530
18 U.S.C.  1833. Exceptions to prohibitions                               531

18 U.S.C.  1836. Civil proceedings                                        533

18 U.S.C.  1838. Construction with other laws                             535

18 U.S.C.  1839. Definitions                                              536

TITLE 35                                                                   538

35 U.S.C.  100. Definitions                                               539

35 U.S.C.  101. Inventions patentable                                     540

35 U.S.C.  102. Conditions for patentability; novelty                     541

35 U.S.C.  103. Conditions for patentability; non-obvious subject matter  543

35 U.S.C.  112. Specification                                             544

35 U.S.C.  154. Contents and term of patent; provisional rights           545

35 U.S.C.  171. Patents for designs                                       546

35 U.S.C.  271. Infringement of patent                                    547

35 U.S.C.  282. Presumption of validity; defenses                         548

35 U.S.C. ㎣ 283, 284, 285, 286, & 289                                     550

35 U.S.C.  311. Inter partes review                                       552
The casebook you're reading may strike you as very different from other texts you've used in law
school. Rather than a beautiful gray-and-silver or red-and-gold bound book with small text, heavily
edited case excerpts, and notes that most students skip, it's an electronic file or a paperback book, with
long case excerpts (and in many instances, the entirety of the court's opinion) and a handful of notes
that come before the cases, not after. The limited number of cases might strike you as especially odd
for a course that is intended to survey the entirety of four-plus fields of law.

All of these choices were made intentionally. Rather than opt for a traditional published casebook, I
instead assembled these materials into a collection that you can read on any device and made the file
available to you free of charge. Instead of many short case excerpts that provide you with key rules or
doctrines, I've instead chosen a handful of judicial opinions for us to discuss--about one or two per
chapter--and provided descriptive notes to fill in the details. Intellectual property cases often involve
an array of legal, factual and policy considerations, and focusing on one or two opinions per class
will allow for more in-class time discussing individual cases and the issues they present. Having the
entire opinion will also give you more context and nuance for each of the decisions. And it will help
you begin to focus on the most important parts of a long opinion, something you will need to do in
practice.

Because reading full opinions is not easy, especially at the beginning of your legal career, another
important component of this casebook are sets of questions to focus on while reading the cases.
Lawyers generally approach texts this way, reading with purpose rather than to glean abstract
knowledge. As you read the opinions, do it with a mind toward answering the questions posed.

A few notes on using this casebook. First, make sure to read the prefatory text at the start of each
section. In addition to the questions, this text contains additional information about doctrines and
other important cases. In addition, make sure to read the statutory sections that are cited in the text
and cases. This text can often be just as important as the cases themselves. In this new edition of the
textbook, the key statutes now accompany the cases so that you can easily find them.

Thanks to my research assistants who have helped with this and previous editions of this text, as well
as the students who have provided feedback on how it can be improved. Enjoy!

                                                                                                                    Jason Rantanen

                                                                      INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW 1
                    1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES

   Learning Objectives: Unit 1

   Upon the conclusion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain what a creative intangible is.
           Articulate reasons for the existence of, and limits on, legal rights over creative intangibles.
           Recall the most common forms of intellectual property and their basic attributes.

This course introduces students to the laws governing intellectual property and the policies that
underlie those laws. As you will quickly learn, intellectual property is not a monolithic concept. Nor
do intellectual property laws govern every aspect of the use of human creativity. Instead, intellectual
property law can be understood as an open framework governing most commercially relevant
activities relating to human-created intangibles that is intended to incentivize certain behaviors and
discourage others. At the same time, there are strong moral components that underlie intellectual
property law and social justice, fairness, and equitable consequences that flow from its existence.

In preparation for our first class, spend some time thinking about what the following questions.
Write down your responses on a sheet of paper or electronic document. You will refer to them
during our first class.

      What do you think of as your intellectual property?
      How much attachment do you feel to the different kinds of intellectual property that you

         identified?
      Why do you feel those attachments?
      Are you willing to share any of your intellectual property?
      If you are willing to share your intellectual property, what (if anything) do you want in

         return? If money, how much?

Next, read International News Service v. Associated Press. This opinion is often read at the beginning or
end of a class on Intellectual Property law; we will read it in both places. It is often read at the
beginning because it can provide an introduction to the concept of creative intangibles, rationales
for protecting them, and the legal questions they raise. Other syllabi place it at the end of the course
because it lies within the interstices of more formally recognized legal rights and raises complex
issues of preemption and federal-state interactions. The decision is also from the period before Erie
Railroad v. Tomkins, which eliminated the concept of federal common law for issues that fall within

2 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
state substantive law. (If you have not yet studied this case, you will in Civil Procedure.) As a result,
while it provides for a good starting point for learning about intellectual property law, it has been
almost entirely eclipsed by the other legal doctrines covered in a course on intellectual property law.

                                                                                       1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES 3
INTERNATIONAL NEWS SERVICE V. THE ASSOCIATED PRESS (1918)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read INS v. AP, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the creative intangible at issue in this case?
           Drawing on your own knowledge, does it look like any of the forms of intellectual property that
              you've heard of before? Which one is the closest?
           What is the Court's justification for protecting this creative intangible?
           What is INS prohibited from doing with the creative intangible?
           Would the outcome be different if the defendant were instead a historian in the 1930's writing a
              book about World War I?

                                International News Service v. The Associated Press

                                                       248 U.S. 215 (1918)

MR. JUSTICE PITNEY delivered the opinion of the court.

The parties are competitors in the gathering and distribution of news and its publication for profit
in newspapers throughout the United States. The Associated Press, which was complainant in the
District Court, is a cooperative organization, incorporated under the Membership Corporations Law
of the State of New York, its members being individuals who are either proprietors or representatives
of about 950 daily newspapers published in all parts of the United States. That a corporation may be
organized under that act for the purpose of gathering news for the use and benefit of its members
and for publication in newspapers owned or represented by them, is recognized by an amendment
enacted in 1901 (Laws N.Y. 1901, c. 436). Complainant gathers in all parts of the world, by means of
various instrumentalities of its own, by exchange with its members, and by other appropriate means,
news and intelligence of current and recent events of interest to newspaper readers and distributes
it daily to its members for publication in their newspapers. The cost of the service, amounting
approximately to $3,500,000 per annum, is assessed upon the members and becomes a part of their
costs of operation, to be recouped, presumably with profit, through the publication of their several
newspapers. Under complainant's by-laws each member agrees upon assuming membership that
news received through complainant's service is received exclusively for publication in a particular
newspaper, language, and place specified in the certificate of membership, that no other use of it shall
be permitted, and that no member shall furnish or permit anyone in his employ or connected with
his newspaper to furnish any of complainant's news in advance of publication to any person not a

4 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
member. And each member is required to gather the local news of his district and supply it to the
Associated Press and to no one else.

Defendant is a corporation organized under the laws of the State of New Jersey, whose business is
the gathering and selling of news to its customers and clients, consisting of newspapers published
throughout the United States, under contracts by which they pay certain amounts at stated times for
defendant's service. It has wide-spread news-gathering agencies; the cost of its operations amounts, it
is said, to more than $2,000,000 per annum; and it serves about 400 newspapers located in the various
cities of the United States and abroad, a few of which are represented, also, in the membership of the
Associated Press.

The parties are in the keenest competition between themselves in the distribution of news throughout
the United States; and so, as a rule, are the newspapers that they serve, in their several districts.

Complainant in its bill, defendant in its answer, have set forth in almost identical terms the rather
obvious circumstances and conditions under which their business is conducted. The value of the
service, and of the news furnished, depends upon the promptness of transmission, as well as upon the
accuracy and impartiality of the news; it being essential that the news be transmitted to members or
subscribers as early or earlier than similar information can be furnished to competing newspapers by
other news services, and that the news furnished by each agency shall not be furnished to newspapers
which do not contribute to the expense of gathering it. And further, to quote from the answer:
"Prompt knowledge and publication of world-wide news is essential to the conduct of a modern
newspaper, and by reason of the enormous expense incident to the gathering and distribution of such
news, the only practical way in which a proprietor of a newspaper can obtain the same is, either
through cooperation with a considerable number of other newspaper proprietors in the work of
collecting and distributing such news, and the equitable division with them of the expenses thereof,
or by the purchase of such news from some existing agency engaged in that business."

The bill was filed to restrain the pirating of complainant's news by defendant in three ways: First, by
bribing employees of newspapers published by complainant's members to furnish Associated Press
news to defendant before publication, for transmission by telegraph and telephone to defendant's
clients for publication by them; Second, by inducing Associated Press members to violate its by-laws
and permit defendant to obtain news before publication; and Third, by copying news from bulletin
boards and from early editions of complainant's newspapers and selling this, either bodily or after
rewriting it, to defendant's customers.

The District Court, upon consideration of the bill and answer, with voluminous affidavits on both
sides, granted a preliminary injunction under the first and second heads; but refused at that stage
to restrain the systematic practice admittedly pursued by defendant, of taking news bodily from the
bulletin boards and early editions of complainant's newspapers and selling it as its own. The court
expressed itself as satisfied that this practice amounted to unfair trade, but as the legal question was
one of first impression it considered that the allowance of an injunction should await the outcome
of an appeal. 240 Fed. Rep. 983, 996. Both parties having appealed, the Circuit Court of Appeals
sustained the injunction order so far as it went, and upon complainant's appeal modified it and
remanded the cause with directions to issue an injunction also against any bodily taking of the words
or substance of complainant's news until its commercial value as news had passed away. 245 Fed. Rep.
244, 253. The present writ of certiorari was then allowed. 245 U.S. 644.

                                                                                       1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES 5
The only matter that has been argued before us is whether defendant may lawfully be restrained
from appropriating news taken from bulletins issued by complainant or any of its members, or from
newspapers published by them, for the purpose of selling it to defendant's clients. Complainant asserts
that defendant's admitted course of conduct in this regard both violates complainant's property
right in the news and constitutes unfair competition in business. And notwithstanding the case has
proceeded only to the stage of a preliminary injunction, we have deemed it proper to consider the
underlying questions, since they go to the very merits of the action and are presented upon facts that
are not in dispute. As presented in argument, these questions are: 1. Whether there is any property in
news; 2. Whether, if there be property in news collected for the purpose of being published, it survives
the instant of its publication in the first newspaper to which it is communicated by the news-gatherer;
and 3. Whether defendant's admitted course of conduct in appropriating for commercial use matter
taken from bulletins or early editions of Associated Press publications constitutes unfair competition
in trade.

The federal jurisdiction was invoked because of diversity of citizenship, not upon the ground that
the suit arose under the copyright or other laws of the United States. Complainant's news matter is
not copyrighted. It is said that it could not, in practice, be copyrighted, because of the large number
of dispatches that are sent daily; and, according to complainant's contention, news is not within the
operation of the copyright act. Defendant, while apparently conceding this, nevertheless invokes the
analogies of the law of literary property and copyright, insisting as its principal contention that,
assuming complainant has a right of property in its news, it can be maintained (unless the copyright
act be complied with) only by being kept secret and confidential, and that upon the publication with
complainant's consent of uncopyrighted news by any of complainant's members in a newspaper or
upon a bulletin board, the right of property is lost, and the subsequent use of the news by the public
or by defendant for any purpose whatever becomes lawful.

A preliminary objection to the form in which the suit is brought may be disposed of at the outset. It
is said that the Circuit Court of Appeals granted relief upon considerations applicable to particular
members of the Associated Press, and that this was erroneous because the suit was brought by
complainant as a corporate entity, and not by its members; the argument being that their interests
cannot be protected in this proceeding any more than the individual rights of a stockholder can be
enforced in an action brought by the corporation. From the averments of the bill, however, it is plain
that the suit in substance was brought for the benefit of complainant's members, and that they would
be proper parties, and, except for their numbers, perhaps necessary parties. Complainant is a proper
party to conduct the suit as representing their interest; and since no specific objection, based upon the
want of parties, appears to have been made below, we will treat the objection as waived. See Equity
Rules 38, 43, 44.

In considering the general question of property in news matter, it is necessary to recognize its
dual character, distinguishing between the substance of the information and the particular form or
collocation of words in which the writer has communicated it.

No doubt news articles often possess a literary quality, and are the subject of literary property at
the common law; nor do we question that such an article, as a literary production, is the subject of
copyright by the terms of the act as it now stands. In an early case at the circuit Mr. Justice Thompson
held in effect that a newspaper was not within the protection of the copyright acts of 1790 and 1802
(Clayton v. Stone, 2 Paine, 382; 5 Fed. Cas. No. 2872). But the present act is broader; it provides that the
works for which copyright may be secured shall include "all the writings of an author," and specifically

6 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
mentions "periodicals, including newspapers." Act of March 4, 1909, c. 320, ㎣ 4 and 5, 35 Stat. 1075,
1076. Evidently this admits to copyright a contribution to a newspaper, notwithstanding it also may
convey news; and such is the practice of the copyright office, as the newspapers of the day bear
witness. See Copyright Office Bulletin No. 15 (1917), pp. 7, 14, 16-17.

But the news element -- the information respecting current events contained in the literary
production -- is not the creation of the writer, but is a report of matters that ordinarily are publici
juris; it is the history of the day. It is not to be supposed that the framers of the Constitution, when
they empowered Congress "to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited
times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries" (Const.,
Art I,  8, par. 8), intended to confer upon one who might happen to be the first to report a historic
event the exclusive right for any period to spread the knowledge of it.

We need spend no time, however, upon the general question of property in news matter at common
law, or the application of the copyright act, since it seems to us the case must turn upon the question
of unfair competition in business. And, in our opinion, this does not depend upon any general right
of property analogous to the common-law right of the proprietor of an unpublished work to prevent
its publication without his consent; nor is it foreclosed by showing that the benefits of the copyright
act have been waived. We are dealing here not with restrictions upon publication but with the very
facilities and processes of publication. The peculiar value of news is in the spreading of it while it is
fresh; and it is evident that a valuable property interest in the news, as news, cannot be maintained
by keeping it secret. Besides, except for matters improperly disclosed, or published in breach of trust
or confidence, or in violation of law, none of which is involved in this branch of the case, the news of
current events may be regarded as common property. What we are concerned with is the business of
making it known to the world, in which both parties to the present suit are engaged. That business
consists in maintaining a prompt, sure, steady, and reliable service designed to place the daily events
of the world at the breakfast table of the millions at a price that, while of trifling moment to each
reader, is sufficient in the aggregate to afford compensation for the cost of gathering and distributing
it, with the added profit so necessary as an incentive to effective action in the commercial world.
The service thus performed for newspaper readers is not only innocent but extremely useful in itself,
and indubitably constitutes a legitimate business. The parties are competitors in this field; and, on
fundamental principles, applicable here as elsewhere, when the rights or privileges of the one are
liable to conflict with those of the other, each party is under a duty so to conduct its own business as
not unnecessarily or unfairly to injure that of the other. Hitchman Coal & Coke Co. v. Mitchell, 245 U.S.
229, 254.

Obviously, the question of what is unfair competition in business must be determined with particular
reference to the character and circumstances of the business. The question here is not so much the
rights of either party as against the public but their rights as between themselves. See Morison v. Moat,
9 Hare, 241, 258. And although we may and do assume that neither party has any remaining property
interest as against the public in uncopyrighted news matter after the moment of its first publication,
it by no means follows that there is no remaining property interest in it as between themselves. For, to
both of them alike, news matter, however little susceptible of ownership or dominion in the absolute
sense, is stock in trade, to be gathered at the cost of enterprise, organization, skill, labor, and money,
and to be distributed and sold to those who will pay money for it, as for any other merchandise.
Regarding the news, therefore, as but the material out of which both parties are seeking to make
profits at the same time and in the same field, we hardly can fail to recognize that for this purpose, and

                                                                                       1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES 7
as between them, it must be regarded as quasi property, irrespective of the rights of either as against
the public.

In order to sustain the jurisdiction of equity over the controversy, we need not affirm any general
and absolute property in the news as such. The rule that a court of equity concerns itself only in
the protection of property rights treats any civil right of a pecuniary nature as a property right (In
re Sawyer, 124 U.S. 200, 210; In re Debs, 158 U.S. 564, 593); and the right to acquire property by
honest labor or the conduct of a lawful business is as much entitled to protection as the right to
guard property already acquired. Truax v. Raich, 239 U.S. 33, 37-38; Brennan v. United Hatters, 73 N.J.L.
729, 742; Barr v. Essex Trades Council, 53 N.J. Eq. 101. It is this right that furnishes the basis of the
jurisdiction in the ordinary case of unfair competition.

The question, whether one who has gathered general information or news at pains and expense for
the purpose of subsequent publication through the press has such an interest in its publication as may
be protected from interference, has been raised many times, although never, perhaps, in the precise
form in which it is now presented.

Board of Trade v. Christie Grain & Stock Co., 198 U.S. 236, 250, related to the distribution of quotations
of prices on dealings upon a board of trade, which were collected by plaintiff and communicated on
confidential terms to numerous persons under a contract not to make them public. This court held
that, apart from certain special objections that were overruled, plaintiff's collection of quotations was
entitled to the protection of the law; that, like a trade secret, plaintiff might keep to itself the work
done at its expense, and did not lose its right by communicating the result to persons, even if many,
in confidential relations to itself, under a contract not to make it public; and that strangers should be
restrained from getting at the knowledge by inducing a breach of trust.

In National Tel. News Co. v. Western Union Tel. Co., 119 Fed. Rep. 294, the Circuit Court of Appeals
for the Seventh Circuit dealt with news matter gathered and transmitted by a telegraph company,
and consisting merely of a notation of current events having but a transient value due to quick
transmission and distribution; and, while declaring that this was not copyrightable although printed
on a tape by tickers in the offices of the recipients, and that it was a commercial not a literary
product, nevertheless held that the business of gathering and communicating the news -- the service
of purveying it -- was a legitimate business, meeting a distinctive commercial want and adding to the
facilities of the business world, and partaking of the nature of property in a sense that entitled it to
the protection of a court of equity against piracy.

Other cases are cited, but none that we deem it necessary to mention.

Not only do the acquisition and transmission of news require elaborate organization and a large
expenditure of money, skill, and effort; not only has it an exchange value to the gatherer, dependent
chiefly upon its novelty and freshness, the regularity of the service, its reputed reliability and
thoroughness, and its adaptability to the public needs; but also, as is evident, the news has an exchange
value to one who can misappropriate it.

The peculiar features of the case arise from the fact that, while novelty and freshness form so
important an element in the success of the business, the very processes of distribution and publication
necessarily occupy a good deal of time. Complainant's service, as well as defendant's, is a daily
service to daily newspapers; most of the foreign news reaches this country at the Atlantic seaboard,
principally at the City of New York, and because of this, and of time differentials due to the earth's

8 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
rotation, the distribution of news matter throughout the country is principally from east to west;
and, since in speed the telegraph and telephone easily outstrip the rotation of the earth, it is a simple
matter for defendant to take complainant's news from bulletins or early editions of complainant's
members in the eastern cities and at the mere cost of telegraphic transmission cause it to be published
in western papers issued at least as early as those served by complainant. Besides this, and irrespective
of time differentials, irregularities in telegraphic transmission on different lines, and the normal
consumption of time in printing and distributing the newspaper, result in permitting pirated news to
be placed in the hands of defendant's readers sometimes simultaneously with the service of competing
Associated Press papers, occasionally even earlier.

Defendant insists that when, with the sanction and approval of complainant, and as the result of the
use of its news for the very purpose for which it is distributed, a portion of complainant's members
communicate it to the general public by posting it upon bulletin boards so that all may read, or by
issuing it to newspapers and distributing it indiscriminately, complainant no longer has the right to
control the use to be made of it; that when it thus reaches the light of day it becomes the common
possession of all to whom it is accessible; and that any purchaser of a newspaper has the right to
communicate the intelligence which it contains to anybody and for any purpose, even for the purpose
of selling it for profit to newspapers published for profit in competition with complainant's members.

The fault in the reasoning lies in applying as a test the right of the complainant as against the
public, instead of considering the rights of complainant and defendant, competitors in business, as
between themselves. The right of the purchaser of a single newspaper to spread knowledge of its
contents gratuitously, for any legitimate purpose not unreasonably interfering with complainant's
right to make merchandise of it, may be admitted; but to transmit that news for commercial use,
in competition with complainant--which is what defendant has done and seeks to justify--is a very
different matter. In doing this defendant, by its very act, admits that it is taking material that has been
acquired by complainant as the result of organization and the expenditure of labor, skill, and money,
and which is salable by complainant for money, and that defendant in appropriating it and selling it
as its own is endeavoring to reap where it has not sown, and by disposing of it to newspapers that
are competitors of complainant's members is appropriating to itself the harvest of those who have
sown. Stripped of all disguises, the process amounts to an unauthorized interference with the normal
operation of complainant's legitimate business precisely at the point where the profit is to be reaped,
in order to divert a material portion of the profit from those who have earned it to those who have
not; with special advantage to defendant in the competition because of the fact that it is not burdened
with any part of the expense of gathering the news. The transaction speaks for itself, and a court of
equity ought not to hesitate long in characterizing it as unfair competition in business.

The underlying principle is much the same as that which lies at the base of the equitable theory of
consideration in the law of trusts--that he who has fairly paid the price should have the beneficial use
of the property. Pom. Eq. Jur.,  981. It is no answer to say that complainant spends its money for that
which is too fugitive or evanescent to be the subject of property. That might, and for the purposes
of the discussion we are assuming that it would, furnish an answer in a common-law controversy.
But in a court of equity, where the question is one of unfair competition, if that which complainant
has acquired fairly at substantial cost may be sold fairly at substantial profit, a competitor who is
misappropriating it for the purpose of disposing of it to his own profit and to the disadvantage of
complainant cannot be heard to say that it is too fugitive or evanescent to be regarded as property.
It has all the attributes of property necessary for determining that a misappropriation of it by a
competitor is unfair competition because contrary to good conscience.

                                                                                       1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES 9
The contention that the news is abandoned to the public for all purposes when published in the
first newspaper is untenable. Abandonment is a question of intent, and the entire organization of
the Associated Press negatives such a purpose. The cost of the service would be prohibitive if the
reward were to be so limited. No single newspaper, no small group of newspapers, could sustain the
expenditure. Indeed, it is one of the most obvious results of defendant's theory that, by permitting
indiscriminate publication by anybody and everybody for purposes of profit in competition with
the news-gatherer, it would render publication profitless, or so little profitable as in effect to cut
off the service by rendering the cost prohibitive in comparison with the return. The practical needs
and requirements of the business are reflected in complainant's by-laws which have been referred to.
Their effect is that publication by each member must be deemed not by any means an abandonment of
the news to the world for any and all purposes, but a publication for limited purposes; for the benefit
of the readers of the bulletin or the newspaper as such; not for the purpose of making merchandise of
it as news, with the result of depriving complainant's other members of their reasonable opportunity
to obtain just returns for their expenditures.

It is to be observed that the view we adopt does not result in giving to complainant the right to
monopolize either the gathering or the distribution of the news, or, without complying with the
copyright act, to prevent the reproduction of its news articles; but only postpones participation by
complainant's competitor in the processes of distribution and reproduction of news that it has not
gathered, and only to the extent necessary to prevent that competitor from reaping the fruits of
complainant's efforts and expenditure, to the partial exclusion of complainant, and in violation of the
principle that underlies the maxim sic utere tuo, etc.

It is said that the elements of unfair competition are lacking because there is no attempt by defendant
to palm off its goods as those of the complainant, characteristic of the most familiar, if not the most
typical, cases of unfair competition. Howe Scale Co. v. Wyckoff, Seamans & Benedict, 198 U.S. 118, 140.
But we cannot concede that the right to equitable relief is confined to that class of cases. In the present
case the fraud upon complainant's rights is more direct and obvious. Regarding news matter as the
mere material from which these two competing parties are endeavoring to make money, and treating
it, therefore, as quasi property for the purposes of their business because they are both selling it as
such, defendant's conduct differs from the ordinary case of unfair competition in trade principally in
this that, instead of selling its own goods as those of complainant, it substitutes misappropriation in
the place of misrepresentation, and sells complainant's goods as its own.

Besides the misappropriation, there are elements of imitation, of false pretense, in defendant's
practices. The device of rewriting complainant's news articles, frequently resorted to, carries its own
comment. The habitual failure to give credit to complainant for that which is taken is significant.
Indeed, the entire system of appropriating complainant's news and transmitting it as a commercial
product to defendant's clients and patrons amounts to a false representation to them and to their
newspaper readers that the news transmitted is the result of defendant's own investigation in the field.
But these elements, although accentuating the wrong, are not the essence of it. It is something more
than the advantage of celebrity of which complainant is being deprived.

The doctrine of unclean hands is invoked as a bar to relief; it being insisted that defendant's practices
against which complainant seeks an injunction are not different from the practice attributed to
complainant, of utilizing defendant's news published by its subscribers. At this point it becomes
necessary to consider a distinction that is drawn by complainant, and, as we understand it, was
recognized by defendant also in the submission of proofs in the District Court, between two kinds of

10 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
use that may be made by one news agency of news taken from the bulletins and newspapers of the
other. The first is the bodily appropriation of a statement of fact or a news article, with or without
rewriting, but without independent investigation or other expense. This form of pirating was found
by both courts to have been pursued by defendant systematically with respect to complainant's news,
and against it the Circuit Court of Appeals granted an injunction. This practice complainant denies
having pursued, and the denial was sustained by the finding of the District Court. It is not contended
by defendant that the finding can be set aside, upon the proofs as they now stand. The other use is to
take the news of a rival agency as a "tip" to be investigated, and if verified by independent investigation
the news thus gathered is sold. This practice complainant admits that it has pursued and still is willing
that defendant shall employ.

Both courts held that complainant could not be debarred on the ground of unclean hands upon the
score of pirating defendant's news, because not shown to be guilty of sanctioning this practice.

As to securing "tips" from a competing news agency, the District Court (240 Fed. Rep. 991, 995),
while not sanctioning the practice, found that both parties had adopted it in accordance with common
business usage, in the belief that their conduct was technically lawful, and hence did not find in it
any sufficient ground for attributing unclean hands to complainant. The Circuit Court of Appeals
(245 Fed. Rep. 247) found that the tip habit, though discouraged by complainant, was "incurably
journalistic," and that there was "no difficulty in discriminating between the utilization of `tips' and
the bodily appropriation of another's labor in accumulating and stating information."

We are inclined to think a distinction may be drawn between the utilization of tips and the bodily
appropriation of news matter, either in its original form or after rewriting and without independent
investigation and verification; whatever may appear at the final hearing, the proofs as they now stand
recognize such a distinction; both parties avowedly recognize the practice of taking tips, and neither
party alleges it to be unlawful or to amount to unfair competition in business. In a line of English
cases a somewhat analogous practice has been held not to amount to an infringement of the copyright
of a directory or other book containing compiled information. In Kelly v. Morris, L.R. 1 Eq. 697,
701, 702, Vice Chancellor Sir William Page Wood (afterwards Lord Hatherly), dealing with such a
case, said that defendant was "not entitled to take one word of the information previously published
without independently working out the matter for himself, so as to arrive at the same result from the
same common sources of information, and the only use that he can legitimately make of a previous
publication is to verify his own calculations and results when obtained." This was followed by Vice
Chancellor Giffard in Morris v. Ashbee, L.R. 7 Eq. 34, where he said: "In a case such as this no one
has a right to take the results of the labour and expense incurred by another for the purposes of a
rival publication, and thereby save himself the expense and labour of working out and arriving at
these results by some independent road." A similar view was adopted by Lord Chancellor Hatherly
and the former Vice Chancellor, then Giffard, L.J., in Pike v. Nicholas, L.R. 5 Ch. App. Cas. 251, and
shortly afterwards by the latter judge in Morris v. Wright, L.R. 5 Ch. App. Cas. 279, 287, where he
said, commenting upon Pike v. Nicholas: "It was a perfectly legitimate course for the defendant to refer
to the plaintiff's book, and if, taking that book as his guide, he went to the original authorities and
compiled his book from them, he made no unfair or improper use of the plaintiff's book; and so here,
if the fact be that Mr. Wright used the plaintiff's book in order to guide himself to the persons on
whom it would be worth his while to call, and for no other purpose, he made a perfectly legitimate use
of the plaintiff's book."

A like distinction was recognized by the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Edward

                                                                                     1. LEGAL RIGHTS IN CREATED INTANGIBLES 11
Thompson Co. v. American Law Book Co., 122 Fed. Rep. 922, and in West Publishing Co. v. Edward
Thompson Co., 176 Fed. Rep. 833, 838.
In the case before us, in the present state of the pleadings and proofs, we need go no further than
to hold, as we do, that the admitted pursuit by complainant of the practice of taking news items
published by defendant's subscribers as tips to be investigated, and, if verified, the result of the
investigation to be sold--the practice having been followed by defendant also, and by news agencies
generally--is not shown to be such as to constitute an unconscientious or inequitable attitude towards
its adversary so as to fix upon complainant the taint of unclean hands, and debar it on this ground
from the relief to which it is otherwise entitled.
There is some criticism of the injunction that was directed by the District Court upon the going down
of the mandate from the Circuit Court of Appeals. In brief, it restrains any taking or gainfully using
of the complainant's news, either bodily or in substance, from bulletins issued by the complainant
or any of its members, or from editions of their newspapers, "until its commercial value as news to
the complainant and all of its members has passed away." The part complained of is the clause we have
italicized; but if this be indefinite, it is no more so than the criticism. Perhaps it would be better that
the terms of the injunction be made specific, and so framed as to confine the restraint to an extent
consistent with the reasonable protection of complainant's newspapers, each in its own area and
for a specified time after its publication, against the competitive use of pirated news by defendant's
customers. But the case presents practical difficulties; and we have not the materials, either in the
way of a definite suggestion of amendment, or in the way of proofs, upon which to frame a specific
injunction; hence, while not expressing approval of the form adopted by the District Court, we decline
to modify it at this preliminary stage of the case, and will leave that court to deal with the matter upon
appropriate application made to it for the purpose.
The decree of the Circuit Court of Appeals will be
Affirmed.

12 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                                   2. THE NORMATIVE OBJECTIVES OF
                                     INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 2

   Upon completion of unit 2, you should be able to:

         1. Recall the articulated justifications for intellectual property.
         2. Explain the articulated justifications for intellectual property.
         3. Identify counterarguments to these justifications for intellectual property.
         4. Apply these justifications to factual scenarios.
         5. Recall the primary constitutional basis for copyright and patent law.

Many of the core concepts underlying intellectual property laws are not new. To the contrary: there
are numerous articulations of these concepts in the historical record. We will focus on some of the
most well-known. Two theories, in particular, have direct ties to our own Constitutional foundation
for intellectual property law: natural or moral rights theory and utilitarian theory. Later on, we will
discuss two additional theories that intersect with intellectual property law: personhood and social
justice.

The reading assignment for today consists of excerpts from the writings of John Locke, Jeremy
Bentham, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison, along with the Patent and Copyright Clause of the
United States Constitution1. As you read these materials, ask yourself the following questions:

      How would you articulate each primary source writer's reasoning in sixty seconds?
      What are the parallels between the four primary source writers?
      What concepts underlie each writing?
      What issues arise when these concepts are applied to creative intangibles?
      How do these conceptions of property manifest in the Patent and Copyright clause?
      What is the meaning of "Science" in the Patent and Copyright clause? Of "useful Arts"? Of

         "Authors and Inventors"? Of "Writings"? "Discoveries?"

1. Article I, Section 8, Clause 8

                                   2. THE NORMATIVE OBJECTIVES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS 13
JOHN LOCKE, TWO TREATISES OF GOVERNMENT BOOK II (1689)

                                                           CHAPTER. V.
                                                         OF PROPERTY.

Sect. 25. Whether we consider natural reason, which tells us, that men, being once born, have a right
to their preservation, and consequently to meat and drink, and such other things as nature affords for
their subsistence: or revelation, which gives us an account of those grants God made of the world to
Adam, and to Noah, and his sons, it is very clear, that God, as king David says, Psal. cxv. 16. has given
the earth to the children of men; given it to mankind in common. But this being supposed, it seems
to some a very great difficulty, how any one should ever come to have a property in any thing: I will
not content myself to answer, that if it be difficult to make out property, upon a supposition that God
gave the world to Adam, and his posterity in common, it is impossible that any man, but one universal
monarch, should have any property upon a supposition, that God gave the world to Adam, and his
heirs in succession, exclusive of all the rest of his posterity. But I shall endeavour to shew, how men
might come to have a property in several parts of that which God gave to mankind in common, and
that without any express compact of all the commoners.

Sect. 26. God, who hath given the world to men in common, hath also given them reason to make use
of it to the best advantage of life, and convenience. The earth, and all that is therein, is given to men
for the support and comfort of their being. And tho' all the fruits it naturally produces, and beasts it
feeds, belong to mankind in common, as they are produced by the spontaneous hand of nature; and
no body has originally a private dominion, exclusive of the rest of mankind, in any of them, as they
are thus in their natural state: yet being given for the use of men, there must of necessity be a means to
appropriate them some way or other, before they can be of any use, or at all beneficial to any particular
man. The fruit, or venison, which nourishes the wild Indian, who knows no enclosure, and is still a
tenant in common, must be his, and so his, i.e. a part of him, that another can no longer have any right
to it, before it can do him any good for the support of his life.

Sect. 27. Though the earth, and all inferior creatures, be common to all men, yet every man has a
property in his own person: this no body has any right to but himself. The labour of his body, and
the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that
nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his labour with, and joined to it something that is
his own, and thereby makes it his property. It being by him removed from the common state nature
hath placed it in, it hath by this labour something annexed to it, that excludes the common right of
other men: for this labour being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he can have
a right to what that is once joined to, at least where there is enough, and as good, left in common for
others.

14 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Sect. 28. He that is nourished by the acorns he picked up under an oak, or the apples he gathered
from the trees in the wood, has certainly appropriated them to himself. No body can deny but the
nourishment is his. I ask then, when did they begin to be his? when he digested? or when he eat? or
when he boiled? or when he brought them home? or when he picked them up? and it is plain, if the
first gathering made them not his, nothing else could. That labour put a distinction between them and
common: that added something to them more than nature, the common mother of all, had done; and
so they became his private right. And will any one say, he had no right to those acorns or apples, he
thus appropriated, because he had not the consent of all mankind to make them his? Was it a robbery
thus to assume to himself what belonged to all in common? If such a consent as that was necessary,
man had starved, notwithstanding the plenty God had given him. We see in commons, which remain
so by compact, that it is the taking any part of what is common, and removing it out of the state nature
leaves it in, which begins the property; without which the common is of no use. And the taking of
this or that part, does not depend on the express consent of all the commoners. Thus the grass my
horse has bit; the turfs my servant has cut; and the ore I have digged in any place, where I have a
right to them in common with others, become my property, without the assignation or consent of any
body. The labour that was mine, removing them out of that common state they were in, hath fixed my
property in them.

                                               2. THE NORMATIVE OBJECTIVES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS 15
  JEREMY BENTHAM, MANUAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY (~1790-95)

  SECTION 23 . . . After the examination we have given to the different methods by which real
  wealth may be increased, we see that government may rely upon the intelligence and inclination of
  individuals for putting them in operation, and that nothing is necessary to be done on its part but
  to leave them in possession of the power, to insure to them the right of enjoyment, and to hasten
  the development of general knowledge. All that it can do with success may be ranged under this
  small number of heads: -- 1. To encourage the study of different branches of natural philosophy.
  The difficulties of science form a barrier between practice and theory, between the artisan and
  the philosopher. 2. To institute prizes for discoveries and experiments. 3. To cause the processes
  employed in every branch of trade to be published. The French government, rising above little
  jealousies, has distinguished itself in this manner, and has rendered itself a benefactor to the human
  race. 4. To cause everything of the same nature in foreign countries to be observed with attention,
  and to give the knowledge they obtain the same publicity. 5. To cause the price of different articles
  of trade to be published. The price of an article is an extra reward for whoever can manufacture or
  furnish it at a cheaper rate. 6. To grant patents for a limited number of years. With respect to a great
  number of inventions in the arts, an exclusive privilege is absolutely necessary, in order that what
  is sown may be reaped. In new inventions, protection against imitators is not less necessary than in
  established manufactures protection against thieves. He who has no hope that he shall reap, will not
  take the trouble to sow. But that which one man has invented, all the world can imitate. Without the
  assistance of the laws, the inventor would almost always be driven out of the market by his rival,
  who finding himself, without any expense, in possession of a discovery which has cost the inventor
  much time and expense, would be able to deprive him of all his deserved advantages, by selling at a
  lower price. An exclusive privilege is of all rewards the best proportioned, the most natural, and the
  least burthensome. It produces an infinite effect, and it costs nothing. "Grant me fifteen years," says
  the inventor, "that I may reap the fruit of my labours; after this term, it shall be enjoyed by all the
  world." Does the sovereign say, "No, you shall not have it," what will happen? It will be enjoyed by no
  one, neither for fifteen years nor afterwards: everybody will be disappointed--inventors, workmen
  consumers--everything will be stifled, both benefit and enjoyment. . . . 7. To class with the crime of
  forgery the injustice done by the artisan who puts upon his own productions the mark of another.--In
  order to prevent the commission of this crime through ignorance, it would be necessary to establish
  a register, in which every artisan might make an entry of his mark. This would tend to secure the
  privilege which nature has established in favour of skill, and which the legislator ought to maintain. It
  can never be obtained without labour, and it can never be abused. 1

1. (This edition comes from Jeremy Bentham, The Works of Jeremy Bentham, vol.
  3 (Usury, Political Economy, Equity, Parliamentary Reform) (John Bowring, ed.
  1843). It can be found in full at: http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/bentham-the-
  works-of-jeremy-bentham-vol-3)

  16 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
JAMES MADISON, FEDERALIST PAPER NO. 43 (1788)

A power "to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing, for a limited time, to authors
and inventors, the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries."
The utility of this power will scarcely be questioned. The copyright of authors has been solemnly
adjudged, in Great Britain, to be a right of common law. The right to useful inventions seems with
equal reason to belong to the inventors. The public good fully coincides in both cases with the claims
of individuals. The States cannot separately make effectual provisions for either of the cases, and most
of them have anticipated the decision of this point, by laws passed at the instance of Congress.

                                               2. THE NORMATIVE OBJECTIVES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS 17
  THOMAS JEFFERSON, LETTER TO ISAAC MCPHERSON (AUGUST 13, 1813)

  It has been pretended by some, (and in England especially,) that inventors have a natural and exclusive
  right to their inventions, and not merely for their own lives, but inheritable to their heirs. But while it
  is a moot question whether the origin of any kind of property is derived from nature at all, it would be
  singular to admit a natural and even an hereditary right to inventors. It is agreed by those who have
  seriously considered the subject, that no individual has, of natural right, a separate property in an acre
  of land, for instance. By an universal law, indeed, whatever, whether fixed or movable, belongs to all
  men equally and in common, is the property for the moment of him who occupies it, but when he
  relinquishes the occupation, the property goes with it. Stable ownership is the gift of social law, and
  is given late in the progress of society. It would be curious then, if an idea, the fugitive fermentation
  of an individual brain, could, of natural right, be claimed in exclusive and stable property. If nature
  has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of exclusive property, it is the action of the
  thinking power called an idea, which an individual may exclusively possess as long as he keeps it to
  himself; but the moment it is divulged, it forces itself into the possession of every one, and the receiver
  cannot dispossess himself of it. Its peculiar character, too, is that no one possesses the less, because
  every other possesses the whole of it. He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself
  without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me. That
  ideas should freely spread from one to another over the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction
  of man, and improvement of his condition, seems to have been peculiarly and benevolently designed
  by nature, when she made them, like fire, expansible over all space, without lessening their density
  in any point, and like the air in which we breathe, move, and have our physical being, incapable of
  confinement or exclusive appropriation. Inventions then cannot, in nature, be a subject of property.
  Society may give an exclusive right to the profits arising from them, as an encouragement to men to
  pursue ideas which may produce utility, but this may or may not be done, according to the will and
  convenience of the society, without claim or complaint from anybody. Accordingly, it is a fact, as far
  as I am informed, that England was, until we copied her, the only country on earth which ever, by a
  general law, gave a legal right to the exclusive use of an idea. In some other countries it is sometimes
  done, in a great case, and by a special and personal act, but, generally speaking, other nations have
  thought that these monopolies produce more embarrassment than advantage to society; and it may be
  observed that the nations which refuse monopolies of invention, are as fruitful as England in new and
  useful devices. 1

1. (The full text of the letter is available at: http://www.let.rug.nl/usa/presidents/
  thomas-jefferson/letters-of-thomas-jefferson/jefl220.php)

  18 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
U.S. CONSTITUTION, ARTICLE 1, SECTION 8, CLAUSE 8

The Congress shall have power...
To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and
Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries;

                                               2. THE NORMATIVE OBJECTIVES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS 19
                                              3. PATENTS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 3

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Describe the parts of a patent and the function they serve.
           Describe the institutions that relate to patents.
           Explain the policy issues related to patents, both positive and negative.
           Explain the first sale doctrine and its legal basis.

Patent lawyers like to think of patents as the primary driver of technological development. That
may be somewhat of an overstatement, but nevertheless patents have historically been an important
mechanism for technological advancement over the last two centuries. Many of the most significant
technological developments of that period--the telephone, the lightbulb, the airplane, the polymerase
chain reaction--involve patents.

A. Patent Law - legal basis

In general terms, a patent is an exclusive right to practice a novel invention for a set period of
time. The government grants these rights in exchange for the public disclosure of the details of the
invention. There are three types of patents: utility patents, design patents, and plant patents. Utility
patents are the most common and are the type of patent that most people think of as "patents."
Design patents are awarded to those who invent new, original, and ornamental designs for articles of
manufacture. Plant patents are awarded to those who invent or discover and asexually reproduce any
distinct and new variety of plant.

Congress's authority to create patent laws is based on Article I, Section 8, Clause 8 of the United
States Constitution. This clause, commonly referred to as the "Intellectual Property Clause" or the
"Patent and Copyright Clause," states that "[the United States Congress shall have power] To promote
the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the
exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries."

The first major legislation governing patents was enacted in 1790, and most of its core elements have
remained relatively unchanged. Over the last 230 years, Congress passed several updated versions of
the patent law, with the current legal framework based on the 1952 Patent Act. Another significant
amendment, the America Invents Act, was enacted in 2011.

B. Patent Law: core substantive components

20 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Patent law is highly complex, and is made more so by the fact that it often involves highly technical
subject matter. However, its fundamental components are relatively simple. In this course we will
focus on those fundamentals, relying primarily on inventions that do not require an advanced
technical or scientific degree to understand. This is not to say that the following cases are "easy": they
will require a substantial amount of work, particularly the more recent ones. But I have intentionally
chosen cases that highly the fundamental elements of patent law or are landmark cases that everyone
knowledgeable about patent law will know.

This section begins with a patent. Even though you may know nothing about patent law, you should
look at this document and see what you can figure out about it. You do not need to read the patent
in any significant depth--instead, just skim through the parts and try to different sections in the
document. As you examine the patent, make notes about what you observe.

A few notes about this specific patent. First, it is especially long--the unedited version is 158
pages--and it has a large number of claims at the end (149). Most patents are much shorter and
typically have 20 claims at most. Second, this patent went through a special process called "reissue,"
in which the original patent was surrendered to the patent office so that the applicant could make
changes. Reissue proceedings are limited by statute, and are beyond the scope of an introductory
course in intellectual property. For purposes of this course, we will just refer to this document as the
Monsanto patent.

After you finish reviewing the patent, read 35 U.S.C. ㎣ 101, 154(a) & 271(a), along with any relevant
statutory definitions. These could be considered the foundational statutes of patent law. Section 101
provides for the grant of a patent to certain people, Section 154(a) states what a patent contains, and
Section 271(a) provides the basic cause of action that the owner of a patent may bring.

With this information in mind, next read Bowman v. Monsanto. This case involves a common sight in
Iowa during the summer: soybeans.

   35 U.S.C. 101. Inventions patentable (1952)

   Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of
   matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions
   and requirements of this title.

   35 U.S.C. 154. Contents and term of patent; provisional rights (2013)

   (1) Contents.--Every patent shall contain a short title of the invention and a grant to the patentee, his heirs
   or assigns, of the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention
   throughout the United States or importing the invention into the United States, and, if the invention is a
   process, of the right to exclude others from using, offering for sale or selling throughout the United States,
   or importing into the United States, products made by that process, referring to the specification for the
   particulars thereof.

                                                                                                                                       3. PATENTS 21
   (2) Term.--Subject to the payment of fees under this title, such grant shall be for a term beginning on the
   date on which the patent issues and ending 20 years from the date on which the application for the patent
   was filed in the United States or, if the application contains a specific reference to an earlier filed
   application or applications under section 120, 121, 365(c), or 386(c), from the date on which the earliest
   such application was filed.
   (3) Priority.--Priority under section 119, 365(a)(b), 386(a)(b) shall not be taken into account in determining
   the term of a patent.
   (4) Specification and Drawing.--A copy of the specification and drawing shall be annexed to the patent and
   be a part of such patent.

   35 U.S.C. 271. Infringement of patent (2010)

   a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, whoever without authority makes, uses, offers to sell, or sells
   any patented invention, within the United States or imports into the United States any patented invention
   during the term of the patent therefor, infringes the patent.
   b) Whoever actively induces infringement of a patent shall be liable as an infringer.
   c) Whoever offers to sell or sells within the United States or imports into the United States a component of
   a patented machine, manufacture, combination or composition, or a material or apparatus for use in
   practicing a patented process, constituting a material part of the invention, knowing the same to be
   especially made or especially adapted for use in an infringement of such patent, and not a staple article or
   commodity of commerce suitable for substantial noninfringing use, shall be liable as a contributory
   infringer.

22 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
U.S. PATENT NO. RE 39,247
   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you skim this patent, try to answer the following questions:
           Who are the inventors on this patent?
           When was the application for this patent filed?
           Who was this patent assigned to prior to issuance?
           Where are the legal rights claimed by this patent?

                                                                                                                                       3. PATENTS 23
24 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
3. PATENTS 25
26 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
3. PATENTS 27
28 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
3. PATENTS 29
30 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
3. PATENTS 31
32 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
3. PATENTS 33
34 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
BOWMAN V. MONSANTO CO. (2013)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Bowman v. Monsanto, ask yourself the following questions:
           How does a patent work?
           What underlying policies are evident from this opinion?
           What is the first sale doctrine? Can you think of an example where it would clearly apply?
           What legal authorities does the Court draw upon and how do they affect its analysis in this case?

                                                  Bowman v. Monsanto Co.
                                                      133 S. Ct. 1761 (2013)

JUSTICE KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
Under the doctrine of patent exhaustion, the authorized sale of a patented article gives the purchaser,
or any subsequent owner, a right to use or resell that article. Such a sale, however, does not allow the
purchaser to make new copies of the patented invention. The question in this case is whether a farmer
who buys patented seeds may reproduce them through planting and harvesting without the patent
holder's permission. We hold that he may not.
I
Respondent Monsanto invented a genetic modification that enables soybean plants to survive
exposure to glyphosate, the active ingredient in many herbicides (including Monsanto's own
Roundup). Monsanto markets soybean seed containing this altered genetic material as Roundup
Ready seed. Farmers planting that seed can use a glyphosate-based herbicide to kill weeds without
damaging their crops. Two patents issued to Monsanto cover various aspects of its Roundup Ready
technology, including a seed incorporating the genetic alteration. See Supp. App. SA1-21 (U. S. Patent
Nos. 5,352,605 and RE39,247E); see also 657 F. 3d 1341, 1343-1344 (CA Fed. 2011).
Monsanto sells, and allows other companies to sell, Roundup Ready soybean seeds to growers who
assent to a special licensing agreement. See App. 27a. That agreement permits a grower to plant the
purchased seeds in one (and only one) season. He can then consume the resulting crop or sell it as
a commodity, usually to a grain elevator or agricultural processor. See 657 F. 3d, at 1344-1345. But
under the agreement, the farmer may not save any of the harvested soybeans for replanting, nor may
he supply them to anyone else for that purpose. These restrictions reflect the ease of producing new
generations of Roundup Ready seed. Because glyphosate resistance comes from the seed's genetic

                                                                                                                                       3. PATENTS 35
  material, that trait is passed on from the planted seed to the harvested soybeans: Indeed, a single
  Roundup Ready seed can grow a plant containing dozens of genetically identical beans, each of which,
  if replanted, can grow another such plant -- and so on and so on. See App. 100a. The agreement's
  terms prevent the farmer from co-opting that process to produce his own Roundup Ready seeds,
  forcing him instead to buy from Monsanto each season.

  Petitioner Vernon Bowman is a farmer in Indiana who, it is fair to say, appreciates Roundup Ready
  soybean seed. He purchased Roundup Ready each year, from a company affiliated with Monsanto, for
  his first crop of the season. In accord with the agreement just described, he used all of that seed for
  planting, and sold his entire crop to a grain elevator (which typically would resell it to an agricultural
  processor for human or animal consumption).

  Bowman, however, devised a less orthodox approach for his second crop of each season. Because he
  thought such late-season planting "risky," he did not want to pay the premium price that Monsanto
  charges for Roundup Ready seed. Id., at 78a; see Brief for Petitioner 6. He therefore went to a grain
  elevator; purchased "commodity soybeans" intended for human or animal consumption; and planted
  them in his fields. 1Those soybeans came from prior harvests of other local farmers. And because
  most of those farmers also used Roundup Ready seed, Bowman could anticipate that many of the
  purchased soybeans would contain Monsanto's patented technology. When he applied a glyphosate-
  based herbicide to his fields, he confirmed that this was so; a significant proportion of the new plants
  survived the treatment, and produced in their turn a new crop of soybeans with the Roundup Ready
  trait. Bowman saved seed from that crop to use in his late-season planting the next year--and then the
  next, and the next, until he had harvested eight crops in that way. Each year, that is, he planted saved
  seed from the year before (sometimes adding more soybeans bought from the grain elevator), sprayed
  his fields with glyphosate to kill weeds (and any non-resistant plants), and produced a new crop of
  glyphosate-resistant--i.e., Roundup Ready--soybeans.

  After discovering this practice, Monsanto sued Bowman for infringing its patents on Roundup Ready
  seed. Bowman raised patent exhaustion as a defense, arguing that Monsanto could not control his
  use of the soybeans because they were the subject of a prior authorized sale (from local farmers to
  the grain elevator). The District Court rejected that argument, and awarded damages to Monsanto of
  $84,456. The Federal Circuit affirmed. It reasoned that patent exhaustion did not protect Bowman
  because he had "created a newly infringing article." 657 F. 3d, at 1348. The "right to use" a patented
  article following an authorized sale, the court explained, "does not include the right to construct an
  essentially new article on the template of the original, for the right to make the article remains with
  the patentee." Ibid. (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, Bowman could not
  "`replicate' Monsanto's patented technology by planting it in the ground to create newly infringing
  genetic material, seeds, and plants." Ibid. We granted certiorari to consider the important question of
  patent law raised in this case, 568 U. S. ___ (2012), and now affirm.

  II

  The doctrine of patent exhaustion limits a patentee's right to control what others can do with an

1. Grain elevators, as indicated above, purchase grain from farmers and sell it for consumption; under federal and state law,
   they generally cannot package or market their grain for use as agricultural seed. See 7 U. S. C.  1571; Ind. Code  15-15-1-32
   (2012). But because soybeans are themselves seeds, nothing (except, as we shall see, the law) prevented Bowman from
   planting, rather than consuming, the product he bought from the grain elevator.

  36 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  article embodying or containing an invention. 2 Under the doctrine, "the initial authorized sale of a
  patented item terminates all patent rights to that item." Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc., 553
  U. S. 617, 625 (2008). And by "exhaust[ing] the [patentee's] monopoly" in that item, the sale confers
  on the purchaser, or any subsequent owner, "the right to use [or] sell" the thing as he sees fit. United
  States v. Univis Lens Co., 316 U. S. 241, 249-250 (1942). We have explained the basis for the doctrine
  as follows: "[T]he purpose of the patent law is fulfilled with respect to any particular article when the
  patentee has received his reward . . . by the sale of the article"; once that "purpose is realized the patent
  law affords no basis for restraining the use and enjoyment of the thing sold." Id., at 251.

  [1] Consistent with that rationale, the doctrine restricts a patentee's rights only as to the "particular
  article" sold, ibid.; it leaves untouched the patentee's ability to prevent a buyer from making new
  copies of the patented item. "[T]he purchaser of the [patented] machine . . . does not acquire any right
  to construct another machine either for his own use or to be vended to another." Mitchell v. Hawley, 16
  Wall. 544, 548 (1873); see Wilbur-Ellis Co. v. Kuther, 377 U. S. 422, 424 (1964) (holding that a purchaser's
  "reconstruction" of a patented machine "would impinge on the patentee's right `to exclude others
  from making' . . . the article" (quoting 35 U. S. C.  154 (1964 ed.))). Rather, "a second creation" of
  the patented item "call[s] the monopoly, conferred by the patent grant, into play for a second time."
  Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 365 U. S. 336, 346 (1961). That is because the patent
  holder has "received his reward" only for the actual article sold, and not for subsequent recreations
  of it. Univis, 316 U. S., at 251. If the purchaser of that article could make and sell endless copies, the
  patent would effectively protect the invention for just a single sale. Bowman himself disputes none
  of this analysis as a general matter: He forthrightly acknowledges the "well settled" principle "that
  the exhaustion doctrine does not extend to the right to `make' a new product." Brief for Petitioner 37
  (citing Aro, 365 U. S., at 346).

  Unfortunately for Bowman, that principle decides this case against him. Under the patent exhaustion
  doctrine, Bowman could resell the patented soybeans he purchased from the grain elevator; so too
  he could consume the beans himself or feed them to his animals. Monsanto, although the patent
  holder, would have no business interfering in those uses of Roundup Ready beans. But the exhaustion
  doctrine does not enable Bowman to make additional patented soybeans without Monsanto's
  permission (either express or implied). And that is precisely what Bowman did. He took the soybeans
  he purchased home; planted them in his fields at the time he thought best; applied glyphosate to kill
  weeds (as well as any soy plants lacking the Roundup Ready trait); and finally harvested more (many
  more) beans than he started with. That is how "to `make' a new product," to use Bowman's words,
  when the original product is a seed. Brief for Petitioner 37; see Webster's Third New International
  Dictionary 1363 (1961) ("make" means "cause to exist, occur, or appear," or more specifically, "plant
  and raise (a crop)"). Because Bowman thus reproduced Monsanto's patented invention, the exhaustion
  doctrine does not protect him. 3

2. The Patent Act grants a patentee the "right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention."
   35 U. S. C.  154(a)(1); see  271(a) ("[W]hoever without authority makes, uses, offers to sell, or sells any patented invention . .
   . infringes the patent").

3. This conclusion applies however Bowman acquired Roundup Ready seed: The doctrine of patent exhaustion no more
   protected Bowman's reproduction of the seed he purchased for his first crop (from a Monsanto-affiliated seed company)
   than the beans he bought for his second (from a grain elevator). The difference between the two purchases was that the
   first--but not the second--came with a license from Monsanto to plant the seed and then harvest and market one crop of
   beans. We do not here confront a case in which Monsanto (or an affiliated seed company) sold Roundup Ready to a farmer
   without an express license agreement. For reasons we explain below, we think that case unlikely to arise. See infra, at 9. And

                                                                                                                                          3. PATENTS 37
Were the matter otherwise, Monsanto's patent would provide scant benefit. After inventing the
Roundup Ready trait, Monsanto would, to be sure, "receiv[e] [its] reward" for the first seeds it sells.
Univis, 316 U. S., at 251. But in short order, other seed companies could reproduce the product
and market it to growers, thus depriving Monsanto of its monopoly. And farmers themselves need
only buy the seed once, whether from Monsanto, a competitor, or (as here) a grain elevator. The
grower could multiply his initial purchase, and then multiply that new creation, ad infinitum--each
time profiting from the patented seed without compensating its inventor. Bowman's late-season
plantings offer a prime illustration. After buying beans for a single harvest, Bowman saved enough
seed each year to reduce or eliminate the need for additional purchases. Monsanto still held its patent,
but received no gain from Bowman's annual production and sale of Roundup Ready soybeans. The
exhaustion doctrine is limited to the "particular item" sold to avoid just such a mismatch between
invention and reward.

Our holding today also follows from J. E. M. Ag Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, Inc., 534 U. S. 124
(2001). We considered there whether an inventor could get a patent on a seed or plant, or only a
certificate issued under the Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA), 7 U. S. C.  2321et seq. We decided
a patent was available, rejecting the claim that the PVPA implicitly repealed the Patent Act's coverage
of seeds and plants. On our view, the two statutes established different, but not conflicting schemes:
The requirements for getting a patent "are more stringent than those for obtaining a PVP certificate,
and the protections afforded" by a patent are correspondingly greater. J. E. M., 534 U. S., at 142. Most
notable here, we explained that only a patent holder (not a certificate holder) could prohibit "[a] farmer
who legally purchases and plants" a protected seed from saving harvested seed "for replanting." Id., at
140; see id., at 143 (noting that the Patent Act, unlike the PVPA, contains "no exemptio[n]" for "saving
seed"). That statement is inconsistent with applying exhaustion to protect conduct like Bowman's. If a
sale cut off the right to control a patented seed's progeny, then (contrary to J. E. M.) the patentee could
not prevent the buyer from saving harvested seed. Indeed, the patentee could not stop the buyer from
selling such seed, which even a PVP certificate owner (who, recall, is supposed to have fewer rights)
can usually accomplish. See 7 U. S. C. ㎣ 2541, 2543. Those limitations would turn upside-down the
statutory scheme J. E. M. described.

Bowman principally argues that exhaustion should apply here because seeds are meant to be planted.
The exhaustion doctrine, he reminds us, typically prevents a patentee from controlling the use of
a patented product following an authorized sale. And in planting Roundup Ready seeds, Bowman
continues, he is merely using them in the normal way farmers do. Bowman thus concludes that
allowing Monsanto to interfere with that use would "creat[e] an impermissible exception to the
exhaustion doctrine" for patented seeds and other "self-replicating technologies." Brief for Petitioner
16.

But it is really Bowman who is asking for an unprecedented exception -- to what he concedes is
the "well settled" rule that "the exhaustion doctrine does not extend to the right to `make' a new
product." See supra, at 5. Reproducing a patented article no doubt "uses" it after a fashion. But as
already explained, we have always drawn the boundaries of the exhaustion doctrine to exclude that
activity, so that the patentee retains an undiminished right to prohibit others from making the thing
his patent protects. See, e.g., Cotton-Tie Co. v. Simmons, 106 U. S. 89, 93-94 (1882) (holding that a
purchaser could not "use" the buckle from a patented cotton-bale tie to "make" a new tie). That is

in the event it did, the farmer might reasonably claim that the sale came with an implied license to plant and harvest one
soybean crop.

38 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
because, once again, if simple copying were a protected use, a patent would plummet in value after
the first sale of the first item containing the invention. The undiluted patent monopoly, it might be
said, would extend not for 20 years (as the Patent Act promises), but for only one transaction. And that
would result in less incentive for innovation than Congress wanted. Hence our repeated insistence
that exhaustion applies only to the particular item sold, and not to reproductions.

Nor do we think that rule will prevent farmers from making appropriate use of the Roundup Ready
seed they buy. Bowman himself stands in a peculiarly poor position to assert such a claim. As noted
earlier, the commodity soybeans he purchased were intended not for planting, but for consumption.
See supra, at 2-3. Indeed, Bowman conceded in deposition testimony that he knew of no other farmer
who employed beans bought from a grain elevator to grow a new crop. See App. 84a. So a non-
replicating use of the commodity beans at issue here was not just available, but standard fare. And
in the more ordinary case, when a farmer purchases Roundup Ready seed qua seed -- that is, seed
intended to grow a crop -- he will be able to plant it. Monsanto, to be sure, conditions the farmer's
ability to reproduce Roundup Ready; but it does not -- could not realistically -- preclude all planting.
No sane farmer, after all, would buy the product without some ability to grow soybeans from it. And
so Monsanto, predictably enough, sells Roundup Ready seed to farmers with a license to use it to make
a crop. See supra, at 2, 6, n. 3. Applying our usual rule in this context therefore will allow farmers to
benefit from Roundup Ready, even as it rewards Monsanto for its innovation.

Still, Bowman has another seeds-are-special argument: that soybeans naturally "self-replicate or
`sprout' unless stored in a controlled manner," and thus "it was the planted soybean, not Bowman"
himself, that made replicas of Monsanto's patented invention. Brief for Petitioner 42; see Tr. of Oral
Arg. 14 ("[F]armers, when they plant seeds, they don't exercise any control . . . over their crop" or
"over the creative process"). But we think that blame-the-bean defense tough to credit. Bowman was
not a passive observer of his soybeans' multiplication; or put another way, the seeds he purchased
(miraculous though they might be in other respects) did not spontaneously create eight successive
soybean crops. As we have explained, supra at 2-3, Bowman devised and executed a novel way to
harvest crops from Roundup Ready seeds without paying the usual premium. He purchased beans
from a grain elevator anticipating that many would be Roundup Ready; applied a glyphosate-based
herbicide in a way that culled any plants without the patented trait; and saved beans from the rest for
the next season. He then planted those Roundup Ready beans at a chosen time; tended and treated
them, including by exploiting their patented glyphosate-resistance; and harvested many more seeds,
which he either marketed or saved to begin the next cycle. In all this, the bean surely figured. But
it was Bowman, and not the bean, who controlled the reproduction (unto the eighth generation) of
Monsanto's patented invention.

Our holding today is limited -- addressing the situation before us, rather than every one involving
a self-replicating product. We recognize that such inventions are becoming ever more prevalent,
complex, and diverse. In another case, the article's self-replication might occur outside the purchaser's
control. Or it might be a necessary but incidental step in using the item for another purpose. Cf. 17 U.
S. C.  117(a)(1) ("[I]t is not [a copyright] infringement for the owner of a copy of a computer program
to make . . . another copy or adaptation of that computer program provide[d] that such a new copy or
adaptation is created as an essential step in the utilization of the computer program"). We need not
address here whether or how the doctrine of patent exhaustion would apply in such circumstances. In
the case at hand, Bowman planted Monsanto's patented soybeans solely to make and market replicas
of them, thus depriving the company of the reward patent law provides for the sale of each article.

                                                                                                                                       3. PATENTS 39
Patent exhaustion provides no haven for that conduct. We accordingly affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
It is so ordered.

40 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                        4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY

   Learning Objectives: Unit 4

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:

           Describe the concept of utility in patent law.
           Explain the requirement of novelty.
           Describe the policy concerns implicated by the requirement of novelty.
           Analyze novelty in a factual scenario.

One fundamental question you may have about patents is: what kinds of stuff can be patented. The
short answer is: inventions. But what, exactly, is an invention?

A slightly longer answer is that an invention is something that is new and useful. These, in turn, involve
their own explanations.

A much longer answer is that newness and usefulness isn't enough: there are some kinds of intangibles
that might be new and useful, but which aren't really an invention under 35 U.S.C.  101 or which
Congress has otherwise deemed to be unpatentable subject matter. Examples of the former are
scientific articulations of how the world works, such as e = mc2 or claims to an invention in terms
that are too abstract, such as the idea of escrow exchanges done on a computer, while an example of
the latter is 42 U.S. Code  2181, which prohibits patents on inventions for atomic weapon. However,
dealing with questions of patent eligible subject matter at the margins can be a challenging subject
for an introductory course on intellectual property. There is a summary of the current state of patent
eligible subject matter law at the conclusion of the section on patents, but we will largely skip over the
application of Section 101. Instead, we will focus on the core concepts of utility and newness.
UTILITY
To be entitled to a patent under 35 U.S.C.  101, a patentee must have invented something useful or
something that is a useful improvement of something already in existence. The modern utility inquiry
revolves around two main forms of utility: a credible basis for asserting that the invention actually
works (credible operability) and that the invention have a practical utility, generally determined based
on whether the described utility is both substantial and specific.

Credible utility requires that the invention has a use and that the use is actually possible. An example
of an invention that does not have credible utility is a time machine: although this invention
presumably would be very useful, it is impossible to make a functioning time machine. Perpetual

                                                                                              4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 41
motion motion machines are similarly impossible. The patent examiner will presume credible utility
unless it is readily apparent that the invention is directed to an impossible undertaking or implausible
scientific principle.

For an invention to have practical utility, it must be have some form of real-world utility. The
alleged practical utility must be both substantial and specific, meaning that the invention must have
"a significant and presently available benefit to the public" and "a use which is not so vague as to be
meaningless." In re Fisher, 421 F.3d 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2005)

NOVELTY

A second fundamental requirement for obtaining a patent is that the invention be new. In patent
law, the term for newness that is used most often is "novelty," although you will sometimes hear the
question framed in terms of whether the invention is "anticipated."

The concept of novelty

The next two cases, Manning v. Cape Ann Isinglass & Glue Co. and In re Lister address the question of
what does it mean for an invention to be "new" in the eyes of the law. One dimension of novelty is
whether the inventor was actually the first person to come up with the invention or whether someone
else sought a patent or disclosed the invention to the public first. A second dimension is whether the
inventor him or herself shared the invention with the public before filing a patent application.

Central to novelty is the statutory framework, codified today at 35 U.S.C.  102. Although the
governing statute has changed over time - most recently, by the America Invents Act in 2011 - its core
language has remained largely unchanged since these cases were decided (with one major change, the
shift to basing novelty solely on the date of filing discussed below). For reference, here is the relevant
text of the 1870 Patent Act:

        SEC. 24.

        And be it further enacted, That any person who has invented or discovered any new and useful art,
        machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, not
        known or used by others in this country, and not patented, or described in any printed publication
        in this or any foreign country, before his invention or discovery thereof, and not in public use or
        on sale for more than two years prior to his application, unless the same is proved to have been
        abandoned, may, upon payment of the duty required by law, and other due proceedings had, obtain
        a patent therefor.

Novelty and the statutory framework

In addition to understanding the basic inquiry for the novelty analysis, it is also important to know
the statutory framework, 35 U.S.C.  102. This section establishes two key components of the novelty
analysis: (a) what activities or materials can constitute prior art and (b) the key dates that apply to the
analysis.

42 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Which version of  102 applies?

A challenge in understanding  102 is that components of this section were changed by the 2011
America Invents Act, and the impact of those changes is still manifesting. Thus, prior to discussing
35 U.S.C.  102, it is important to first cover the transition from the old statutory framework to the
new AIA framework. The effective date of the new  102 framework under the AIA was March 16,
2013. Any applications with effective filing dates on or after this March 16, 2013 are analyzed under
the AIA framework for  102. We will primarily focus on the "new" version of  102, but recognize
that some patents and a few new applications may still be subject to the "old" version.

"New" section 102(a) states that:

        A person shall be entitled to a patent unless -

           (1) the claimed invention was patented, described in a printed publication, or in public use, on
           sale, or otherwise available to the public before the effective filing date of the claimed invention;
           or

           (2) the claimed invention was described in a patent issued under section 151, or in an application
           for patent published or deemed published under section 122(b), in which the patent or
           application, as the case may be, names another inventor and was effectively filed before the
           effective filing date of the claimed invention.

References qualifying as prior art under 35 U.S.C.  102(a)(1) are commonly referred to as "One-time-
period prior art," because they involve analysis of only one event, while references qualifying as prior
art under 35 U.S.C.  102(a)(2) are called "Two-time-period prior art" because they require analysis of
two events: the original filing date and the subsequent publication of the application or issuance of a
patent.

Under 35 U.S.C.  102(a)(1), the categories of one-time period prior art are: (a) patented, (b) described
in a printed publication, (c) in public use, (d) on sale, and (e) otherwise available to the public. To
anticipate the invention (i.e.: render it not novel), the activity must take place prior to the effective
filing date of the application whose patentability or validity is being analyzed. Two-time-period prior
art under 35 U.S.C.  102(a)(2) consists of patent applications filed prior to the effective filing date of
the application in issue that was published or issued as a patent at some later time.

In addition, there are a set of "exceptions" provided in 35 U.S.C.  102(b). Generally, these take the
form of self-disclosures by the inventor less than one year before the effective filing date. In most
cases, however, attorneys are reluctant to advise clients to rely on these exceptions, however, as there
are several uncertainties about their scope and they almost never apply to patent applications filed in
other countries.

   35 U.S.C. 102. Conditions for patentability; novelty (2012)

                                                                                              4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 43
   a) Novelty; Prior Art.-- A person shall be entitled to a patent unless--
            (1) the claimed invention was patented, described in a printed publication, or in public use, on sale,
            or otherwise available to the public before the effective filing date of the claimed invention; or
            (2) the claimed invention was described in a patent issued under section 151, or in an application for
            patent published or deemed published under section 122(b), in which the patent or application, as
            the case may be, names another inventor and was effectively filed before the effective filing date of
            the claimed invention.

   b)
            (1) Disclosures made 1 year or less before the effective filing date of the claimed invention. A
            disclosure made 1 year or less before the effective filing date of a claimed invention shall not be prior
            art to the claimed invention under subsection (a)(1) if:
                     (A) the disclosure was made by the inventor or joint inventor or by another who obtained the
                     subject matter disclosed directly or indirectly from the inventor or a joint inventor; or
                     (B) the subject matter disclosed had, before such disclosure, been publicly disclosed by the
                     inventor or a joint inventor or another who obtained the subject matter disclosed directly or
                     indirectly from the inventor or a joint inventor
            (2) Disclosures appearing in applications and patents. A disclosure shall not be prior art to a claimed
            invention under subsection (a)(2) if--
                     (A) the subject matter disclosed was obtained directly or indirectly from the inventor or a
                     joint inventor;
                     (B) the subject matter disclosed had, before such subject matter was effectively filed under
                     subsection (a)(2), been publicly disclosed by the inventor or a joint inventor or another who
                     obtained the subject matter disclosed directly or indirectly from the inventor or a joint
                     inventor; or
                     (C) the subject matter disclosed and the claimed invention, not later than the effective filing
                     date of the claimed invention, were owned by the same person or subject to an obligation of
                     assignment to the same person.

44 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
MANNING AND ANOTHER V. CAPE ANN ISINGLASS & GLUE CO. AND OTHERS
(1883)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Manning, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the legal basis for a "newness" requirement? The policy rationale?
           How does the law address the issue of newness?
           What is the basis for the Court's conclusion on the validity of the patent?

                     Manning and another v. Cape Ann Isinglass & Glue Co. and others
                                                        2 S.Ct. 860 (1883)

WOODS. J.
We think that the defense, that the improvement described in the patent had been in public use for
more than two years prior to the application therefor, is established by the testimony.
The appellants contend that the patent covers an improvement in the process of making isinglass. It
is not contended that the patent covers the rolls between which the fish-sounds are passed, or the
keeping of the rolls cool by making them hollow and injecting a stream of cold water into the cavity,
nor the automatic scrapers, but in the use of automatic scrapers applied to such rolls to prevent the
isinglass from being carried through the rolls a second time without aeration.
The testimony shows that as early as the year 1860, James Manning, the inventor, was engaged in
the manufacture of isinglass at Ipswich, Massachusetts, in copartnership with his brother-in-law
Caleb Norwood, under the name of Norwood & Manning. In that year Oliver C. Smith, a machinist
at Salem, constructed for the firm a machine containing adjustable hollow water-cooled rolls, with
stationary scrapers, substantially such as are described in the patent, for converting isinglass into
sheets in the manner therein set forth. The use of this machine was continued down to the year 1867,
when the firm of Norwood & Manning was dissolved. In the division of the assets of the firm between
the partners, the machine with the scraper, made by Smith, fell to Norwood. He took into the business
with him as a partner his son, Caleb J. Norwood, and continued it in the same factory from 1867 to
1870, using the machine with the stationary scraper which had been made by Smith.
James Manning, after the dissolution of the firm of Norwood & Manning, established an isinglass
factory at Rockport, Massachusetts, and procured to be constructed two machines similar to that
disclosed in the patent. With this factory and machinery he set up in business his two sons, John J.

                                                                                              4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 45
Manning and William N. Manning, and they carried on the business of manufacturing isinglass, under
the name of J. J. Manning & Brother, from the year 1868 until the testimony in this case was taken
in 1877, using the two machines with scrapers above mentioned. James Manning, the inventor, had
no interest in the business carried on by Norwood and his son after the dissolution of the firm of
Norwood & Manning in 1867, nor in the business of J. J. Manning & Brother, carried on from 1868
until after the issue of the patent.

Some attempt is made to show that the use of the machines in the factory of Caleb Norwood, from
1867 to 1870, was a secret and not a public use. But we think the testimony shows a use open to the
public generally. But whether this be so or not is immaterial, for Norwood and his son were allowed
by the inventor the unrestricted use of the patent during the period mentioned, without injunction
of secrecy or other condition. This is sufficient to constitute a public use. Egbert v. Lippman, 104 U. S.
333.

The decided weight of the evidence shows that there was also a public use of the invention in the
factories of J. J. Manning & Brother for more than four years prior to the application for the patent;
namely, from 1868 to 1873.

It is also made clear by the testimony, not only that the machinery but the process used by Norwood &
Manning from 1860 to 1867, by Norwood & Son from 1867 to 1870, and by J. J. Manning & Brother
from 1868 to 1873, and after that year, was substantially the same as that described in the patent.
During all these years there was no material change, either in the machinery or the process. The use
of the machinery and process was not, therefore, an experimental use. These conclusions of fact are
fatal to the complainant's case.

It is the policy of the patent laws to forbid the issue of a patent for an invention which has been in
public use before the application therefor. The statute of 1836 (5 St. 117,  6) did not allow the issue
of a patent when the invention had been in public use or on sale for any period, however short, with
the consent or allowance of the inventor; and the statute of 1870 (16 St. 201,  24; Rev. St.  4886)
does not allow the issue, when the invention had been in public use for more than two years prior to
the application, either with or without the consent or allowance of the inventor. Under either of these
statutes the patent relied on in this case was improvidently issued, for there was a public use, with the
consent of the inventor, for more than two years prior to the application. The patent is therefore void.
McClurg v. Kingsland, 1 How. 202; Egbert v. Lippman, ubi supra; Consolidated Fruit-jar Co. v. Wright, 94 U.
S. 92; Worley v. Tobacco Co. 104 U. S. 340.

The decree of the circuit court was therefore right, and must be affirmed.

46 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
IN RE LISTER (FED. CIR. 2009)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Lister, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is "prior art"?
           Are there any meaningful structural limitations on what can constitute prior art?
           Given this precedent, how would you analyze whether an email chain distributed through a listserv
              that any interested person could join constitutes a "printed publication"?

                                                            In re Lister
                                                583 F.3d 1307 (Fed. Cir. 2009)
PROST, Circuit Judge:
Dr. Richard Lister appeals from a decision of the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences ("Board")
that affirmed the examiner's rejection of claims 21-25 of his application under 35 U.S.C.  102(b).
Because the record does not contain sufficient evidence that the prior art reference relied upon by the
Board was publicly accessible more than one year prior to the date on which Dr. Lister filed his patent
application, we vacate and remand.
I. BACKGROUND
Dr. Lister is a Ph.D. clinical psychologist and an avid sportsman. In his earlier days, he competed
regularly in organized golf tournaments. However, he eventually grew tired of what he describes
as the horrendously slow pace of a game of golf. Although he discontinued his participation in
tournaments, he continued to play casually. During this time, he realized that casual golfers have great
difficulty with the ordinary requirement that, beginning with the second stroke on each hole, the ball
must be hit while lying directly on the ground. This observation led him to conclude that recreational
golfers would be able to obtain better scores in a shorter time if they were permitted to tee up their
balls on every shot except for those taken from designated hazard areas or the putting green.
Dr. Lister described this method of playing golf in a manuscript entitled "Advanced Handicap
Alternatives for Golf" ("the manuscript" or "the Lister manuscript"):
It is strongly advocated that official sanction be given to the concept of a T handicap. That is, the
unrestricted use of a golf tee or peg on any golf shot. Currently, it is allowed 18 times, but only when
it is the first shot of the hole being played.

                                                                                              4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 47
The game otherwise would be played the same, including play in hazards of sand and water, where
a tee would not be advocated or permitted. On the surface, this may appear to be a small and
insignificant change. Ten years of careful research, by this Ph.D. clinical psychologist, sports
psychologist, and former professional athlete, has found that a T handicap option would make a
profound, positive influence on the game of golf.

Subsequently, Dr. Lister decided to seek intellectual property protection for his method of playing
golf. Proceeding without the assistance of a lawyer, he submitted the manuscript to the United States
Copyright Office ("Copyright Office") on July 4, 1994. The Copyright Office issued a certificate of
registration on July 18, 1994. At some point in the future, Dr. Lister learned that he needed to obtain
a patent rather than a copyright in order to protect his invention. On August 5, 1996, he filed an
application with the United States Patent and Trademark Office ("USPTO").

The prosecution history of Dr. Lister's application is lengthy. Over the past thirteen years, Dr. Lister
has gone through several rounds of rejections and amendments with the examiner and two appeals
to the Board. Of the five claims that remain at issue, claim 21, the only independent claim, is
representative:

        21. A method for playing a game of organized golf wherein the improvement is that each
        participating player or group of players is permitted under the official or sanctioned rules of
        said game for normal play to raise or tee the ball up above turf level at any time during play,
        except for designated hazard areas and greens, and further comprising the step of recording the
        number of strokes taken by each participating player of [sic] group of players throughout said
        game for the purpose of comparing said number of strokes with the number of strokes of each
        other participating player or group of players or to an average or expected number of strokes
        for golf play in accordance with said game.

In the most recent final rejection, issued on January 31, 2003, the examiner rejected claims 21-25 as
anticipated by the Lister manuscript under 35 U.S.C. ㎣ 102(a) and 102(b). In the examiner's view, the
manuscript was sufficiently publicly accessible to be a printed publication within the meaning of 
102(b) because an interested researcher would have been able to find it by searching the Copyright
Office's catalog by title.

On appeal, the Board reversed the  102(a) rejection and affirmed the  102(b) rejection. Ex parte
Lister, No.2006-0808 (B.P.A.I. Mar. 27, 2008). With respect to  102(a), the Board pointed out that that
subsection bars the patentability of inventions that have been described in a printed publication prior
to the applicant's date of invention. Because "[Dr.] Lister could not have disclosed his own invention
before he invented it," the Board concluded that the  102(a) rejection was erroneous. Turning to 
102(b), which precludes the patenting of inventions that were described in a printed publication more
than one year prior to the applicant's date of filing, the Board noted that under In re Klopfenstein, 380
F.3d 1345 (Fed.Cir.2004), the Lister manuscript must have been "publicly accessible" in order to have
been a printed publication. The Board found that the copyright registration for the Lister manuscript
was issued on July 18, 1994, more than one year prior to Dr. Lister's application date of August 5,
1996. It further concluded that an interested researcher would have been able to find the manuscript
by searching the Copyright Office's catalog by title for the word "golf" in combination with the
word "handicap." Additionally, the Board found that an individual seeking to view the manuscript
would have been able to do so by visiting the Copyright Office. Finally, the Board rejected Dr.
Lister's arguments that the inconvenience of visiting the Copyright Office and the Copyright Office's

48 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
rules prohibiting individuals from making copies of the manuscript precluded a finding of public
accessibility. With respect to the unavailability of copies, the Board found that the inventive concept
was straightforward enough that it could be understood and retained by a person of ordinary skill in
the art upon reading the manuscript without any need to obtain a copy.

In his request for rehearing before the Board, Dr. Lister argued that the manuscript was not publicly
accessible because there was no evidence that it was actually accessed by anyone. Additionally, Dr.
Lister argued that the Board erred by relying heavily on Klopfenstein, a case about whether a poster
presentation at a conference was a printed publication, rather than citing more factually analogous
cases, such as In re Hall, 781 F.2d 897 (Fed.Cir.1986), and In re Cronyn, 890 F.2d 1158 (Fed.Cir.1989),
which involved single copies of documents housed in libraries. The Board rejected both arguments,
concluding that evidence of actual access was not a requirement under SRI International, Inc. v.
Internet Security Systems, Inc., 511 F.3d 1186 , 1197 (Fed.Cir.2008), and that the discussion
of Hall and Cronyn in Klopfenstein, 380 F.3d at 1349, demonstrates that the law set forth
in Klopfensteinis relevant to library cases. Ex parte Lister, No.2006-0808, slip op. at 3-5 (B.P.A.I. July 22,
2008).

Dr. Lister timely appealed. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.  1295(a)(4) and 35 U.S.C.  141.

II. DISCUSSION

A

"Whether an asserted anticipatory document qualifies as a `printed publication' under  102 is a
legal conclusion based on underlying factual determinations." Cooper Cameron Corp. v. Kvaerner Oilfield
Prods., Inc., 291 F.3d 1317, 1321 (Fed.Cir.2002). We review the Board's factual determinations for
substantial evidence, In re Gartside, 203 F.3d 1305, 1315 (Fed.Cir.2000), and its legal conclusions de
novo,Klopfenstein, 380 F.3d at 1347.

Section 102(b) is a bar to patentability if "the invention was patented or described in a printed
publication in this or a foreign country or in public use or on sale in this country, more than one year
prior to the date of the application for patent in the United States." 35 U.S.C.  102(b). "The bar is
grounded on the principle that once an invention is in the public domain, it is no longer patentable by
anyone." Hall, 781 F.2d at 898.

In order to qualify as a printed publication within the meaning of  102, a reference "must have been
sufficiently accessible to the public interested in the art."Cronyn, 890 F.2d at 1160 (quotingConstant v.
Adv. Micro-Devices, Inc., 848 F.2d 1560, 1568 (Fed.Cir.1988)). "Because there are many ways in which
a reference may be disseminated to the interested public, `public accessibility' has been called the
touchstone in determining whether a reference constitutes a `printed publication' bar under 35 U.S.C.
 102(b)."Hall, 781 F.2d at 898-99. Whether a reference is publicly accessible is determined on a
case-by-case basis based on the "facts and circumstances surrounding the reference's disclosure to
members of the public."Klopfenstein, 380 F.3d at 1350. A reference is considered publicly accessible if
it was "disseminated or otherwise made available to the extent that persons interested and ordinarily
skilled in the subject matter or art exercising reasonable diligence, can locate it." Kyocera Wireless Corp.
v. Int'l Trade Comm'n, 545 F.3d 1340, 1350 (2008) (quotation marks omitted).

Prior cases have looked to a variety of factors when considering whether a reference was publicly
accessible. In several cases involving references stored in libraries, we have considered whether the

                                                                                              4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 49
research tools available would have been sufficient to permit an interested researcher to locate and
examine the reference. In Hall, for example, we held that a dissertation shelved in the stacks and
indexed in the catalog at the Freiburg University library was a printed publication. 781 F.2d at 898,
899-90. In contrast, the thesis at issue in In re Bayer was held not to have been publicly accessible as of
the critical date because at that time it was uncataloged, unshelved, and could have been found in the
library at the University of Toledo "only by one having been informed of its existence by the [author's]
faculty committee, and not by means of the customary research aids available in the library." 568 F.2d
1357, 1361 (Cust. & Pat. App.1978).

The differences in accessibility in Bayer and Hall were highlighted in Cronyn, where this court
explained that "the critical difference between [ Bayer and Hall ] that explains the different results is that
on the critical date in Bayer the thesis was `uncatalogued and unshelved' and therefore not accessible
to the public, whereas in Hall the `dissertation was accessible' because it had been indexed, cataloged
and shelved." 890 F.2d at 1161. At issue in Cronyn was a student's thesis housed in the main campus
library and the chemistry department library at Reed College. Each library contained a collection
of student theses and a corresponding set of index cards that listed the title and author of each
thesis.Id.at 1159. The index cards were filed alphabetically by the author's last name, which, this court
noted, "bears no relationship to the subject of the student's thesis." Id.at 1161. Although the index
cards and the student theses were available for public examination, this court held that the theses were
not publicly accessible because "they had not been either cataloged or indexed in a meaningful way." Id.

While cataloging and indexing have played a significant role in our cases involving library references,
we have explained that neither cataloging nor indexing is a necessary condition for a reference to
be publicly accessible.See Klopfenstein, 380 F.3d at 1348 ("[Our cases] do not limit this court to finding
something to be a `printed publication' only when there is distribution and/or indexing."). Depending
on the circumstances surrounding the disclosure, a variety of factors may be useful in determining
whether a reference was publicly accessible. See, e.g., id. at 1350 (listing four factors relevant to whether
a slide presentation was a printed publication); Bruckelmyer v. Ground Heaters, Inc., 445 F.3d 1374, 1379
(Fed.Cir.2006) (explaining that an application that resulted in the issuance of a published Canadian
patent was publicly accessible because the issued patent served as a "roadmap to the application
file"); see also id. at 1380 (Linn, J., dissenting) (opining that the application was not publicly accessible
because "the text of an issued patent does not generally serve to guide researchers to the file history
for a more expansive disclosure of the described invention, and it certainly does not lead researchers
to the file history for disclosure of subject matter not described in the issued text"). In short, we must
consider all of the facts and circumstances surrounding the disclosure and determine whether an
interested researcher would have been sufficiently capable of finding the reference and examining its
contents.

With the framework of the public accessibility analysis established, we turn to the specifics of Dr.
Lister's appeal.

B

Several of the facts that are pertinent to our public accessibility analysis are not in dispute. First, the
parties agree that the Lister manuscript discloses the claimed invention. Next, it is undisputed that the
Copyright Office issued a certificate of registration for the Lister manuscript on July 18, 1994. It is
also undisputed that the Copyright Office retained a copy of the manuscript in Washington, D.C., that
was available upon request to be inspected by the public. Additionally, the parties agree that, absent

50 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  limited special circumstances, the Copyright Office will neither provide copies of the manuscript nor
  permit individuals inspecting the document to make copies themselves. 1 However, the parties do not
  agree as to when, if ever, the manuscript was listed in a catalog or index that would have permitted an
  interested researcher to learn of its existence and locate it for inspection.

  Dr. Lister raises two arguments on appeal. First, he argues that even if the manuscript was sufficiently
  indexed so that an interested researcher could learn of its existence and relevance, the task of traveling
  to Washington, D.C., and inspecting the manuscript at the Library of Congress was too burdensome
  for it to have been considered publicly accessible. Second, he argues that the manuscript was not a
  printed publication as of the critical date because there is no evidence that it was included in a catalog
  or index at that time that would have permitted an interested researcher to discover it. We address
  each argument in turn.

  1. Availability for Inspection

  Dr. Lister analogizes this case to Northern Telecom, Inc. v. Datapoint Corp., 908 F.2d 931, 936-37
  (Fed.Cir.1990), a case in which this court held that several documents relating to a military system for
  distributed computer processing of logistical data were not printed publications within the meaning
  of  102(b) because they were not "generally available" to the interested public. According to Dr. Lister,
  the burden of traveling to Washington, D.C., and navigating what he describes as the "cumbersome
  procedures" necessary to gain access to the manuscript precludes a finding of general availability. In
  support of his position, he cites a September 10, 2004 letter from the Copyright Office that states that
  it searched its records but did not find a single request for inspection of the manuscript. Additionally,
  Dr. Lister emphasizes that the Copyright Office is unable to provide copies of the manuscript to
  interested researchers. See 37 C.F.R.  201.2(d)(2). Thus, in Dr. Lister's view, the difficulty of accessing
  the manuscript, combined with affirmative evidence that no one has ever requested to inspect it,
  demonstrates that the manuscript was effectively unavailable to the public.

  We cannot accept Dr. Lister's argument. First, there is a critical difference between the requirements
  for obtaining access to the documents at issue in Northern Telecom and the steps that one must
  take to view the Lister manuscript at the Copyright Office. In Northern Telecom, the documents
  were housed within the library at Mitre Corporation, and "[a]ccess to the library was restricted to
  persons authorized by Mitre." 908 F.2d at 936. In contrast, in this case, any member of the public
  who submits a proper request is capable of gaining access to the manuscript without any need for
  special authorization. Second, we have previously recognized that a reference can be considered
  publicly accessible even if gaining access to it might require a significant amount of travel. See Hall,
  781 F.2d at 899-900 (holding that a copy of a dissertation shelved in a library in Germany was a
  printed publication). Additionally, as the Board noted, an interested person could hire someone local
  to inspect the manuscript on their behalf. Finally, our cases have held that once accessibility is shown,
  it is unnecessary to show that anyone actually inspected the reference. See, e.g., SRI, 511 F.3d at
  1197 ("[A]ctual retrieval of a publication is not a requirement for public accessibility...."); Constant,
  848 F.2d at 1569 ("Accessibility goes to the issue of whether interested members of the relevant public
  could obtain the information if they wanted to. If accessibility is proved, there is no requirement to
  show that particular members of the public actually received the information."). Finally, we agree with

1. Under 37 C.F.R.  201.2(d)(2), the Copyright Office will provide copies of copyrighted works in only three circumstances:
   (1) the copyright holder provides written authorization; (2) a written request is filed by an attorney representing either a
   plaintiff or defendant in connection with litigation relating to the copyrighted work; or (3) the Copyright Office receives a
   court order for reproduction of a work that is the subject of litigation.

                                                                                                 4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 51
the Board that an interested researcher would be able to gain and retain an understanding of Dr.
Lister's invention upon inspection of the manuscript and without any need to obtain a copy.

2. Existence and Adequacy of an Index

The above conclusion that the Lister manuscript was available at the Copyright Office for inspection
by any interested person does not end our inquiry. We must also consider whether anyone would have
been able to learn of its existence and potential relevance prior to the critical date. Dr. Lister argues
that this criterion is not met for two reasons. First, he asserts that the catalogs and databases relied
upon by the Board were not sufficiently searchable to lead an interested researcher to the manuscript.
Second, he argues that even if some of the catalogs and databases were adequate, there is no evidence
that the manuscript was in fact listed in any of them prior to the critical date.

The parties agree that the only evidence in the record pertaining to the cataloging or indexing of
the Lister manuscript is a statement made by Dr. Lister in an Information Disclosure Statement
("IDS") filed with the USPTO during prosecution of his application.See Oral Arg., 20:31-47, June 4,
2009; available at http://oralarguments.cafc.uscourts.gov/mp3/2009-1060.mp3. In relevant part, that
statement reads:

        [A]lthough the Copyright Office maintains a public record of the registrations of copyrighted
        works, searching of the catalog cannot be done by subject. See U.S. Copyright Office, How to
        Investigate The Copyright Status of a Work 4, Circular 22, Jan. 1991 (visited Dec. 30, 1997)
        ("The Copyright Office does not maintain any listings of works by subject"). Effective with
        registrations made since 1978, copyright registration information is available to the public
        through an automated catalog, accessible either at the Library of Congress or over the Internet.
        [ Id. at 3] Searching of the automated catalog can be performed by the first word in the title
        of the work or by the author's last name. However, the automated catalog does not enable
        subject matter searching or key word searching of the text of deposits. Telephone Interview
        with Copyright Information Specialist, U.S. Copyright Office ( Jan. 6, 1998)....

Applicant further submits that any copyright information available through computerized databases
such as DIALOG is not sufficiently indexed to make Applicant's deposited work  102(b) prior art. The
information contained in these databases comes directly from the Library of Congress, and therefore
is available in essentially the exact same format as found in the automated catalog of the Library of
Congress. Telephone Interview with Linda Jarmy, Catalog Distribution Service, Library of Congress
(Jan. 9, 1998). Computerized searching in these databases does not offer subject matter searching of
copyright registrations. The only additional feature offered by computerized searching, such as in the
WESTLAW database, is the ability to search the title of works using key words.

J.A. 122-23 (footnote omitted).

As stated in the IDS and confirmed by the parties at oral argument, the undisputed facts relating
to the indexing of the manuscript are summarized as follows. There are three relevant databases,
the Copyright Office's automated catalog and two commercial databases, Westlaw and Dialog. The
automated catalog was not sorted by subject matter and could only be searched by either the author's
last name or the first word of the title of the work. Westlaw and Dialog obtained the automated
catalog data from the Copyright Office and entered it into their own databases. Users of the Westlaw
and Dialog databases could perform keyword searches of the titles, but not the full texts, of the works.

52 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Relying on Cronyn, Dr. Lister argues that none of the databases indexed or cataloged the manuscript
  in a "meaningful way" that would permit a researcher to locate it. See 890 F.2d at 1161. With respect
  to the Copyright Office's automated catalog, he asserts that neither searching by author nor the
  first word in the title ("Advanced") would guide a researcher interested in his golfing method to the
  manuscript. At oral argument, the government conceded that the automated catalog alone would
  have been insufficient to support a finding of public accessibility. Oral Arg. at 18:48-19:08,
  29:47-30:05; Cronyn, 890 F.2d at 1161 ("Here, the only research aid was the student's name, which, of
  course, bears no relationship to the subject of the student's thesis.").

  Turning to the Westlaw and Dialog commercial databases, which, unlike the Copyright Office's
  automated catalog, permit the searching of titles by keyword, Dr. Lister argues that the Board erred
  by concluding that a researcher would have found the manuscript by searching for the word "golf"
  in combination with the word "handicap." Dr. Lister criticizes the Board's conclusion as not taking
  into account the possibility that such a search would have either inundated the researcher with
  hundreds or thousands of irrelevant results or failed to retrieve relevant documents that happened
  not to include both words in their title. Additionally, he suggests that the term "handicap" is not a
  good descriptor of the invention because it is not used in any of the claims and that an interested
  researcher would have used other search terms, such as "tee" or "ball," which would not have yielded
  the manuscript.

  Dr. Lister attempts to impose too rigid of a test for whether an interested researcher could find a
  reference. The question is not whether an individual, selecting terms from the claim language, could
  execute a single keyword search that would yield all relevant references including the anticipatory
  reference at issue. Rather, our inquiry is whether it could be located by "persons interested and
  ordinarily skilled in the subject matter or art exercising reasonable diligence." Kyocera, 545 F.3d at
  1350 (emphasis added) (quotation marks omitted). A reasonably diligent researcher with access to a
  database that permits the searching of titles by keyword would be able to attempt several searches
  using a variety of keyword combinations. We agree with the Board that an individual interested in
  ways to expedite the game of golf and make it easier for casual players would be inclined to use
  "handicap" as a search term. Indeed, Dr. Lister used the term in his specification to describe his
  invention. See, e.g., J.A. 81 ("In accordance with one embodiment the present invention provides ... a
  golf handicap method (T Handicap) which generally involves the unrestricted use of teeing the ball
  after the first shot, except in hazards and greens."). Regardless of whether Dr. Lister views other search
  terms as more descriptive of his invention, a reasonably diligent researcher would have searched for
  "golf" in combination with "handicap." 2 Accordingly, we conclude that the Lister manuscript was
  publicly accessible as of the date that it was included in either Westlaw or Dialog, the databases that
  permitted keyword searching of titles.

  In order for the manuscript to be a bar to patentability under  102(b), it must have been publicly
  accessible more than one year prior to Dr. Lister filing his application on August 5, 1996. Dr. Lister
  argues that there is no evidence that it was in fact included in either Westlaw or Dialog prior to
  the critical date. 3 See Manual of Patent Examining Procedures  2128 ("Prior art disclosures on the

2. Because there is no evidence in the record suggesting that such a search would have yielded an unmanageable number of
   references, we need not decide whether in some circumstances an overwhelming number of search results might warrant a
   conclusion that a particular reference included in the list was not publicly accessible.

3. The government argues that Dr. Lister waived this argument by failing to raise it before the Board. Although it may not have
   been the primary focus of the brief he submitted to the Board, we nevertheless find that the brief sufficiently expressed Dr.

                                                                                                 4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 53
Internet or on an on-line database are considered to be publicly available as of the date the item was
publicly posted. Absent evidence of the date that the disclosure was publicly posted, if the publication
itself does not include a publication date (or retrieval date), it cannot be relied upon as prior art under
35 U.S.C. 102(a) or (b)."). The government offers two responses, neither of which is persuasive.

First, it asserts that Dr. Lister's IDS provides substantial evidence that the manuscript was listed
in the commercial databases prior to the critical date. At oral argument, the government relied
on the portion of the IDS stating that "[t]he information contained in [the commercial] databases
comes directly from the Library of Congress." J.A. 123 (emphasis added); see Oral Arg. at 21:25-24:10.
In the government's view, the use of the word "directly" is sufficient evidence that the manuscript
was listed in either Westlaw or Dialog shortly after the Copyright Office issued Dr. Lister's certificate
of registration on July 18, 1994. We disagree. We see nothing in the IDS that speaks to the date on
which the Lister manuscript was incorporated into the Westlaw and Dialog databases. When pressed
to identify such a date at oral argument, the government's only answer was "directly around the time
of the Copyright Office's housing [of the manuscript]." Oral Arg. at 23:48-24:10. The government
asks us to read too much into the word "directly." There is no indication that that portion of the
IDS was meant to address the timing of the database updates and, indeed, Westlaw or Dialog could
acquire the catalog information "directly from the Library of Congress" ten years after it was first
generated for the Copyright Office automated catalog. Further, there is no other evidence that speaks
to the timing or process by which Westlaw or Dialog incorporated the Copyright Office's updated
automated catalog information into their databases. Although "evidence establishing a specific date
of cataloging" was not required in Hall, in that case we held that "competent evidence of the general
library practice" of cataloging and shelving established that the thesis became accessible prior to the
critical date. 781 F.2d at 899. In contrast, in this case the government has not identified any evidence
of the general practice of the Copyright Office, Westlaw, or Dialog with regard to database updates.
Absent such evidence, we have no basis to conclude that the manuscript was publicly accessible prior
to the critical date.

The government's second argument is that it made a prima facie showing that the manuscript was
included in the commercial databases shortly after the Copyright Office granted the certificate of
registration and the burden has shifted to Dr. Lister to present evidence that it was not in either
database before the critical date. Because he has presented no such evidence, the government asserts
that Dr. Lister has failed to meet his burden and it was proper for the Board to make a finding
in the government's favor. We do not agree that the government has established a prima facie case
that warrants shifting the burden to Dr. Lister. Essentially, the evidence shows that at some point in
time Westlaw and Dialog incorporated the Copyright Office's automated catalog information about
the Lister manuscript into their own databases. There is no indication as to when that occurred
or whether it was prior to the critical date. We see little difference between the evidence in this
case and a situation in which an examiner comes across an undated reference that discloses an
invention for which an applicant is seeking the patent. We surely would not view the mere existence
of the reference in the latter scenario as prima facie evidence that it was available prior to the
applicant's critical date. The government urges us that it is appropriate in this case to presume that
the manuscript information was added to the Westlaw and Dialog databases prior to the critical
date because the critical date was more than a year after the certificate of registration was granted.
However, absent any evidence pertaining to the general practices of the Copyright Office, Westlaw,

Lister's disagreement with the examiner's finding that the manuscript was listed in a keyword searchable database prior to
the critical date.SeeJ.A. 296-98.

54 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  and Dialog, or the typical time that elapses between copyright registration, inclusion in the Copyright
  Office's automated catalog, and subsequent incorporation into one of the commercial databases, any
  presumption along those lines would be pure speculation.
  Because the evidence contained in the IDS neither provides substantial evidence that the Lister
  manuscript was publicly accessible as of the critical date nor suffices to prove a prima facie case of
  accessibility that would shift the burden to Dr. Lister to show inaccessibility, we conclude that the
  Board erred in affirming the examiner's  102(b) rejection.
  III. CONCLUSION
  For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Board's decision and remand for further proceedings
  consistent with this opinion. 4
  VACATED AND REMANDED

4. Citing the thirteen-year pendency of his application, Dr. Lister also asks us to issue an order requiring the USPTO to
   conclude prosecution and issue a notice of allowance. Dr. Lister did not argue to the Board that the allegedly excessive
   delays during prosecution entitle him to the issuance of a patent. Accordingly, that issue is not properly before us.See In re
   Watts, 354 F.3d 1362, 1367-68 (Fed. Cir.2004). Additionally, we note that our decision is limited to the question of whether
   the Board properly affirmed the examiner's  102(b) rejection. Other bars to patentability are not before us and may be raised
   during the proceedings on remand.
                                                                                                 4. UTILITY, PRIOR ART, AND NOVELTY 55
                                     5. NONOBVIOUSNESS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 5

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain the nonobviousness requirement, including its legal basis and analytical framework.
           Explain the policy issues implicated in the nonobviousness requirement.
           Describe the general history of the nonobviousness requirement.
           Analyze nonobviousness in a factual scenario.

Unlike the novelty analysis, nonobviousness is not about whether every limitation of a claimed
invention was disclosed in a single reference. Instead, the nonobviousness inquiry is a determination
of whether the claimed invention would be obvious based on a reference or combination of
references. The nonobviousness inquiry is always completed from the view of someone having
ordinary skill in the art--in other words, the critical question being asked is whether the claimed
invention was obvious to a person having ordinary skill in the art based on the prior art.

As a preliminary matter, it is important to discuss what is considered prior art for the purposes of the
nonobviousness analysis. Generally, any reference that qualifies as prior art under 35 U.S.C.  102 is
also prior art for the purposes of a nonobviousness analysis under 35 U.S.C.  103.

Graham v. John Deere (1966) is probably the most cited patent law case of all time. Like Manning
and Lister, Graham involved the issue of newness. Unlike those cases, however, Graham involved an
invention that was technically new, in the sense that no one had ever created it before, but yet was not
be new enough to constitute a valid patent.

Graham was hardly the first case to involve the issue of non-literal newness, however. Opinions as
far back as Hotchkiss v. Greenwood in 1850, which involved the substitution of porcelain for wood
or metal in a doorknob when other types of knobs using porcelain were already known, struggled
with this question, although it was framed in terms of "invention" rather than "nonobviousness."
Although Hotchkiss was decided more than 170 years ago, its holding is still relevant to the modern
nonobviousness inquiry. Hotchkiss held that trivial changes to an invention, such as changing a
material or composition, is not an inventive modification and therefore would be considered obvious
to someone having ordinary skill in the art. Further, Hotchkiss also states that combining two know
elements or inventions also is not considered inventive when there is an obvious reason to do so.

Although the principles from Hotchkiss were consistently used in the nonobviousness inquiry, analyses

56 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
and outcomes were not particularly consistent. This led Congress to codify the requirement in the
1952 Patent Act, imposing structure on what had become (in the patent bar's eyes) an arbitrary and
unfettered mechanism for invalidating patents.

Graham was the first Supreme Court case to address the nonobviousness requirement added by the
1952 Patent Act. Graham not only affirmed the constitutionality of 35 U.S.C.  103, but also set forth a
framework to guide the nonobviousness inquiry under Graham: (1) the scope and content of the prior
art, (2) the differences between prior art and the claims at issue, (3) the level of ordinary skill in the art,
and (4) any relevant secondary indicia such as commercial success, long felt unsolved needs, or failure
of others.

In the years following Graham, concerns persisted about the nonobviousness analysis. Supreme Court
decisions in the 1970's seemed to apply a high bar for nonobviousness, and circuit courts varied
widely in their application of the nonobviousness requirement.

In 1982, Congress created the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit and granted
it jurisdiction over all appeals involving patents including both from the USPTO and the federal
district courts. As it sought to develop a more unified and consistent patent law, the Federal Circuit
constructed several doctrinal frameworks for analyzing nonobviousness, the most well known of
which was a test called the "teaching, suggestion, or motivation" (TSM). Under the TSM test, a claimed
invention could only be obvious if there was a teaching, suggestion, or motivation to combine prior
art references to arrive at the claimed invention.

The Supreme Court's opinion in KSR Int'l Co. v. Teleflex Inc., 550 U.S. 398 (2007), both affirmed
Graham and addressed changes to the nonobviousness inquiry that had developed in the Federal
Circuit over the previous two decades. While KSR rejected the exclusive use of the TSM test to
determine obviousness, the Court recognized the need to identify a reason why a person of ordinary
skill in the art would have combined references to make the claimed invention.

We will not read Graham, its two companion cases, Calmar, Inc. v. Cook Chemical Co. and United
States v. Adams, Hotchkiss, or KSR. Instead, we'll read a more recent Federal Circuit case analyzing
nonobviousness: Apple v. Samsung.

   35 U.S.C. 103. Conditions for patentability; non-obvious subject matter (2011)

   A patent for a claimed invention may not be obtained, notwithstanding that the claimed invention is not
   identically disclosed as set forth in section 102, if the differences between the claimed invention and the
   prior art are such that the claimed invention as a whole would have been obvious before the effective filing
   date of the claimed invention to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which the claimed invention
   pertains. Patentability shall not be negated by the manner in which the invention was made.

                                                                                                                       5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 57
APPLE, INC. V. SAMSUNG ELECTRONICS CO., LTD. (FED. CIR. 2016)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read this case, ask yourself the following questions:
           How does the newness issue embodied in  103 differ from that embodied in  102?
           What might be the policy rationales underlying  103?
           How is the nonobviousness inquiry structured? Why structure the inquiry this way?
           Are there any meaningful legal constraints on the nonobviousness analysis or is it essentially an
              arbitrary inquiry?

                                     Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
                                         839 F.3d 1034 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (en banc)

Concurring in the result without opinion Circuit Judge Hughes.
Dissenting Opinion filed by Chief Judge Prost.
Dissenting Opinion filed by Circuit Judge Dyk.
Dissenting Opinion filed by Circuit Judge Reyna.

Moore, Circuit Judge.
I. INTRODUCTION
The current appeal results from a patent infringement suit and countersuit between Apple Inc.
("Apple") and Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., Samsung Electronics America, Inc., and Samsung
Telecommunications America, LLC (collectively, "Samsung"). Relevant to this en banc decision, the
district court granted summary judgment that Samsung's accused devices infringe the asserted claim
of U.S. Patent No. 8,074,172 ("the 172 patent"). After a thirteen day trial, the jury found the asserted
claim of U.S. Patent No. 5,946,647 ("the 647 patent") infringed, and the district court denied
Samsung's requested judgment as a matter of law ("JMOL"). The jury also found the asserted claim
of U.S. Patent No. 8,046,721 ("the 721 patent") infringed and not invalid and the asserted claim of
the 172 patent not invalid. The district court later denied Samsung's requested JMOL and entered

58 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  judgment accordingly. 1 Samsung appealed the district court's grant of summary judgment of
  infringement as to the 172 patent, denial of JMOL of non-infringement as to the 647 patent, and
  denial of JMOL of obviousness as to the 721 and 172 patents.

                                                             [Text omitted]

  III. DISCUSSION

  We review a district court's order granting or denying JMOL under the standard applied by the
  regional circuit. In the Ninth Circuit, JMOL "is proper when the evidence permits only one
  reasonable conclusion and the conclusion is contrary to that of the jury." See Monroe v. City of Phoenix,
  248 F.3d 851, 861 (9th Cir. 2001). The Ninth Circuit explains that "[t]he evidence must be viewed in
  the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, and all reasonable inferences must be drawn in favor
  of that party." Id. The Ninth Circuit reviews a district court's decision to grant or deny JMOL de novo.
  Id.

                                                             [Text omitted]

  B. The 721 Patent

  Apple asserted infringement of claim 8 of the 721 patent. The jury entered a verdict that claim 8 was
  infringed and would not have been obvious. J.A. 40872, 40874. Samsung challenges the district court's
  denial of JMOL that claim 8 would have been obvious. We agree with the district court that there
  was substantial evidence to support the jury's underlying fact findings and that these fact findings
  supported the conclusion that Samsung failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that claim
  8 would have been obvious.

  Obviousness is a question of law based on underlying facts. Kinetic Concepts, Inc. v. Smith & Nephew,
  Inc., 688 F.3d 1342, 1356-57 (Fed. Cir. 2012). When reviewing a denial of JMOL of obviousness,
  where there is a black box jury verdict, as is the case here, we presume the jury resolved underlying
  factual disputes in favor of the verdict winner and leave those presumed findings undisturbed if
  supported by substantial evidence. Id. We then examine the legal conclusion de novo in light of those
  facts. Id. at 1357.

  In Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 U.S. 1, 17-18, 86 S.Ct. 684, 15 L.Ed.2d 545 (1966), and KSR Int'l Co. v.
  Teleflex Inc., 550 U.S. 398, 406, 127 S.Ct. 1727, 167 L.Ed.2d 705 (2007), the Supreme Court set out the
  framework for the obviousness inquiry under 35 U.S.C.  103:

          Under  103, the scope and content of the prior art are to be determined; differences between
          the prior art and the claims at issue are to be ascertained; and the level of ordinary skill in
          the pertinent art resolved. Against this background, the obviousness or nonobviousness of the
          subject matter is determined. Such secondary considerations as commercial success, long felt
          but unsolved needs, failure of others, etc., might be utilized to give light to the circumstances
          surrounding the origin of the subject matter sought to be patented.

1. Separately, the jury found that Samsung had not infringed the asserted claims of Apple's 414 or 959 patents. Additionally,
   the jury found that Apple had infringed the asserted claim of Samsung's 449 patent but had not infringed the asserted claim
   of Samsung's 239 patent and awarded Samsung $158,400 in damages. We reinstate the panel decision as to the appeals
   relating to these issues.

                                                                                                                          5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 59
  A determination of whether a patent claim is invalid as obvious under  103 requires consideration of
  all four Graham factors, and it is error to reach a conclusion of obviousness until all those factors are
  considered. In re Cyclobenzaprine Hydrochloride Extended-Release Capsule Patent Litig., 676 F.3d 1063,
  1075-76 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (citing Richardson-Vicks Inc. v. Upjohn Co., 122 F.3d 1476, 1483 (Fed. Cir.
  1997)). 2 Objective indicia of nonobviousness must be considered in every case where present. See, e.g.,
  Transocean Offshore Deepwater Drilling, Inc. v. Maersk Drilling USA, Inc., 699 F.3d 1340, 1349 (Fed. Cir.
  2012) ("[E]vidence rising out of the so-called `secondary considerations' must always when present
  be considered en route to a determination of obviousness." (quoting Stratoflex, Inc. v. Aeroquip Corp.,
  713 F.2d 1530, 1538 (Fed. Cir. 1983))); Simmons Fastener Corp. v. Illinois Tool Works, Inc., 739 F.2d
  1573, 1575 (Fed. Cir. 1984) ("The section 103 test of nonobviousness set forth in Graham is a four
  part inquiry comprising, not only the three familiar elements (scope and content of the prior art,
  differences between the prior art and the claims at issue, and level of ordinary skill in the pertinent
  art), but also evidence of secondary considerations when such evidence is, of course, present."). This
  requirement is in recognition of the fact that each of the Graham factors helps inform the ultimate
  obviousness determination. Kinetic Concepts, 688 F.3d at 1360; Nike, Inc. v. Adidas AG, 812 F.3d
  1326, 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (holding that evidence of secondary considerations must be examined to
  determine its impact on the first three Graham factors).

  The 721 patent discloses a portable device with a touch-sensitive display that can be "unlocked
  via gestures" performed on the screen. 721 patent at Abstract. The patent teaches that a "problem
  associated with using touch screens on portable devices is the unintentional activation or deactivation
  of functions due to unintentional contact with the touch screen." Id. at 1:38-40. "Unintentional
  activation or deactivation of functions due to unintentional contact with the touch screen" is
  commonly referred to as "pocket dialing." See, e.g., J.A. 10638:9-13 (Andrew Cockburn) (describing
  the "pocket dial problem"); Apple Br. 25 ("Apple's 721 patent discloses a user-friendly solution to the
  problem of accidental activation of mobile touchscreen devices (e.g., `pocket dialing')."). Greg Christie,
  an inventor of the 721 patent, described the problem he and his colleagues set out to solve:

          [W]e were worried about accidental use, pocket dialling [sic], the phone getting shut down
          accidentally, or since we were going to have all these features on the phone, like e-mail and
          messaging, we were worried that, you know, mail could be sent accidentally or deleted
          accidentally or the phone would answer itself simply because the touch surface--you know, if it
          was like, like, the touch surface against your leg in your pocket, we were worried that just, like,
          you know, jostling around, moving around would trigger things on the screen.

  J.A. 10601:4-13.

  The 721 patent also describes the importance of making phone activation as "user-friendly" and
  "efficient" as possible. It teaches:

          Accordingly, there is a need for more efficient, user-friendly procedures for unlocking such
          devices, touch screens, and/or applications. More generally, there is a need for more efficient,
          user-friendly procedures for transitioning such devices, touch screens, and/or applications
          between user interface states (e.g., from a user interface state for a first application to a user
          interface state for a second application, between user interface states in the same application,

2. Even though no secondary considerations were argued to the Supreme Court in KSR with regard to obviousness, the Court
   explains: "Graham sets forth a broad inquiry and invited courts, where appropriate, to look at any secondary considerations
   that would prove instructive." KSR, 550 U.S. at 415, 127 S.Ct. 1727.

  60 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        or between locked and unlocked states). In addition, there is a need for sensory feedback to the
        user regarding progress towards satisfaction of a user input condition that is required for the
        transition to occur.

721 patent at 1:56-67. Mr. Christie testified that the ease of the user interface was a central design
consideration when developing the slide to unlock feature:

        [W]e thought to introduce some sort of definite gesture. We knew we wanted to have some
        instruction. We knew we wanted the interface to be obvious to the customer. It would be
        possibly the first experience even in a retail environment. They're deciding whether they want
        to buy it. They pick up this iPhone, you know, it would be very bad if they looked at the phone
        that they had heard so much about and they look at it and say "I can't figure out how to use
        this. I don't know how to unlock it. It's locked." At the same time, we knew that people would
        be unlocking their phone, you know, tens or hundreds of times a day, so we didn't want the
        instruction to be, you know, insulting or talk down to the customer. We didn't want it to be
        cumbersome, something that they would grow tired of after a while.

J.A. 10602:6-20. Apple's expert, Dr. Cockburn, explained that there was a tension between preventing
pocket dialing and ease of use: "... [I]t has to work. It has to succeed in preventing accidental activation
by mistake. But yet it needs to be something that's easy to do, but not so easy that it can occur by
accident, and it succeeds in that." J.A. 10639:19-23.

Apple asserted claim 8, which depends from claim 7, against several Samsung devices. These claims
recite:

        7. A portable electronic device, comprising:

        a touch-sensitive display;

        memory;

        one or more processors; and

        one or more modules stored in the memory and configured for execution by the one or more
        processors, the one or more modules including instructions:

                to detect a contact with the touch-sensitive display at a first predefined location
                corresponding to an unlock image;

                to continuously move the unlock image on the touch-sensitive display in accordance with
                the movement of the detected contact while continuous contact with the touch-sensitive
                display is maintained, wherein the unlock image is a graphical, interactive user-interface
                object with which a user interacts in order to unlock the device; and

                to unlock the hand-held electronic device if the unlock image is moved from the first
                predefined location on the touch screen to a predefined unlock region on the touch-
                sensitive display.

        8. The device of claim 7, further comprising instructions to display visual cues to communicate
        a direction of movement of the unlock image required to unlock the device.

                                                                                                                       5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 61
The jury found that Samsung's accused devices infringed claim 8 of the 721 patent. J.A. 40872.
Samsung does not appeal this aspect of the verdict. The jury also found that Samsung's infringement
was willful and that Samsung failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence claim 8 is invalid. J.A.
40874. Following the verdict, Samsung moved for JMOL that, inter alia, claim 8 would have been
obvious and Samsung did not willfully infringe the claim. The district court denied Samsung's motion
as to obviousness but granted the motion as to willfulness.

Samsung argues claim 8 would have been obvious in light of the combination of Neonode and
Plaisant. "Neonode" refers to the Neonode N1 Quickstart Guide. J.A. 20713. Neonode discloses a
mobile device with a touch-sensitive screen. It explains that a user may unlock the device by pressing
the power button. After the user presses the power button, text appears instructing the user to "Right
sweep to unlock." Sweeping right then unlocks the unit. J.A. 20725.

"Plaisant" refers to a video and corresponding two-page paper published in 1992 titled "Touchscreen
Toggle Design" by Catherine Plaisant and Daniel Wallace. J.A. 20742. The authors of the paper
conducted an experiment to determine which controls ("toggles") users prefer on wall-mounted
controllers for "entertainment, security, and climate control systems." Id. These controllers were
intended to be installed "flushmounted into the wall or the cabinetry." Id. The authors presented six
alternative unlocking mechanisms to a group of fifteen undergraduate students, including a "slider
toggle" where a user could activate the controller by "grab[bing] the pointer and slid[ing] it to the
other side." J.A. 20743. The students preferred "toggles that are pushed" over "toggles that slide," and
generally ranked the slider fifth of the six alternatives. Id. The paper also notes that sliders "were not
preferred," "sliding is a more complex task than simply touching," and that "sliders are more difficult
to implement than buttons." Id.

On appeal, Apple does not contest that, together, Neonode and Plaisant disclose all the elements
of claim 8.145 Rather, the parties dispute whether a person of ordinary skill in the art would have
been motivated to combine one of the unlocking mechanisms disclosed in Plaisant with Neonode.
Samsung argues "there was no evidence of any kind suggesting that Plaisant's application to a wall-
mounted device would lead inventors not to combine Plaisant with Neonode." Samsung Resp. Br.
19-20. Its expert, Dr. Greenberg, testified that a person of ordinary skill "would be highly interested"
in both references because "they both deal with touch base systems, they both deal with user
interfaces." J.A. 11982:13-17. Dr. Greenberg testified that "a person looking at this would just think
it natural to combine these two, as well taking the ideas in Plaisant, the slider, and putting them
on the Neonode is, is just a very routine thing to think about in terms of interaction design." J.A.
11982:23-11983:2. Samsung points to the Plaisant reference which states that sliding movement "is
less likely to be done inadvertently." Samsung Br. 35-36 (quoting J.A. 20743).

Apple counters that a skilled artisan designing a mobile phone would not have been motivated to
turn to a wall-mounted air conditioning controller to solve the pocket dialing problem. Apple Br.
26-27. Its expert, Dr. Cockburn, testified that a person of ordinary skill would not have been naturally
motivated to combine Neonode and Plaisant. J.A. 12877:17-21. Dr. Cockburn testified that the way
the Plaisant controllers "were intended to be used was the touch screen would be mounted into a wall
or into cabinetry and it would be used to control, for remote control, office or home appliances, like
air conditioning units or heaters." J.A. 12876:20-23. He also explained to the jury that Plaisant itself
discloses that sliding toggles were less preferred than the other switches disclosed. J.A. 12877:7-16.
Apple points to Plaisant's teachings that "sliders were not preferred," "sliding is a more complex task,"
and "sliders are more difficult to implement." Apple Br. 27-28. Apple argues there was substantial

62 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
evidence for the jury to conclude that there would not have been a motivation to combine Plaisant
and Neonode to arrive at the claimed invention.

What a prior art reference teaches and whether a skilled artisan would have been motivated to
combine references are questions of fact. See Par Pharm., Inc. v. TWI Pharms., Inc., 773 F.3d 1186,
1196-97 (Fed. Cir. 2014); Transocean Offshore Deepwater Drilling, Inc. v. Maersk Contractors USA, Inc.,
617 F.3d 1296, 1303 (Fed. Cir. 2010). "Before KSR, we had also consistently treated the question of
motivation to combine prior art references as a question of fact... KSR did not change this rule ...."
Wyers v. Master Lock Co., 616 F.3d 1231, 1238-39 (Fed. Cir. 2010); id. at 1237 ("[W]hether there was
sufficient motivation to combine the references" is a "factual issue[ ]."). The district court determined
that a reasonable jury could have found that a person of ordinary skill would not have been motivated
to combine Plaisant and Neonode:

        A reasonable jury could infer from [Dr. Cockburn's] testimony that an ordinary artisan would
        not have been motivated to combine elements from a wall-mounted touchscreen for home
        appliances and a smartphone, particularly in view of the "pocket dialing" problem specific to
        mobile devices that Apple's invention sought to address.

        Additionally, Dr. Cockburn explained that Plaisant "teach[es] away from the use of sliding,"
        because it "tells you not to use the sliding [toggle] mechanism."

J.A. 55 (citations omitted).146 After noting that what a reference teaches is a question of fact, the
district court discussed the various statements in Plaisant about sliding toggles and concluded that
substantial evidence supports the jury's fact findings that Samsung failed to establish a motivation
to combine. J.A. 55-56. We agree with the district court that on this record, the jury's implicit fact
findings that Plaisant would not have provided a skilled artisan with a motivation to combine its slider
toggle switch with Neonode is supported by substantial evidence. In addition to the statements in
Plaisant, the court explained:

        Dr. Cockburn testified, contrary to Dr. Greenberg, that a person of ordinary skill in the art
        would not have been motivated to combine the Neonode and Plaisant in such a way as to invent
        claim 8. He provided two reasons. First, Plaisant described "toggle designs" intended to be used
        with a "touch screen [that] would be mounted into a wall or into cabinetry" for controlling
        "office or home appliances, like air conditioning units or heaters." A reasonable jury could
        infer from this testimony that an ordinary artisan would not have been motivated to combine
        elements from a wall-mounted touchscreen for home appliances and a smartphone, particularly
        in view of the "pocket dialing" problem specific to mobile devices that Apple's invention sought
        to address.

J.A. 54-55 (citations omitted).

We agree with the district court's analysis. Because the jury found the issue of validity in favor of
Apple, we presume it resolved the conflicting expert testimony and found that a skilled artisan would
not have been motivated to combine the slider toggle in Plaisant with the cell phone disclosed in
Neonode. The question for our review is whether substantial evidence supports this implied fact
finding. We conclude that it does. Neonode discloses a mobile phone. Plaisant discloses a wall-
mounted air conditioning controller. The jury had both references before it. Although Samsung
presents arguments for combining the two references, these arguments were before the jury. Our
job is not to review whether Samsung's losing position was also supported by substantial evidence

                                                                                                                       5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 63
or to weigh the relative strength of Samsung's evidence against Apple's evidence. We are limited to
determining whether there was substantial evidence for the jury's findings, on the entirety of the
record. And under the Ninth Circuit standard, we cannot conclude that the evidence affords only one
reasonable conclusion and that it is contrary to that of the jury. See Monroe, 248 F.3d at 861. We agree
with the district court: "A reasonable jury could infer from this testimony that an ordinary artisan
would not have been motivated to combine elements from a wall-mounted touchscreen for home
appliances and a smartphone, particularly in view of the `pocket dialing' problem specific to mobile
devices that Apple's invention sought to address." J.A. 55.

1. The Objective Indicia of Non-Obviousness

The Supreme Court explained that various factors "may also serve to `guard against slipping into use
of hindsight,' and to resist the temptation to read into the prior art the teachings of the invention in
issue." Graham, 383 U.S. at 36, 86 S.Ct. 684 (citation omitted). These factors are commonly known as
secondary considerations or objective indicia of non-obviousness. These include: commercial success
enjoyed by devices practicing the patented invention, industry praise for the patented invention,
copying by others, and the existence of a long-felt but unsatisfied need for the invention. As this court
held in Stratoflex:

        Indeed, evidence of secondary considerations may often be the most probative and cogent
        evidence in the record. It may often establish that an invention appearing to have been obvious
        in light of the prior art was not. It is to be considered as part of all the evidence, not just when
        the decisionmaker remains in doubt after reviewing the art.

713 F.2d at 1538-39. Apple introduced evidence of industry praise, copying, commercial success, and
long-felt need. We presume the jury found that the evidence was sufficient to establish each by a
preponderance of the evidence. We find substantial evidence in the record to support each of those
findings.

a. Industry Praise

Evidence that the industry praised a claimed invention or a product that embodies the patent claims
weighs against an assertion that the same claimed invention would have been obvious. Industry
participants, especially competitors, are not likely to praise an obvious advance over the known art.
Thus, if there is evidence of industry praise of the claimed invention in the record, it weighs in favor
of the non-obviousness of the claimed invention. See, e.g., Institut Pasteur & Universite Pierre Et Marie
Curie v. Focarino, 738 F.3d 1337, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2013) ("[I]ndustry praise ... provides probative and
cogent evidence that one of ordinary skill in the art would not have reasonably expected [the claimed
invention]."); Power-One, Inc. v. Artesyn Techs., Inc., 599 F.3d 1343, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (noting that
industry praise, and specifically praise from a competitor, tends to indicate that the invention would
not have been obvious).

Samsung's entire appeal regarding the jury's fact finding that industry praise weighed in favor of
nonobviousness is contained in one half of one sentence: "Indeed, the district court relied solely on
generic praise not linked to the actual subject matter of the claim ...." Samsung Br. 37. The district
court rejected Samsung's argument on this issue, determining that substantial evidence supports
the jury's underlying findings in favor of "industry praise specifically for Apple's slide to unlock
invention." J.A. 56. It cited numerous internal Samsung documents that both praised Apple's slide to

64 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
unlock feature and indicated that Samsung should modify its own phones to incorporate Apple's slide
to unlock feature:

      PTX 119 at 11: presentation prepared by Samsung's European design team in June 2009 with
         a picture of the iPhone stating that Apple's slide to unlock invention is a "[c]reative way[ ] of
         solving UI complexity" and that "swiping unlock on the screen allows to prevent erroneous
         unlock," J.A. 50950;

      PTX 121 at 100: Samsung software verification group document with a picture of the iPhone
         noting that unlike Samsung's "Victory" phone, the iPhone's "unlocking standard is precise as it
         is handled through sliding, and it allows prevention of any wrong motion," and
         recommending a "direction of improvement" to make it the "same as iPhone, [and] clarify the
         unlocking standard by sliding," J.A. 51289;

      PTX 157 at 19-20: Samsung document with a picture of the iPhone recommending
         improving the Samsung phone by making it "easy to unlock, [given that] lock screen always
         shows guide text or arrow like the iPhone" and to make the lock icon's movement "be smooth
         and continuous" like the iPhone, J.A. 57 ( JMOL Order citing PTX 157);

      PTX 219 at 14: Samsung document with a picture of the iPhone noting that the iPhone
         "intuitively indicate[s] the direction and length to move when unlocking on the lock screen,"
         J.A. 51603;

      PTX 120 at 28, 84: Samsung document with a picture of an iPhone that describes the
         "Direction of Improvement" as using a defined bar to unlock the phone, as is done on the
         iPhone. The same document describes the "Direction of Improvement" as displaying the
         unlock instruction on the screen, as is done on the iPhone. J.A. 51028, 51084.

See J.A. 56-57 (JMOL Order citing several Samsung documents). Such internal documents from the
patentee's top competitor represent important admissions, acknowledging the merits of the patented
advance over the then state of the art and can be used to establish industry praise. Dr. Cockburn,
Apple's expert, testified "these various Samsung documents recognized the advantages of claim 8." J.A.
57 (citing J.A. 10640-52).

The court also explained that Apple presented a video at trial showing Steve Jobs unveiling the slide
to unlock feature at an Apple event. When Mr. Jobs swiped to unlock the phone, "the audience burst
into cheers." J.A. 12879-80 (Andrew Cockburn). The video was shown to the jury, and Apple's expert,
an inventor, and Apple's Vice President of Marketing all referenced the video in their testimony. See
J.A. 57 (JMOL Order citing 4/4/14 Tr. at 603:6-11 (Greg Christie)); J.A. 12879:17-12880:2 (Andrew
Cockburn); 4/1/14 Tr. at 428:12-17 (Phillip Schiller) ("There were many press in attendance at the
event, and the reaction was enormous.").

Samsung does not discuss any of this evidence on appeal. In light of this evidence, we find its
argument that the district court cited only generic praise of the iPhone, and not praise tied to the
claimed slide to unlock feature, is without merit. The jury was presented with substantial evidence
of praise in the industry that specifically related to features of the claimed invention, thereby linking
that industry praise with the patented invention.

b. Copying

Samsung does not dispute in its briefing that the jury heard substantial evidence that it copied the

                                                                                                                       5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 65
  iPhone's claimed features. In other words, Samsung does not challenge on appeal that substantial
  evidence exists in the record that Samsung copied Apple's slide to unlock feature, nor does it challenge
  on appeal that this evidence of copying supports a conclusion that claim 8 would not have been
  obvious. Apple cites the same Samsung internal documents for both industry praise and copying,
  as they show evidence of both. The record contains multiple internal Samsung presentations given
  by different Samsung groups at different times stating that the iPhone's slide to unlock feature is
  better than the various Samsung alternatives. See supra J.A. 50950 (PTX 119); J.A. 51028, 51084 (PTX
  120); J.A. 51289 (PTX 121); J.A. 57 (JMOL Order citing PTX 157); J.A. 51603 (PTX 219). And many
  of these same presentations conclude that the direction for improvement is for Samsung to modify
  its unlocking mechanism to be like the iPhone. See id. This is substantial evidence of copying by
  Samsung, and it supports the jury's verdict that the claimed invention would not have been obvious.

  c. Commercial Success

  In its opening appellate brief, Samsung also glosses over commercial success, giving it one sentence:
  "Apple made no effort to establish a nexus between commercial success and the subject matter of
  claim 8." Samsung Br. 37. Commercial success requires a nexus to the claimed invention. Transocean,
  699 F.3d at 1350. We look to the record to ascertain whether there is substantial evidence for the jury's
  fact finding that Apple established a nexus between commercial success and the invention in claim 8.

  At trial, Apple's expert, Dr. Cockburn, testified that the iPhone practiced the asserted claim of the
  721 patent, and "clearly there's been commercial success of the iPhones that use this invention."
  J.A. 12879:20-22; see also J.A. 11984:24-25 ("[T]here's no question that the Apple iPhone was a
  commercial success.") (Saul Greenberg, Samsung's expert). Critically, Apple presented survey evidence
  that customers would be less likely to purchase a portable device without the slide to unlock feature
  and would pay less for products without it, thus permitting the jury to conclude that this feature
  was a key driver in the ultimate commercial success of the products. 3 J.A. 21066, 21108. Apple's
  Senior Vice President of Worldwide Marketing testified that slide to unlock was the very first feature
  shown in Apple's original iPhone TV commercial, 4/1/14 Tr. at 433:16-434:18 (Phillip Schiller)
  (citing PTX 180), and the jury saw that commercial during the trial. Id. A reasonable jury could have
  found evidence that Apple's marketing experts elected to emphasize the claimed feature as evidence
  of its importance. It is likewise reasonable to conclude that advertising that highlights or focuses
  on a feature of the invention could influence customer purchasing decisions. And an inventor of
  the 721 patent--an Apple Vice President--confirmed that slide to unlock was important because it
  "would possibly be [a customer's] first experience even in a retail environment" when the customer
  was "deciding whether they want to buy it." J.A. 10601:25-10602:22 (Greg Christie).148 Mr. Schiller
  explained the importance of the slide to unlock feature in great detail:

          When this ad ran, people hadn't had the opportunity yet to actually use an iPhone for
          themselves, and so they've never used at this point in time a device anything like it. The
          challenge is how do you show people, in a simple, 30-second ad, something that gives them a

3. In its reply brief, Samsung argues that Apple's survey evidence "did not even test the 721 patent for smartphones." Samsung
   Resp. Br. 21. The claims of the 721 patent, however, are not directed to a smartphone, but rather to a "hand-held electronic
   device." J.A. 685. Apple's survey evidence tested tablets with 7 screens. No one argued that a 7 tablet was not a "hand-held
   electronic device," nor does this distinction have anything to do with the slide to unlock feature. The dissents suggest that
   the survey evidence should be rejected because the survey only establishes that customers would prefer to purchase a device
   with a slide-to-unlock feature and that such evidence does not demonstrate a nexus to Apple's particular slide-to-unlock
   mechanism. We decline to reach this argument because it was never made in this appeal.

  66 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        feel for what it's like to use this new generation of Apple's smartphone. And we started the ad
        with something you're going to be doing every day, many, many times a day, which is to unlock
        the screen, and to do that, you use a simple gesture, slide to unlock. And that one gesture, having
        seen that one thing first, you get an instant idea of how multitouch works so that you're doing a
        gesture on the screen, and it does something simple and useful to you, and that it's easy to use.
        You don't need a manual to figure it out. And that one starting point was a great beginning to
        your understanding of what an iPhone is and what this kind of device can do.

4/1/14 Tr. at 433:1-18. Finally, the video of the crowd "burst[ing] into cheers" when Steve Jobs
demonstrated the slide to unlock feature supports a conclusion that consumers valued this particular
feature. J.A. 12879:20-12880:2 (Andrew Cockburn). It is the fact finders' job to assess the probative
value of the evidence presented. Pro-Mold & Tool Co. v. Great Lakes Plastics, Inc., 75 F.3d 1568, 1574
(Fed. Cir. 1996) ("It is within the province of the fact-finder to resolve these factual disputes regarding
whether a nexus exists between the commercial success of the product and its patented features, and
to determine the probative value of Pro-Mold's evidence of secondary considerations ....").

This record overall contains substantial evidence of a nexus between the slide to unlock feature and
the iPhone's commercial success, and we are required to give this jury fact finding deference. It is not
our role to reweigh the evidence or consider what the record might have supported. This commercial
success evidence supports the jury's verdict that the claimed invention would not have been obvious.

d. Long-Felt Need

Evidence of a long-felt but unresolved need can weigh in favor of the non-obviousness of an invention
because it is reasonable to infer the need would not have persisted had the solution been obvious.
There is substantial evidence for the jury to have found that there was a long-felt but unresolved need
for a solution to the pocket dialing problem until Apple's claimed invention, with its slide to unlock
feature, solved that problem. Samsung's appeal of the jury's fact finding of long-felt need was limited
to a single sentence, which was itself simply a quote from George M. Martin Co. v. All. Mach. Sys. Int'l
LLC, 618 F.3d 1294, 1304 (Fed. Cir. 2010): "[w]here the differences between the prior art and the
claimed invention are as minimal as they are here, ... it cannot be said that any long felt need was
unsolved." Samsung Br. 37 (alteration in original). In its brief, there was no application to this case, no
analysis of the issue of long-felt need, and no citation to any record evidence.

To the extent that Samsung's quote should be interpreted as precluding a jury finding of long-felt
need favoring non-obviousness when the difference between the prior art and the claimed invention
is small, we reject such a categorical rule. This type of hard and fast rule is not appropriate for the
factual issues that are left to the province of the jury. There could be a long-felt need for what might
be considered a relatively small improvement over the prior art--it all depends upon the evidence,
and it is up to the fact finder to assess that evidence.

Moreover, we do not understand the quote from George M. Martin to be a proclamation of law but
instead simply an application to the particular facts of that case. The quoted language makes clear that
the court was evaluating the facts in that particular case regarding the claimed advances over the prior
art, "as minimal as they are here." George M. Martin, 618 F.3d at 1304. And importantly, the George M.
Martin court explains that the "need" had already been met by the prior art devices that already solved
the problem at issue. Id. at 1305. Thus, in George M. Martin, not only was the difference between the
prior art and the claimed invention minimal, but the prior art had already solved the problem for

                                                                                                                       5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 67
  which the patentee claimed there was a long-felt need. Id. Samsung's sole argument on long-felt need
  is thus based on a misreading of George M. Martin.

  In this case, there is substantial evidence for the jury's finding that long-felt need supported the
  nonobviousness of the claimed invention. Denying JMOL on this issue, the district court cited
  testimony from Apple's expert: "Dr. Cockburn's testimony that phone designers had been trying to
  solve the problem of accidental activation and the `pocket dial problem' before the iPhone existed,
  but had only come up with `frustrat[ing]' solutions." J.A. 57 (quoting J.A. 10638-39). While the expert
  discusses particular examples in the first person: "I have been very frustrated with [the prior art
  options]," the jury could still reasonably find that this testimony was probative of a long-felt need. See
  J.A. 10638:17-19.

  The district court also cited the testimony of one of the inventors, where he discussed concerns over
  pocket dialing. 4

  In addition to the portion of Dr. Cockburn's testimony cited by the district court, there are other
  portions of his testimony upon which the jury fact finding could be predicated. The record contained
  a document (PTX 55) in which Samsung listed all the alternatives to the iPhone slide to unlock.
  See 4/4/14 Tr. at 680:10-687:15 (Andrew Cockburn). Apple's expert went through several of the
  alternatives, including the Ripple unlock, the glass unlock, and the circle unlock, and explained how
  each of these failed to solve the accidental activation problem. Id. The jury could have reasonably
  found that this testimony established long-felt unresolved need.

  In addition, the jury could have found that the same internal Samsung documents Apple relied
  upon for industry praise and copying demonstrate that Samsung compared four of its own rejected
  alternative unlock mechanisms (Kepler, Victory, Behold, & Amythest) to the iPhone slide to unlock
  mechanism, and that Samsung concluded the iPhone slide to unlock was better. See, e.g., J.A. 51028
  (PTX 120 at 28 ("Behold3: Unintentional unlock occurs ... iPhone Lock undone only when sliding
  action is applied to a specific button")); J.A. 51289 (PTX 121 at 100 ("Victory: The Screen Lock
  gets unlocked with a slight flick motion"; "iPhone Unlocking standard is precise as it is handled
  through sliding, and it allows prevention of any wrong motion")). The jury could have found that
  these Samsung documents show that Samsung, Apple's fiercest competitor, was unsuccessfully trying
  to solve the same problem. All of this evidence was presented to the jury during the trial in this case.
  This evidence constitutes substantial evidence for the jury fact finding that there was a long-felt but
  unresolved need, which Apple's 721 patented invention solved. This evidence weighs in favor of non-
  obviousness.

  2. Conclusion on Obviousness of the 721 Patent

  Acknowledging that "it can be important to identify a reason that would have prompted a person of
  ordinary skill in the relevant field to combine the elements in the way the claimed new invention

4. This is how the inventor described the problem to be solved:
             Q: What was the problem that you guys were working on at the time that you came up with the 721 invention?
             A: ... We were worried about accidental use, pocket dialling [sic], the phone getting shut down accidentally, or since
             we were going to have all these features on the phone, like e-mail and messaging, we were worried that, you know,
             mail could be sent accidentally or deleted accidentally or the phone would answer itself simply because the touch
             surface--you know, if it was like, like, the touch surface against your leg in your pocket, we were worried that just,
             like, you know, jostling around, moving around would trigger things on the screen.

  68 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
does," the Supreme Court cautioned that "[h]elpful insights, however, need not become rigid and
mandatory formulas." KSR, 550 U.S. at 418-19, 127 S.Ct. 1727. The Supreme Court explained:

        The obviousness analysis cannot be confined by a formalistic conception of the words teaching,
        suggestion, and motivation, or by overemphasis on the importance of published articles and the
        explicit content of issued patents. The diversity of inventive pursuits and of modern technology
        counsels against limiting the analysis in this way.

Id. at 419, 127 S.Ct. 1727. "Rigid preventative rules that deny factfinders recourse to common sense,
however, are neither necessary under our case law nor consistent with it." Id. at 421, 127 S.Ct. 1727.
With these principles in mind, we review de novo the ultimate legal determination and conclude that
it would not have been obvious to a skilled artisan to combine the prior art to arrive at the claimed
invention.

Common sense and real world indicators indicate that to conclude otherwise would be to give in to
hindsight, to allow the exact ex post reasoning against which the Supreme Court cautioned in Graham
and KSR. The record includes Plaisant and Neonode and all that these references teach, including
Plaisant's reference to inadvertent activation, complexity, difficult implementability, and that users
do not prefer sliders. Though the prior art references each relate to touchscreens, the totality of the
evidence supports the conclusion that it would not have been obvious for a skilled artisan, seeking
an unlock mechanism that would be both intuitive to use and solve the pocket dialing problem for
cell phones, to look to a wall-mounted controller for an air conditioner. The two-page Plaisant paper
published in 1992 reported the results of a user-preference survey of fifteen undergraduates on six
different computer-based switches. That a skilled artisan would look to the Plaisant paper directed
to a wall-mounted interface screen for appliances and then choose the slider toggle, which the study
found rated fifth out of six options in usability, to fulfill a need for an intuitive unlock mechanism that
solves the pocket dialing problem for cell phones seems far from obvious.

We have considered the jury's implicit fact findings about the teachings of Plaisant and Neonode. We
have also considered the objective indicia found by the jury which are particularly strong in this case
and powerfully weigh in favor of validity. They include copying, industry praise, commercial success,
and long-felt need. These real world indicators of whether the combination would have been obvious
to the skilled artisan in this case "tip the scales of patentability," Graham, 383 U.S. at 36, 86 S.Ct. 684,
or "dislodge the determination that claim [8 would have been] obvious," KSR, 550 U.S. at 426, 127
S.Ct. 1727. Weighing all of the Graham factors, we agree with the district court on the ultimate legal
determination that Samsung failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that claim 8 of the
721 patent would have been obvious. We affirm the district court's denial of JMOL.

                                                           [Text omitted]

IV. CONCLUSION

We affirm and reinstate the district court judgment as to the 647, 721, and 172 patents. We reinstate
the portions of the panel decision that pertain to the 959, 414, 239, and 449 patents, for which the
panel decision affirmed the district court's rulings on all issues of those patents. We thus reinstate the
district court's award of costs which the panel had vacated. We remand the willfulness issue for the
district court to consider under the Supreme Court's Halo standard in the first instance.

AFFIRMED

                                                                                                                       5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 69
Prost, Chief Judge, dissenting.

At the outset, I share Judge Dyk's and Judge Reyna's concerns as to the procedural irregularities
surrounding this case at the en banc stage. There was no need to take this case en banc. However,
having done so, the en banc court would certainly have benefited from our normal practice of
allowing further briefing and argument from the parties and from hearing the views of amici, such as
the government.

On the merits, I agree with Judge Dyk that KSR International Co. v. Teleflex Inc. significantly reduced the
evidentiary burden necessary to establish a motivation to combine prior art references and held that
motivation to combine can be found in "any need or problem known in the field of endeavor," not just
the problem faced by the inventor. 550 U.S. 398, 420, 127 S.Ct. 1727, 167 L.Ed.2d 705 (2007). I also
agree with his concerns regarding the majority's elevation of secondary considerations beyond their
historic role, which is that secondary considerations take on less importance when there is little doubt
as to obviousness. See Dow Chem. Co. v. Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co., 324 U.S. 320, 330, 65 S.Ct.
647, 89 L.Ed. 973 (1945) ("But these considerations are relevant only in a close case where all other
proof leaves the question of invention in doubt."); Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. v. Ray-O-Vac Co., 321
U.S. 275, 279, 64 S.Ct. 593, 88 L.Ed. 721 (1944) ("These factors were entitled to weight in determining
whether the improvement amounted to invention and should, in a close case, tip the scales in favor of
patentability.").

Aside from these broader legal principles, though, I write separately to express concern that the
majority misapplies the substantial evidence standard of review with respect to the invalidity analysis,
finding evidence in the record when there is none to support the jury's implicit factual findings.
With respect to the 647 patent, the majority goes too far by implicitly modifying our prior claim
construction that is binding on and agreed upon by the parties.

In the majority's view, the existence of any evidence that could theoretically support a jury verdict
would seem to end our substantial evidence review on appeal. But see Consol. Edison Co. of N.Y. v.
Nat'l Labor Relations Bd., 305 U.S. 197, 229, 59 S.Ct. 206, 83 L.Ed. 126 (1938) ("Substantial evidence
is more than a mere scintilla. It means such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion."). Indeed, as Judge Reyna forcefully articulates in his dissent today,
the majority has abdicated its role in substantial evidence review. For the additional reasons discussed
below, I respectfully dissent.

DISCUSSION

I

A

Under the majority's analysis, the question with respect to the validity of claim 8 of the 721 patent is
straightforward: whether there is substantial evidence to support the jury's implicit finding that there
was no motivation to combine Neonode and Plaisant. The en banc majority relies on the testimony
of Apple's expert, Dr. Cockburn, to say that a skilled artisan would not be motivated to combine
Neonode and Plaisant. In support, the en banc majority cites only one fact (that is self-evident from
the face of the references themselves): Neonode concerns a portable telephone and Plaisant concerns
wall-mounted touchscreen devices. That lone statement does not rise to the level of substantial
evidence.

70 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Neonode describes a portable phone that may be activated by "[s]weep[ing] right" on the screen. J.A.
  20725. Plaisant discloses a toggle device for use on a touch screen, referred to as a "[s]lider toggle,"
  which requires a user to slide a pointer from one side of the toggle to the other in order to activate it.
  J.A. 20743. Plaisant also teaches that an "advantage of the sliding movement is that it is less likely to
  be done inadvertently therefore making the toggle very secure (the finger has to land on and lift off
  the right locations)." Id. It is undisputed that Neonode and Plaisant are analogous art references that
  together disclose all of the limitations of claim 8. The relevant question is whether a skilled artisan
  would be motivated to combine the references to solve the problem addressed by the 721 patent,
  namely "the unintentional activation or deactivation of functions due to unintentional contact with
  the touch screen." 5

  721 patent col. 1 ll. 38-40. See KSR, 550 U.S. at 420, 127 S.Ct. 1727 (noting that a motivation to
  combine may be found in "any need or problem known in the field of endeavor at the time of
  invention and addressed by the patent").

  The majority holds that there is no motivation to combine Neonode with Plaisant because a person
  of ordinary skill would not turn to Plaisant's wall-mounted touchscreen to solve the "unintentional
  activation" problem of a portable phone. The problem with that conclusion is that Apple did not
  present any evidence to support it. Indeed, a review of the entirety of Dr. Cockburn's testimony on
  motivation to combine reveals the striking absence of any evidence that a skilled artisan would not
  look to Plaisant simply because it discloses wall-mounted touchscreens:

          Q. And can you show us, please, using some graphics, remind us what the Plaisant application
          is.

          A. Sure. Quickly I've got a few slides on Plaisant, this is the paper, the two-page paper, it
          describes touch screen toggle designs, so these are on/off switches.

          And the way they were intended to be used was the touch screen would be mounted into a wall or
          into cabinetry and it would be used to control, for remote control, office or home appliances, like air
          conditioning units or heaters.

          The publication itself and the video that accompanies it both teach away from the use of
          sliding.... [Plaisant] tells us that toggles that are pushed seem to be preferred over toggles that
          slide; and the sliding is more complex than simply touching; and also that sliders are harder to
          implement.

5. Apple also argued at the district court and on appeal that Plaisant teaches away from using sliders because they were "not
   preferred" over other toggle devices. Apple Br. 27. The majority declined to address teaching away, focusing instead on
   motivation to combine. The majority states, however, that "even if Plaisant does not teach away, its statements regarding
   users preferring other forms of switches are relevant to a finding regarding whether a skilled artisan would be motivated to
   combine the slider toggle in Plaisant with the mobile phone in Neonode." Majority Op. at 1051 n.13. This rationale is new.
   It was never before the jury, see J.A. 12876-78, and even Apple does not assert that rationale.
   In any event, there is no teaching away here. Though Plaisant notes that sliders may not be preferred, it also describes
   advantages that sliders have over other toggle methods. J.A. 20743. As a matter of law, "the mere disclosure of more than one
   alternative does not amount to teaching away from one of the alternatives where the reference does not criticize, discredit,
   or otherwise discourage the solution" presented by the disclosure. SightSound Techs., LLC v. Apple Inc., 809 F.3d 1307, 1320
   (Fed. Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted); see also Allergan, Inc. v. Apotex Inc., 754 F.3d 952, 964
   (Fed. Cir. 2014) (stating that "mere disclosure of alternative preferences" does not teach away).

                                                                                                                          5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 71
          And the figure at the top shows those results for user preference indicating that both of the
          two designs that they considered, levers and sliders, was the least preferred, that's the slider
          highlighted in red and the lever.

          Q. [Samsung's expert] told this jury that a person of ordinary skill in the art would have been
          naturally motivated to combine the Neonode guide with the Plaisant article.

          Did you agree with that opinion?

          A. No, I do not.

          Q. And why do you say that?

          A. The patent office, the patent examiner, had all of the Neonode guide available to them.

          They also had Plaisant, in its complete form, available to them, and they commented extensively
          on Plaisant. There was an extensive discussion of Plaisant, and at the end of that discussion,
          they conclude that Plaisant does not, or none of the prior art discloses continuous movement of
          the unlock image to order to unlock the device.

  J.A. 12876-78 (emphases added to denote portions of the testimony relied on by the majority). 6

  Dr. Cockburn's statement concerning wall-mounted touchscreens did not concern whether a person
  of ordinary skill would look to Plaisant to solve the problem of "unintentional activation"; it was
  merely a restatement of Plaisant's express disclosure. See J.A. 20742 ("Users see the screen
  flushmounted into the wall or the cabinetry."). 7 Indeed, leaving aside his reference to the entirely
  discrete issue of teaching away, Dr. Cockburn's only purported rationale for a lack of motivation to
  combine was that both Neonode and Plaisant were before the Patent Office during prosecution--a
  fact that Apple does not rely on before us with respect to motivation to combine.

  In stark contrast, the jury heard compelling evidence that a skilled artisan would be motivated to
  combine the references to solve the problem of unintentional activation. Most importantly, Plaisant
  itself expressly teaches that an "advantage of the sliding movement is that it is less likely to be done
  inadvertently." J.A. 20743. Indeed, this disclosure alone does more than motivate the combination of
  Plaisant with Neonode--it actually teaches and suggests it.

  Samsung's expert, Dr. Greenberg, explained this to the jury when asked whether a skilled artisan
  would be motivated to combine the references:

          They both specifically describe how a sliding action is used to prevent accidental activation.

          So this is--you know, a person looking at this would just think it natural to combine these two,

6. Apple never even argued to the jury that Plaisant's disclosure being a wall-mounted device had any bearing on motivation
   to combine. See Apple Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 5:12-cv-630, Trial Tr. of Apr. 29, 2014 at 3212-14, ECF No. 1929.

7. The majority only cites Dr. Cockburn's statement that he did not believe there was a motivation to
   combine Neonode with Plaisant but not his subsequent explanation. A court may not treat a conclusory answer without
   any context as evidence. See Telemac Cellular Corp. v.Topp Telecom, Inc., 247 F.3d 1316, 1329 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (holding that
   conclusory statements offered by experts are not evidence).
  72 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
          as well taking the ideas in Plaisant, the slider, and putting them on the Neonode is, is just a very
          routine thing to think about in terms of interaction design.

  J.A. 11982-83. By the end of trial, the jury had thus heard from Samsung's expert, who articulated
  a specific motivation to combine based on the explicit disclosure of Plaisant itself, and from Apple's
  expert, who gave no explanation as to why a skilled artisan would not be so motivated.

  Nonetheless, the majority finds that there is substantial evidence of a lack of motivation to combine.
  But a reviewing court in our situation must "review the record as a whole," crediting not only evidence
  favoring the nonmovant but also "evidence supporting the moving party that is uncontradicted and
  unimpeached, at least to the extent that that evidence comes from disinterested witnesses." Reeves v.
  Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 151, 120 S.Ct. 2097, 147 L.Ed.2d 105 (2000) (internal
  quotation marks omitted). Here, the record as a whole makes clear that a skilled artisan, starting with
  the portable phone of Neonode, would have seen a benefit to adding Plaisant's sliders to solve the
  accidental activation problem described by the  721 patent. 8 See KSR, 550 U.S. at 424, 127 S.Ct. 1727.
  A straightforward evaluation of the entire record compels only one reasonable conclusion--there is a
  motivation to combine Neonode with Plaisant.

  In sum, there is no support in the record for the majority's conclusion that substantial evidence
  supports the jury's implicit factual finding that a person of ordinary skill in the art would not be
  motivated to combine Neonode and Plaisant. Substantial evidence may be a lenient standard, but it is
  a standard nonetheless that cannot be met with the stark absence of evidence. Therefore, no rational
  jury could find that a motivation to combine the references to arrive at the claimed invention was
  lacking.

  B

  Despite the majority's statement that there is no motivation to combine, the majority does not appear
  to rest its conclusion on that basis. See Majority Op. at 1052. Instead, the majority goes on to state
  that it considers Plaisant's teachings, including the reference to "inadvertent activation," against the
  evidence of secondary considerations. Id. at 1058-59. It is unclear what analytical framework the
  majority has adopted in its analysis and whether this goes to the question of motivation to combine.
  We have only weighed the teachings of a prior art reference related to motivation to combine against
  each other in the teaching away context. See, e.g., Galderma Labs., L.P. v. Tolmar, Inc., 737 F.3d 731, 739
  (Fed. Cir. 2013) (a teaching that a concentration of 0.1% was optimal did not weigh against a teaching
  that 0.3% concentration was possible); DePuy Spine, Inc. v. Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc., 567 F.3d 1314,
  1327 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (a teaching expressing a "general preference for an alternative" did not weigh
  against a teaching). Doing so as part of the ultimate legal question of obviousness, as the majority does
  now, is a new approach that neither we nor the Supreme Court has sanctioned.

  Given the majority's conclusion (with which I disagree) that there was no motivation to combine
  references in this case, there is no reason for the majority to go on to opine on the question of
  secondary considerations at all--that discussion is arguably dicta. 9 See, e.g., Allergan, Inc. v. Sandoz

8. Because it is undisputed that Plaisant is analogous art, a hypothetical person of ordinary skill would be aware of it. See Mast,
   Foos, & Co. v. Stover Mfg. Co., 177 U.S. 485, 494, 20 S.Ct. 708, 44 L.Ed. 856 (1900) ("[I]n determining the question of invention,
   we must presume the patentee was fully informed of everything which preceded him, whether such were the actual fact or
   not."); Kimberly-Clark Corp. v. Johnson & Johnson, 745 F.2d 1437, 1449-54 (Fed. Cir. 1984) (collecting cases).

9. The majority's assessment of secondary considerations also relies on additional evidence that was not presented by Apple

                                                                                                                          5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 73
Inc., 796 F.3d 1293, 1304-07 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (affirming a nonobvious determination based only on
issues of teaching away and unexpected results); Stryker Corp. v. Zimmer, Inc., No. 2013-1668, 837
F.3d 1268, 1277-78, 2016 WL 4729504, at *7 (Fed. Cir. Sept. 12, 2016) (declining to reach secondary
considerations in reaching a determination of nonobviousness), vacated and remanded on other
grounds sub nom. Halo Elecs., Inc. v. Pulse Elecs., Inc., --- U.S. ----, 136 S.Ct. 1923, 195 L.Ed.2d 278
(2016); In re Fine, 837 F.2d 1071, 1076 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (same).

In my analysis, however, I conclude that no reasonable jury could find a lack of motivation to
combine, so I am obligated to consider Apple's proffered evidence of secondary considerations. Nike,
Inc. v. Adidas AG, 812 F.3d 1326, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

In the history of our court, we have only once held that evidence of secondary considerations
outweighs strong evidence of obviousness. See Transocean Offshore Deepwater Drilling, Inc. v. Maersk
Drilling USA, Inc., 699 F.3d 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2012). In that case, the jury, in view of "compelling"
evidence, made express findings that seven types of secondary considerations supported
nonobviousness. Id. at 1349, 1354. However, we acknowledged that "[f]ew cases present such
extensive objective evidence of nonobviousness, and thus we have rarely held that objective evidence
is sufficient to overcome a prima facie case of obviousness." Id. at 1354. This is not a case where
evidence of secondary considerations is so "extensive." See KSR, 550 U.S. at 426, 127 S.Ct. 1727 ("Like
the District Court, finally, we conclude Teleflex has shown no secondary factors to dislodge the
determination that claim 4 is obvious.").

When examining evidence of secondary considerations, "courts must exercise care in assessing
proffered evidence of objective considerations, giving such evidence weight only where the objective
indicia are attributable to the inventive characteristics of the discovery as claimed in the patent." In
re Cyclobenzaprine Hydrochloride Extended-Release Capsule Patent Litig., 676 F.3d 1063, 1079 n.6 (Fed.
Cir. 2012) (internal quotation marks omitted) (citations omitted). The proponent of such evidence of
secondary considerations, in this case Apple, "bears the burden of showing that a nexus exists between
the claimed features of the invention and the objective evidence offered to show non-obviousness."
WMS Gaming, Inc. v. Int'l Game Tech., 184 F.3d 1339, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 1999). Though the existence
of such a nexus is a question of fact, which we review for substantial evidence, the consideration
of objective indicia is part of the ultimate determination of obviousness which we review de novo.
See Agrizap, Inc. v. Woodstream Corp., 520 F.3d 1337, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2008) ("Even when we presume
the jury found that the objective evidence of nonobviousness favored [the patentee], this evidence is
insufficient to overcome the overwhelming strength of [the alleged infringer's] prima facie case of
obviousness."); Leapfrog Enters., Inc. v. Fisher-Price, Inc., 485 F.3d 1157, 1162 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (agreeing
with the district court's conclusion that even substantial evidence of various secondary considerations
was "inadequate to overcome" obviousness as a matter of law). The mere existence of evidence of
secondary considerations does not control the obviousness determination. Richardson-Vicks Inc. v.
Upjohn Co., 122 F.3d 1476, 1483 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

In this case, Apple presented evidence that it contends shows there was commercial success, long-
felt need, industry praise, and copying. However, Apple's evidence of commercial success does not
establish a nexus with the patented feature, and the remaining evidence, even if a nexus is assumed, is

to the district court or to us on appeal in opposition to Samsung's obviousness evidence, and relies on theories that appear
nowhere in Apple's briefs. Compare Majority Op. at 1052-59 with Apple's Opp'n to Samsung's Mot. for J. as a Matter of
Law Pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(b) & Mot. to Am. the J. at 18, Apple Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 5:12-cv-630, ECF No.
1908-03 ("Apple JMOL Opposition"); Apple Br. 29.

74 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   not sufficient to "tip the scales of patentability." Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 U.S. 1, 36, 86 S.Ct. 684,
   15 L.Ed.2d 545 (1966).

   1

   To argue commercial success on appeal, Apple only relies on a portion of a survey introduced to
   establish the value of the "patent-related" slide-to-unlock feature on tablets with screens larger than
   7 inches, J.A. 21066, 21108, coupled with Dr. Greenberg's statement that "there's no question that the
   Apple iPhone was a commercial success." J.A. 11984; see Apple Br. 29. This evidence does not establish
   a nexus for commercial success. 10

   With respect to the survey, it did not ask about the slide-to-unlock feature on smartphones, which
   in the survey had screens no larger than 5.5 inches (smaller than the surveyed tablet screens). J.A.
   21076, 21108. Apple does not point to any separate evidence regarding the sales of those tablets. As
   for the success of the iPhone device, there is no evidence tying that success specifically to the features
   embodied in the claimed invention. To establish the requisite nexus, there needs to be some record
   evidence to tie the commercial success of a product to the slide-to-unlock feature of that product
   embodying the claimed invention. Here, there is none.

   In addition, although Dr. Greenberg testified that the iPhone was commercially successful, he
   continued: "[b]ut I've seen no evidence that says that that commercial success was due to the lock
   screen." J.A. 11985. No reasonable juror could conclude that Dr. Greenberg's statement that he had
   seen no evidence of a nexus was somehow evidence of a nexus. 11

   2

   The remainder of Apple's secondary consideration arguments consists of long-felt need, industry
   praise, and copying. To show long-felt need, Apple relies on the testimony of Dr. Cockburn, who
   provided a single example of a portable phone that he characterized as "entirely unintuitive." J.A.
   10638-39. For industry praise, Apple relies upon the audience reaction at the first public unveiling of
   the iPhone. J.A. 12879-80. Finally, Apple relies on internal Samsung documents that it argues show
   both copying and industry praise. See, e.g., J.A. 51289.157

   Even assuming that the jury implicitly found a nexus between Apple's evidence and the claimed
   invention, this evidence is insufficient in the face of the strong evidence of obviousness. The
   testimony of an expert testifying as to a single example of unsatisfactory prior art is, at best, weak.
   Cf. Cyclobenzaprine, 676 F.3d at 1083 (testimony regarding an expert's experience over ten years).
   Similarly, Apple's evidence of applause at its own press event is also weak evidence of nonobviousness.
   See In re Cree, 818 F.3d 694, 702 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (finding a company's press release unpersuasive

10. To find a nexus for commercial success, the majority also relies on testimony by Apple's Senior Vice President of Worldwide
    Marketing, a television commercial shown to the jury, and additional testimony from Apple's witness, Mr. Christie. Majority
    Op. at 1054-56. Apple did not rely on any of that evidence before the district court in its JMOL opposition or before us on
    appeal to support a showing of commercial success. See Apple JMOL Opposition 18; Apple Br. 29. These rationales are new.
    There is no need to reach these arguments because they were never made in this appeal.

11. Apple also argued before the district court, but not on appeal, that Dr. Cockburn's testimony was evidence of commercial
    success for the 721 patent. See Apple JMOL Opposition 18. But Dr. Cockburn only testified that the iPhone was
    commercially successful, not that the iPhone was commercially successful because of the slide-to-unlock feature. See J.A.
    12879 ("Well, clearly there's been commercial success both of the iPhones that use this invention, and for the devices that
    have copied the technique."). This testimony is also insufficient to establish nexus.

                                                                                                                           5. NONOBVIOUSNESS 75
   evidence of nonobviousness). Finally, though Samsung's internal documents are probative of copying
   (and industry praise), they do not move the needle in this case. See Tokai Corp. v. Easton Enters.,
   Inc., 632 F.3d 1358, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (finding evidence of copying unpersuasive evidence of
   nonobviousness).
   Considering the totality of the evidence, Apple's evidence relating to secondary considerations does
   not "tip the scales of patentability." Graham, 383 U.S. at 36, 86 S.Ct. 684; see also Leapfrog Enters.,
   485 F.3d at 1162 (finding substantial evidence of commercial success, industry praise, and long-felt
   need insufficient to overcome strong evidence of obviousness); Richardson-Vicks, 122 F.3d at 1483
   ("Evidence of secondary considerations ... are but a part of the `totality of the evidence' that is used
   to reach the ultimate conclusion of obviousness."). The asserted claim of the 721 patent is therefore
   obvious as a matter of law. 12

                                                               [Text omitted]
   CONCLUSION
   For the foregoing reasons, no jury could rationally conclude that the 721 and 172 patents were not
   obvious, or that Samsung infringed the 647 patent. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

                                       [Dissents by Judge Dyk and Judge Reyna omitted]

12. As a basis for affirmance, the majority implies that it would be inappropriate to "reverse nearly a dozen fact
    findings." See Majority Op. at 1039-40. The number of underlying findings to a legal conclusion is irrelevant in a legal
    analysis. Reversal of a jury finding of nonobviousness, which we have done not infrequently, usually requires by its very
    nature the explicit or implicit reversal of multiple fact findings. See, e.g., W. Union Co. v. MoneyGram Payment Sys., Inc., 626
    F.3d 1361, 1368-1374 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (reversing jury's implicit factual findings of the scope and content of the prior
    art, motivation to combine, and evidence of secondary considerations); Ecolab, Inc. v. FMC Corp., 569 F.3d 1335, 1348-50
    (reversing a jury determination of nonobviousness and, implicitly, the underlying factual findings); PharmaStem Therapeutics,
    Inc. v. ViaCell, Inc., 491 F.3d 1342, 1360-67 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (reversing a jury's implicit factual findings regarding the scope
    and teaching of the prior art, expectation of success, and secondary considerations).
    76 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                            6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 6

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain the concept of patent claims and their legal requirements.
           Explain the concept of claim definiteness.
           Explain the policy issues involved in patent claims.
           Describe the general process of patent prosecution.

Our primary focus in this class will be on the patent claim, which establishes the boundaries of the
patent holder's right to exclude. In connection with this discussion, we will look at two aspects of
claiming: the process for obtaining a patent (typically referred to as "patent prosecution") and the
requirement of definiteness. We will discuss the interpretation of patent claims in this class.

A. The process of obtaining a patent

The process of obtaining a patent involves a series of interactions between the applicant (or more
commonly, their attorney), and an examiner at the United States Patent and Trademark office
(USPTO or PTO). This process is often referred to as "patent prosecution" (from the perspective of
the applicant) or "patent examination" (from the perspective of the public). Patent prosecution begins
when the applicant files their patent application with the PTO. This application is then assigned to an
examiner, who assesses the patentability of the claims proposed by the applicant. If the applicant has
not met one or more of the requirements of patentability, the examiner will issue an office action to
which the applicant must respond with any amendments and/or comments addressing the examiner's
rejections. This process will continue until the application is allowed or the examiner issues a final
office action.

An application will be allowed if the applicant has satisfied all of the patentability requirements,
meaning the application can issue as a patent. If, on the other hand, the examiner issues a final office
action rejecting the application, the applicant can either file a request for continued examination
or appeal the final rejection to the Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB). If the applicant files a
request for continued examination, the process of examination and response continues again until the
examiner finds the application allowable or issues another final office action.

There are also several post-issuances proceedings that can occur at the PTO. These include inter
partes review (IPR), ex parte review, post-grant review (PGR), supplemental examination, and covered

                                                                                                     6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS 77
business methods review. Decisions in these proceedings are made by the PTAB, and all PTAB
decisions are appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
B. The requirement of claim definiteness
Nautilus v. Biosig (2014) involves the issue of claim definiteness. Under 35 U.S.C.  112(b), an
application should include "one or more claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the
subject matter which the applicant regards as his invention...." This text is generally referred to as the
"claim definiteness" requirement.
Issues of definiteness can arise both in when interpreting the meaning of claims and when applying
the claims. Problems with the application of the claim language include grammatical or word errors,
terms of degree, open-ended ranges, subjective terms, and multiple methods of measuring.
Definiteness issues can also arise when the applicant uses functional language in the claims. Under 35
U.S.C.  112(f), "[a]n element in a claim for a combination may be expressed as a means or step for
performing a specified function without recital of the structure, material, or acts in support thereof,
and such claim shall be construed to cover the corresponding structure, material, or acts described
in the specification and equivalents thereof." A means-plus-function claim is indefinite if the "means"
are not properly described elsewhere in the specification.

   35 U.S.C 112. Specification (2011)

   (a) In General. - The specification shall contain a written description of the invention, and of the manner
   and process of making and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person
   skilled in the art to which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly connected, to make and use the same,
   and shall set forth the best mode contemplated by the inventor or joint inventor of carrying out the
   invention.

   (b) Conclusion. - The specification shall conclude with one or more claims particularly pointing out and
   distinctly claiming the subject matter which the inventor or a joint inventor regards as the invention.

   (c) Form. - A claim may be written in independent or, if the nature of the case admits, in dependent or
   multiple dependent form.
   ...
   (f) Element in Claim for a Combination. - An element in a claim for a combination may be expressed as a
   means or step for performing a specified function without the recital of structure, material, or acts in
   support thereof, and such claim shall be construed to cover the corresponding structure, material, or acts
   described in the specification and equivalents thereof.

78 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
NAUTILUS, INC. V. BIOSIG INSTRUMENTS, INC. (2014)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   Nautilus involves the core standard for determining whether a claim meets the definiteness requirement.
   As you read the opinion, ask yourself the following questions:

           How would you describe in two minutes the process for obtaining a patent?
           According to the Court, what standard was the Federal Circuit using?
           What is the Court's standard for determining whether a patent claim is indefinite?
           What are the policy rationales underlying the Court's decision in Nautilus?

                                        Nautilus, Inc. v. Biosig Instruments, Inc.

                                                      134 S. Ct. 2120 (2014)

JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court.

The Patent Act requires that a patent specification "conclude with one or more claims particularly
pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which the applicant regards as [the] invention."
35 U.S.C.  112,  2 (2006 ed.) (emphasis added). This case, involving a heart-rate monitor used
with exercise equipment, concerns the proper reading of the statute's clarity and precision demand.
According to the Federal Circuit, a patent claim passes the  112,  2 threshold so long as the claim is
"amenable to construction," and the claim, as construed, is not "insolubly ambiguous." 715 F.3d 891,
898-899 (2013). We conclude that the Federal Circuit's formulation, which tolerates some ambiguous
claims but not others, does not satisfy the statute's definiteness requirement. In place of the "insolubly
ambiguous" standard, we hold that a patent is invalid for indefiniteness if its claims, read in light of
the specification delineating the patent, and the prosecution history, fail to inform, with reasonable
certainty, those skilled in the art about the scope of the invention. Expressing no opinion on the
validity of the patent-in-suit, we remand, instructing the Federal Circuit to decide the case employing
the standard we have prescribed.

I

Authorized by the Constitution "[t]o promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for
limited Times to . . . Inventors the exclusive Right to their . . . Discoveries," Art. I,  8, cl. 8, Congress
has enacted patent laws rewarding inventors with a limited monopoly. "Th[at] monopoly is a property
right," and "like any property right, its boundaries should be clear." Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku
Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 730, 122 S.Ct. 1831, 152 L.Ed.2d 944 (2002). See also Markman
v. Westview Instruments, Inc., 517 U.S. 370, 373, 116 S.Ct. 1384, 134 L.Ed.2d 577 (1996) ("It has long

                                                                                                     6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS 79
been understood that a patent must describe the exact scope of an invention and its manufacture . .
. ."). Thus, when Congress enacted the first Patent Act in 1790, it directed that patent grantees file a
written specification "containing a description . . . of the thing or things . . . invented or discovered,"
which "shall be so particular" as to "distinguish the invention or discovery from other things before
known and used." Act of Apr. 10, 1790,  2, 1 Stat. 110.

The patent laws have retained this requirement of definiteness even as the focus of patent
construction has shifted. Under early patent practice in the United States, we have recounted, it was
the written specification that "represented the key to the patent." Markman, 517 U.S., at 379, 116
S.Ct. 1384. Eventually, however, patent applicants began to set out the invention's scope in a separate
section known as the "claim." See generally 1 R. Moy, Walker on Patents  4.2, pp. 4-17 to 4-20 (4th ed.
2012). The Patent Act of 1870 expressly conditioned the receipt of a patent on the inventor's inclusion
of one or more such claims, described with particularity and distinctness. See Act of July 8, 1870,  26,
16 Stat. 201 (to obtain a patent, the inventor must "particularly point out and distinctly claim the part,
improvement, or combination which [the inventor] claims as his invention or discovery").

The 1870 Act's definiteness requirement survives today, largely unaltered. Section 112 of the Patent
Act of 1952, applicable to this case, requires the patent applicant to conclude the specification with
"one or more claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which the
applicant regards as his invention." 35 U.S.C.  112,  2 (2006 ed.). A lack of definiteness renders
invalid "the patent or any claim in suit."  282,  2(3).159

II

A

The patent in dispute, U.S. Patent No. 5,337,753 (`753 patent), issued to Dr. Gregory Lekhtman in
1994 and assigned to respondent Biosig Instruments, Inc., concerns a heart-rate monitor for use
during exercise. Previous heart-rate monitors, the patent asserts, were often inaccurate in measuring
the electrical signals accompanying each heartbeat (electrocardiograph or ECG signals). The
inaccuracy was caused by electrical signals of a different sort, known as electromyogram or EMG
signals, generated by an exerciser's skeletal muscles when, for example, she moves her arm, or grips
an exercise monitor with her hand. These EMG signals can "mask" ECG signals and thereby impede
their detection. App. 52, 147.

Dr. Lekhtman's invention claims to improve on prior art by eliminating that impediment. The
invention focuses on a key difference between EMG and ECG waveforms: while ECG signals detected
from a user's left hand have a polarity opposite to that of the signals detected from her right hand,160
EMG signals from each hand have the same polarity. The patented device works by measuring
equalized EMG signals detected at each hand and then using circuitry to subtract the identical EMG
signals from each other, thus filtering out the EMG interference.

As relevant here, the `753 patent describes a heart-rate monitor contained in a hollow cylindrical bar
that a user grips with both hands, such that each hand comes into contact with two electrodes, one
"live" and one "common." The device is illustrated in figure 1 of the patent, id., at 41, reproduced in
the Appendix to this opinion.

Claim 1 of the `753 patent, which contains the limitations critical to this dispute, refers to a "heart rate
monitor for use by a user in association with exercise apparatus and/or exercise procedures." Id., at 61.

80 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  The claim "comprise[s]," among other elements, an "elongate member" (cylindrical bar) with a display
  device; "electronic circuitry including a difference amplifier"; and, on each half of the cylindrical bar,
  a live electrode and a common electrode "mounted . . . in spaced relationship with each other." Ibid. 1
  The claim sets forth additional elements, including that the cylindrical bar is to be held in such a way
  that each of the user's hands "contact[s]" both electrodes on each side of the bar. Id., at 62. Further,
  the EMG signals detected by the two electrode pairs are to be "of substantially equal magnitude
  and phase" so that the difference amplifier will "produce a substantially zero [EMG] signal" upon
  subtracting the signals from one another. Ibid.

  B

  The dispute between the parties arose in the 1990's, when Biosig allegedly disclosed the patented
  technology to StairMaster Sports Medical Products, Inc. According to Biosig, StairMaster, without
  ever obtaining a license, sold exercise machines that included Biosig's patented technology, and
  petitioner Nautilus, Inc., continued to do so after acquiring the StairMaster brand. In 2004, based on
  these allegations, Biosig brought a patent infringement suit against Nautilus in the U.S. District Court
  for the Southern District of New York.

  With Biosig's lawsuit launched, Nautilus asked the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) to
  reexamine the `753 patent. The reexamination proceedings centered on whether the patent was
  anticipated or rendered obvious by prior art -- principally, a patent issued in 1984 to an inventor
  named Fujisaki, which similarly disclosed a heart-rate monitor using two pairs of electrodes and a
  difference amplifier. Endeavoring to distinguish the `753 patent from prior art, Biosig submitted a
  declaration from Dr. Lekhtman. The declaration attested, among other things, that the `753 patent
  sufficiently informed a person skilled in the art how to configure the detecting electrodes so as "to
  produce equal EMG [signals] from the left and right hands." Id., at 160. Although the electrodes' design
  variables -- including spacing, shape, size, and material -- cannot be standardized across all exercise
  machines, Dr. Lekhtman explained, a skilled artisan could undertake a "trial and error" process of
  equalization. This would entail experimentation with different electrode configurations in order to
  optimize EMG signal cancellation. Id., at 155-156, 158. 2 In 2010, the PTO issued a determination
  confirming the patentability of the `753 patent's claims.

  Biosig thereafter reinstituted its infringement suit, which the parties had voluntarily dismissed
  without prejudice while PTO reexamination was underway. In 2011, the District Court conducted
  a hearing to determine the proper construction of the patent's claims, see Markman v. Westview
  Instruments, Inc., 517 U.S. 370, 116 S.Ct. 1384, 134 L.Ed.2d 577 (1996) (claim construction is a matter
  of law reserved for court decision), including the claim term "in spaced relationship with each other."
  According to Biosig, that "spaced relationship" referred to the distance between the live electrode and
  the common electrode in each electrode pair. Nautilus, seizing on Biosig's submissions to the PTO
  during the reexamination, maintained that the "spaced relationship" must be a distance "greater than
  the width of each electrode." App. 245. The District Court ultimately construed the term to mean
  "there is a defined relationship between the live electrode and the common electrode on one side of

1. As depicted in figure 1 of the patent, id., at 41, reproduced in the Appendix to this opinion, the live electrodes are identified
   by numbers 9 and 13, and the common electrodes, by 11 and 15.

2. Dr. Lekhtman's declaration also referred to an expert report prepared by Dr. Henrietta Galiana, Chair of the Department of
   Biomedical Engineering at McGill University, for use in the infringement litigation. That report described how Dr. Galiana's
   laboratory technician, equipped with a wooden dowel, wire, metal foil, glue, electrical tape, and the drawings from the `753
   patent, was able in two hours to build a monitor that "worked just as described in the . . . patent." Id., at 226.

                                                                                                        6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS 81
the cylindrical bar and the same or a different defined relationship between the live electrode and the
common electrode on the other side of the cylindrical bar," without any reference to the electrodes'
width. App. to Pet. for Cert. 43a-44a.

Nautilus moved for summary judgment, arguing that the term "spaced relationship," as construed, was
indefinite under  112,  2. The District Court granted the motion. Those words, the District Court
concluded, "did not tell [the court] or anyone what precisely the space should be," or even supply "any
parameters" for determining the appropriate spacing. Id., at 72a.

The Federal Circuit reversed and remanded. A claim is indefinite, the majority opinion stated, "only
when it is `not amenable to construction' or `insolubly ambiguous.'" 715 F.3d 891, 898 (2013) (quoting
Datamize, LLC v. Plumtree Software, Inc., 417 F.3d 1342, 1347 (C.A.Fed.2005)). Under that standard, the
majority determined, the `753 patent survived indefiniteness review. Considering first the "intrinsic
evidence"--i.e., the claim language, the specification, and the prosecution history--the majority
discerned "certain inherent parameters of the claimed apparatus, which to a skilled artisan may be
sufficient to understand the metes and bounds of `spaced relationship.'" 715 F.3d, at 899. These
sources of meaning, the majority explained, make plain that the distance separating the live and
common electrodes on each half of the bar "cannot be greater than the width of a user's hands"; that is
so "because claim 1 requires the live and common electrodes to independently detect electrical signals
at two distinct points of a hand." Ibid. Furthermore, the majority noted, the intrinsic evidence teaches
that this distance cannot be "infinitesimally small, effectively merging the live and common electrodes
into a single electrode with one detection point." Ibid. The claim's functional provisions, the majority
went on to observe, shed additional light on the meaning of "spaced relationship." Surveying the
record before the PTO on reexamination, the majority concluded that a skilled artisan would know
that she could attain the indicated functions of equalizing and removing EMG signals by adjusting
design variables, including spacing.

In a concurring opinion, Judge Schall reached the majority's result employing "a more limited
analysis." Id., at 905. Judge Schall accepted the majority's recitation of the definiteness standard, under
which claims amenable to construction are nonetheless indefinite when "the construction remains
insolubly ambiguous." Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). The District Court's construction
of "spaced relationship," Judge Schall maintained, was sufficiently clear: the term means "there is
a fixed spatial relationship between the live electrode and the common electrode" on each side of
the cylindrical bar. Ibid. Judge Schall agreed with the majority that the intrinsic evidence discloses
inherent limits of that spacing. But, unlike the majority, Judge Schall did not "presum[e] a functional
linkage between the `spaced relationship' limitation and the removal of EMG signals." Id., at 906.
Other limitations of the claim, in his view, and not the "`spaced relationship' limitation itself,"
"included a functional requirement to remove EMG signals." Ibid.

We granted certiorari, 571 U.S. ___, 134 S.Ct. 896, 187 L.Ed.2d 702 (2014), and now vacate and
remand.

III

A

Although the parties here disagree on the dispositive question -- does the `753 patent withstand
definiteness scrutiny -- they are in accord on several aspects of the  112,  2 inquiry. First,
definiteness is to be evaluated from the perspective of someone skilled in the relevant art. See, e.g.,

82 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  General Elec. Co. v. Wabash Appliance Corp., 304 U.S. 364, 371, 58 S.Ct. 899, 82 L.Ed. 1402 (1938).
  See also  112,  1 (patent's specification "shall contain a written description of the invention, and
  of the manner and process of making and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to
  enable any person skilled in the art to which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly connected,
  to make and use the same" (emphasis added)). Second, in assessing definiteness, claims are to be read
  in light of the patent's specification and prosecution history. See, e.g., United States v. Adams, 383 U.S.
  39, 48-49, 86 S.Ct. 708, 15 L.Ed.2d 572 (1966) (specification); Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo
  Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 741, 122 S.Ct. 1831, 152 L.Ed.2d 944 (2002) (prosecution history). Third,
  "[d]efiniteness is measured from the viewpoint of a person skilled in [the] art at the time the patent was
  filed." Brief for Respondent 55 (emphasis added). See generally E. Manzo, Patent Claim Construction
  in the Federal Circuit  0.2, p. 9 (2014) ("Patent claims . . . should be construed from an objective
  perspective of a [skilled artisan], based on what the applicant actually claimed, disclosed, and stated
  during the application process.").

  The parties differ, however, in their articulations of just how much imprecision  112,  2 tolerates.
  In Nautilus' view, a patent is invalid when a claim is "ambiguous, such that readers could reasonably
  interpret the claim's scope differently." Brief for Petitioner 37. Biosig and the Solicitor General would
  require only that the patent provide reasonable notice of the scope of the claimed invention. See Brief
  for Respondent 18; Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 9-10.

  Section 112, we have said, entails a "delicate balance." Festo, 535 U.S., at 731, 122 S.Ct. 1831. On the
  one hand, the definiteness requirement must take into account the inherent limitations of language.
  See ibid. Some modicum of uncertainty, the Court has recognized, is the "price of ensuring the
  appropriate incentives for innovation." Id., at 732, 122 S.Ct. 1831. One must bear in mind, moreover,
  that patents are "not addressed to lawyers, or even to the public generally," but rather to those skilled
  in the relevant art. Carnegie Steel Co. v. Cambria Iron Co., 185 U.S. 403, 437, 22 S.Ct. 698, 46 L.Ed. 968
  (1902) (also stating that "any description which is sufficient to apprise [steel manufacturers] in the
  language of the art of the definite feature of the invention, and to serve as a warning to others of what
  the patent claims as a monopoly, is sufficiently definite to sustain the patent"). 3

  At the same time, a patent must be precise enough to afford clear notice of what is claimed, thereby
  "`appris[ing] the public of what is still open to them.'" Markman, 517 U.S., at 373, 116 S.Ct. 1384
  (quoting McClain v. Ortmayer, 141 U.S. 419, 424, 12 S.Ct. 76, 35 L.Ed. 800 (1891)). 4 Otherwise there
  would be "[a] zone of uncertainty which enterprise and experimentation may enter only at the risk
  of infringement claims." United Carbon Co. v. Binney & Smith Co., 317 U.S. 228, 236, 63 S.Ct. 165,
  87 L.Ed. 232 (1942). And absent a meaningful definiteness check, we are told, patent applicants face
  powerful incentives to inject ambiguity into their claims. See Brief for Petitioner 30-32 (citing patent
  treatises and drafting guides). See also Federal Trade Commission, The Evolving IP Marketplace:

3. See alsoEibel Process Co. v. Minnesota & Ontario Paper Co., 261 U.S. 45, 58, 65-66, 43 S.Ct. 322, 67 L.Ed. 523 (1923) (upholding
   as definite a patent for an improvement to a paper-making machine, which provided that a wire be placed at a "high" or
   "substantial elevation," where "readers . . . skilled in the art of paper making and versed in the use of the . . . machine" would
   have "no difficulty. . . in determining . . . the substantial [elevation] needed" for the machine to operate as specified).

4. See also United Carbon Co. v. Binney & Smith Co., 317 U.S. 228, 236, 63 S.Ct. 165, 87 L.Ed. 232 (1942) ("The statutory
   requirement of particularity and distinctness in claims is met only when they clearly distinguish what is claimed from
   what went before in the art and clearly circumscribe what is foreclosed from future enterprise."); General Elec. Co. v. Wabash
   Appliance Corp., 304 U.S. 364, 369, 58 S.Ct. 899, 82 L.Ed. 1402 (1938) ("The limits of a patent must be known for the
   protection of the patentee, the encouragement of the inventive genius of others and the assurance that the subject of the
   patent will be dedicated ultimately to the public.").

                                                                                                        6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS 83
  Aligning Patent Notice and Remedies With Competition 85 (2011) (quoting testimony that patent
  system fosters "an incentive to be as vague and ambiguous as you can with your claims" and "defer
  clarity at all costs"). 5 Eliminating that temptation is in order, and "the patent drafter is in the best
  position to resolve the ambiguity in . . . patent claims." Halliburton Energy Servs., Inc. v. M-I LLC, 514
  F.3d 1244, 1255 (C.A.Fed.2008). See also Hormone Research Foundation, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 904 F.2d
  1558, 1563 (C.A.Fed.1990) ("It is a well-established axiom in patent law that a patentee is free to be his
  or her own lexicographer . . . .").

  To determine the proper office of the definiteness command, therefore, we must reconcile concerns
  that tug in opposite directions. Cognizant of the competing concerns, we read  112,  2 to require
  that a patent's claims, viewed in light of the specification and prosecution history, inform those skilled
  in the art about the scope of the invention with reasonable certainty. The definiteness requirement, so
  understood, mandates clarity, while recognizing that absolute precision is unattainable. The standard
  we adopt accords with opinions of this Court stating that "the certainty which the law requires in
  patents is not greater than is reasonable, having regard to their subject-matter." Minerals Separation,
  Ltd. v. Hyde, 242 U.S. 261, 270, 37 S.Ct. 82, 61 L.Ed. 286 (1916). See also United Carbon, 317 U.S., at 236,
  63 S.Ct. 165 ("claims must be reasonably clear-cut"); Markman, 517 U.S., at 389, 116 S.Ct. 1384 (claim
  construction calls for "the necessarily sophisticated analysis of the whole document," and may turn on
  evaluations of expert testimony).

  B

  In resolving Nautilus' definiteness challenge, the Federal Circuit asked whether the `753 patent's
  claims were "amenable to construction" or "insolubly ambiguous." Those formulations can breed
  lower court confusion, 6 for they lack the precision  112,  2 demands. It cannot be sufficient
  that a court can ascribe some meaning to a patent's claims; the definiteness inquiry trains on the
  understanding of a skilled artisan at the time of the patent application, not that of a court viewing
  matters post hoc. To tolerate imprecision just short of that rendering a claim "insolubly ambiguous"
  would diminish the definiteness requirement's public-notice function and foster the innovation-
  discouraging "zone of uncertainty," United Carbon, 317 U.S., at 236, 63 S.Ct. 165, against which this
  Court has warned.

  Appreciating that "terms like `insolubly ambiguous' may not be felicitous," Brief for Respondent 34,
  Biosig argues the phrase is a shorthand label for a more probing inquiry that the Federal Circuit
  applies in practice. The Federal Circuit's fuller explications of the term "insolubly ambiguous," we
  recognize, may come closer to tracking the statutory prescription. See, e.g., 715 F.3d, at 898 (case
  below) ("[I]f reasonable efforts at claim construction result in a definition that does not provide
  sufficient particularity and clarity to inform skilled artisans of the bounds of the claim, the claim is
  insolubly ambiguous and invalid for indefiniteness." (internal quotation marks omitted)). But although
  this Court does not "micromanag[e] the Federal Circuit's particular word choice" in applying patent-
  law doctrines, we must ensure that the Federal Circuit's test is at least "probative of the essential

5. Online at http://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/ files/documents/reports/evolving-ip-marketplace-aligning-patent-notice-
   and-remedies-competition-report-federal-trade/110307patentreport.pdf (as visited May 30, 2014, and available in Clerk of
   Court's case file).

6. See, e.g., Every Penny Counts, Inc. v. Wells Fargo Bank, N. A., ___ F.Supp.2d ___, ___, 2014 WL 869092, *4 (M.D.Fla., Mar.
   5, 2014) (finding that "the account," as used in claim, "lacks definiteness," because it might mean several different things and
   "no informed and confident choice is available among the contending definitions," but that "the extent of the indefiniteness
   . . . falls far short of the `insoluble ambiguity' required to invalidate the claim").

  84 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  inquiry." Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 17, 40, 117 S.Ct. 1040, 137 L.Ed.2d
  146 (1997). Falling short in that regard, the expressions "insolubly ambiguous" and "amenable to
  construction" permeate the Federal Circuit's recent decisions concerning  112,  2's requirement. 7
  We agree with Nautilus and its amici that such terminology can leave courts and the patent bar at sea
  without a reliable compass. 8

  IV

  Both here and in the courts below, the parties have advanced conflicting arguments as to the
  definiteness of the claims in the `753 patent. Nautilus maintains that the claim term "spaced
  relationship" is open to multiple interpretations reflecting markedly different understandings of the
  patent's scope, as exemplified by the disagreement among the members of the Federal Circuit panel.
  9 Biosig responds that "spaced relationship," read in light of the specification and as illustrated in the
  accompanying drawings, delineates the permissible spacing with sufficient precision.

  "[M]indful that we are a court of review, not of first view," Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S. 709, 718, n.
  7, 125 S.Ct. 2113, 161 L.Ed.2d 1020 (2005), we decline to apply the standard we have announced to
  the controversy between Nautilus and Biosig. As we have explained, the Federal Circuit invoked a
  standard more amorphous than the statutory definiteness requirement allows. We therefore follow
  our ordinary practice of remanding so that the Court of Appeals can reconsider, under the proper
  standard, whether the relevant claims in the `753 patent are sufficiently definite. See, e.g., Johnson v.
  California, 543 U.S. 499, 515, 125 S.Ct. 1141, 160 L.Ed.2d 949 (2005); Gasperini v. Center for Humanities,
  Inc., 518 U.S. 415, 438, 116 S.Ct. 2211, 135 L.Ed.2d 659 (1996).

  * * *

  For the reasons stated, we vacate the judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal
  Circuit and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. It is so ordered.

7. E.g., Hearing Components, Inc. v. Shure Inc., 600 F.3d 1357, 1366 (C.A.Fed.2010) ("the definiteness of claim terms depends on
   whether those terms can be given any reasonable meaning"); Datamize, LLC v. Plumtree Software, Inc., 417 F.3d 1342, 1347
   (C.A.Fed. 2005) ("Only claims `not amenable to construction' or `insolubly ambiguous' are indefinite."); Exxon Research &
   Engineering Co. v. United States, 265 F.3d 1371, 1375 (C.A.Fed. 2001) ("If a claim is insolubly ambiguous, and no narrowing
   construction can properly be adopted, we have held the claim indefinite."). See also Dept. of Commerce, Manual of Patent
   Examining Procedure  2173.02(I), p. 294 (9th ed. 2014) (PTO manual describing Federal Circuit's test as upholding a claim's
   validity "if some meaning can be gleaned from the language").

8. The Federal Circuit suggests that a permissive definiteness standard "`accord[s] respect to the statutory presumption of
   patent validity.'" 715 F.3d 891, 902 (2013) (quoting Exxon Research, 265 F.3d, at 1375). See also  282,  1 ("[a] patent shall
   be presumed valid," and "[t]he burden of establishing invalidity of a patent or any claim thereof shall rest on the party
   asserting such invalidity"); Microsoft Corp. v. i4i Ltd. Partnership, 564 U.S. ___, ___, 131 S.Ct. 2238, 2242, 180 L.Ed.2d 131
   (2011) (invalidity defenses must be proved by "clear and convincing evidence"). As the parties appear to agree, however,
   this presumption of validity does not alter the degree of clarity that  112,  2 demands from patent applicants; to the
   contrary, it incorporates that definiteness requirement by reference. See  282,  2(3) (defenses to infringement actions
   include "[i]nvalidity of the patent or any claim in suit for failure to comply with . . . any requirement of [ 112]").
   The parties nonetheless dispute whether factual findings subsidiary to the ultimate issue of definiteness trigger the clear-
   and-convincing-evidence standard and, relatedly, whether deference is due to the PTO's resolution of disputed issues of fact.
   We leave these questions for another day. The court below treated definiteness as "a legal issue [the] court reviews without
   deference," 715 F.3d, at 897, and Biosig has not called our attention to any contested factual matter--or PTO determination
   thereof--pertinent to its infringement claims.

9. Notably, however, all three panel members found Nautilus' arguments unavailing.

                                                                                                        6. PATENT CLAIMS AND PROCESS 85
                                           7. DISCLOSURE

   Learning Objectives: Unit 7

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:

           Explain the modern requirement of disclosure.
           Explain the policy issues underlying the enablement and written description requirements.
           Analyze a hypothetical scenario involving enablement and written description issues.

Although an invention may meet the newness requirements of ㎣ 102 and 103, and may be claimed
in a sufficiently definite manner, an inventor is still not entitled to a patent until the invention has
been adequately disclosed. Put another way, an inventor is limited to claims that are commensurate
with what was actually disclosed. As the readings reveal, this disclosure requirement serves multiple
purposes.

The classic entry point into this discussion is The Incandescent Lamp Patent (1895), which involves
the general concept of a disclosure requirement. Here, Thomas Edison is being sued for patent
infringement by the owners of an earlier patent. In the excerpt provide, the Court is grappling with
the question of whether the knowledge disclosed by the patentees, Sawyer & Man, is sufficient to
support their claims.

The Incandescent Lamp Patent was decided in an era in which patent law doctrine was much more
inchoate and less crystallized than its current form. Beginning around the enactment of the 1952
Patent Act, courts--in particular, the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, which heard appeals of
decisions by the USPTO to deny patents--began to formalize and crystallize patent law doctrine.

Today, the disclosure requirement takes two primary doctrinal forms: enablement, which involves the
question of whether the technical disclosure of the patent is sufficient to enable one of ordinary skill
in the art to make and use the invention without undue experimentation, and written description,
which involves the question of whether a person of ordinary skill in the art would consider the
inventor to have had "possession" of the claimed invention based on the application as initially filed.
The statutory basis for both requirements is 35 U.S.C.  112(a). However, the underpinnings of these
modern doctrines remain rooted in the core principles discussed in the Incandescent Lamp Patent case.

The contemporary case that you will read is Amgen v. Sanofi, a patent infringement case involving
antibody technologies. As in Incandescent Lamp Patent case, the accused infringer is defending by
arguing that the patent owner's patent is invalid-in this instance, by failing to meet the statutory
requirement of enablement.

86 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
U.S. PATENT NO. 317, 676

                                                                                                                                 7. DISCLOSURE 87
88 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
7. DISCLOSURE 89
90 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
7. DISCLOSURE 91
  THE INCANDESCENT LAMP PATENT (1895)

     READING WITH PURPOSE

      As you read the Incandescent Lamp Patent, ask yourself the following questions:
              What purposes does the disclosure requirement serve?
              Why does the third claim of the Sawyer & Man patent probably satisfy the disclosure requirement
                 but the first claim does not?
              How is the analysis described in The Incandescent Lamp Patent similar to and different from the
                 statutory language of  112(a)?

                                                The Incandescent Lamp Patent1

                                                          159 U.S. 465 (1895)

  Case Background:

  This was a bill in equity, filed by the Consolidated Electric Light Company against the McKeesport
  Light Company, to recover damages for the infringement of letters patent No. 317,076,* issued May
  12, 1885, to the Electro-Dynamic Light Company, assignee of Sawyer and Man, for an electric light.
  The defendants justified under certain patents to Thomas A. Edison, particularly No. 223,898, issued
  January 27, 1880; denied the novelty and utility of the complainant's patent; and averred that the
  same had been fraudulently and illegally procured. The real defendant was the Edison Electric Light
  Company, and the case involved a contest between what are known as the Sawyer and Man and the
  Edison systems of electric lighting.

  In their application, Sawyer and Man stated that their invention related to `that class of electric
  lamps employing an incandescent conductor inclosed in a transparent, hermetically sealed vessel or
  chamber, from which oxygen is excluded, and * * * more especially to the incandescing conductor, its
  substance, its form, and its combination with the other elements composing the lamp. Its object is to
  secure a cheap and effective apparatus; and our improvement consists, first, of the combination, in a
  lamp chamber, composed wholly of glass, as described in patent No. 205,144,' upon which this patent
  was declared to be an improvement, `of an incandescing conductor of carbon made from a vegetable
  fibrous material, in contradistinction to a similar conductor made from mineral or gas carbon, and
  also in the form of such conductor so made from such vegetable carbon, and combined in the lighting
  circuit with the exhausted chamber of the lamp.'

1. This is the title of this case in the opinion of the court; but its docket title is, "The Consolidated Electric Light Company,
   Appellant, v. The McKeesport Light Company."
  92 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The following drawings exhibit the substance of the invention:

The specification further stated that:
        `In the practice of our invention, we have made use of carbonized paper, and also wood carbon.
        We have also used such conductors or burners of various shapes, such as pieces with their lower
        ends secured to their respective supports, and having their upper ends united so as to form an
        inverted V-shaped burner. We have also used conductors of varying contours,--that is, with
        rectangular bends instead of curvilinear ones; but we prefer the arch shape. `
        `No especial description of making the illuminating carbon conductors, described in this
        specification, and making the subject-matter of this improvement, is thought necessary, as any
        of the ordinary methods of forming the material to be carbonized to the desired shape and size,
        and carbonizing it while confined in retorts in powdered carbon, substantially according to the
        methods in practice before the date of this improvement, may be adopted in the practice thereof
        by any one skilled in the arts appertaining to the making of carbons for electric lighting or for
        other use in the arts.'
        `An important practical advantage which is secured by the arch form of incandescing carbon is
        that it permits the carbon to expand and contract under the varying temperatures to which it is
        subjected when the electric current is turned on or off without altering the position of its fixed
        terminals. Thus, the necessity for a special mechanical device to compensate for the expansion
        and contraction which has heretofore been necessary is entirely dispensed with, and thus the
        lamp is materially simplified in its construction. Another advantage of the arch form is that the
        shadow cast by such burners is less than that produced by other forms of burners when fitted
        with the necessary devices to support them.'
        `Another important advantage resulting from our construction of the lamp results from the
        fact that the wall forming the chamber of the lamp through which the electrodes pass to the
        interior of the lamp is made wholly of glass, by which all danger of oxidation, leakage, or short-
        circuiting is avoided.'

                                                                                                                                 7. DISCLOSURE 93
        `The advantages resulting from the manufacture of the carbon from vegetable fibrous or textile
        material instead of mineral or gas carbon are many. Among them may be mentioned the
        convenience afforded for cutting and making the conductor in the desired form and size, the
        purity and equality of the carbon obtained, its susceptibility to tempering, both as to hardness
        and resistance, and its toughness and durability. We have used such burners in closed or
        hermetically sealed transparent chambers, in a vacuum, in nitrogen gas, and in hydrogen gas;
        but we have obtained the best results in a vacuum, or an attenuated atmosphere of nitrogen gas,
        the great desideratum being to exclude oxygen or other gases capable of combining with carbon
        at high temperatures from the incandescing chamber, as is well understood.'

The claims were as follows:

        `(1) An incandescing conductor for an electric lamp, of carbonized fibrous or textile material,
        and of an arch or horseshoe shape, substantially as hereinbefore set forth.'

        `(2) The combination, substantially as hereinbefore set forth, of an electric circuit and an
        incandescing conductor of carbonized fibrous material, included in and forming part of said
        circuit, and a transparent, hermetically sealed chamber, in which the conductor is inclosed.'

        `(3) The incandescing conductor for an electric lamp, formed of carbonized paper, substantially
        as described.'

        `(4) An incandescing electric lamp consists of the following elements in combination: First, an
        illuminating chamber made wholly of glass hermetically sealed, and out of which all carbon-
        consuming gas has been exhausted or driven; second, an electric-circuit conductor passing
        through the glass wall of said chamber, and hermetically sealed therein, as described; third, an
        illuminating conductor in said circuit, and forming part thereof within said chamber, consisting
        of carbon made from a fibrous or textile material, having the form of an arch or loop,
        substantially as described, for the purpose specified.'

The commercial Edison lamp used by the appellee, and which is illustrated below, is composed of a
burner, A, made of carbonized bamboo of a peculiar quality, discovered by Mr. Edison to be highly
useful for the purpose, and having a length of about 6 inches, a diameter of about 5/1000 of an inch,
and an electrical resistance of upward of 100 ohms. This filament of carbon is bent into the form of
a loop, and its ends are secured by good electrical and mechanical connections to two fine platinum
wires, B, B. These wires pass through a glass stem, C, the glass being melted and fused upon the
platinum wires. A glass globe, D, is fused to the glass stem, C. This glass globe has originally attached
to it, at the point d, a glass tube, by means of which a connection is made with highly organized and
refined exhausting apparatus, which produces in the globe a high vacuum, whereupon the glass tube
is melted off by a flame, and the globe is closed by the fusion of the glass at the point d.

94 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Upon a hearing in the circuit court before Mr. Justice Bradley, upon pleadings and proofs, the court
held the patent to be invalid, and dismissed the bill. 40 Fed. 21. Thereupon complainant appealed to
this court.

Case Opinion:

MR. JUSTICE BROWN, after stating the case as above reported, delivered the opinion of the court.

In order to obtain a complete understanding of the scope of the Sawyer and Man patent, it is desirable
to consider briefly the state of the art at the time the application was originally made, which was in
January, 1880.

Two general forms of electric illumination had for many years been the subject of experiments more
or less successful, one of which was known as the arc light, produced by the passage of a current of
electricity between the points of two carbon pencils, placed end to end, and slightly separated from
each other. In its passage from one point to the other through the air, the electric current took the
form of an arc, and gave the name to the light. This form of light had been produced by Sir Humphry
Davy as early as 1810, and by successive improvements in the carbon pencils and in their relative
adjustment to each other, had come into general use as a means of lighting streets, halls, and other
large spaces; but by reason of its intensity, the uncertain and flickering character of the light, and the
rapid consumption of the carbon pencils, it was wholly unfitted for domestic use. The second form of
illumination is what is known as the incandescent system, and consists generally in the passage of a
current of electricity through a continuous strip or piece of refractory material, which is a conductor
of electricity, but a poor conductor -- in other words, a conductor offering a considerable resistance
to the flow of the current through it.It was discovered early in this century that various substances
might be heated to a white heat by passing a sufficiently strong current of electricity through them.
The production of a light in this way does not in any manner depend upon the consumption or
wearing away of the conductor, as it does in the arc light. A third system was a combination of the two
others, but it never seems to have come into general use, and is unimportant in giving a history of the
art.

                                                                                                                                 7. DISCLOSURE 95
For many years prior to 1880, experiments had been made by a large number of persons, in various
countries, with a view to the production of an incandescent light which could be made available for
domestic purposes, and could compete with gas in the matter of expense. Owing partly to a failure
to find a proper material, which should burn but not consume, partly to the difficulty of obtaining
a perfect vacuum in the globe in which the light was suspended, and partly to a misapprehension of
the true principle of incandescent lighting, these experiments had not been attended with success;
although it had been demonstrated as early as 1845 that, whatever material was used, the conductor
must be enclosed in an air-tight bulb, to prevent it from being consumed by the oxygen in the
atmosphere. The chief difficulty was that the carbon burners were subject to a rapid disintegration or
evaporation, which electricians assumed was due to the disrupting action of the electric current, and,
hence, the conclusion was reached that carbon contained in itself the elements of its own destruction,
and was not a suitable material for the burner of an incandescent lamp.

It is admitted that the lamp described in the Sawyer and Man patent is no longer in use, and was
never a commercial success; that it does not embody the principle of high resistance with a small
illuminating surface; that it does not have the filament burner of the modern incandescent lamp; that
the lamp chamber is defective, and that the lamp manufactured by the complainant and put upon
the market is substantially the Edison lamp; but it is said that, in the conductor used by Edison, (a
particular part of the stem of the bamboo lying directly beneath the silicious cuticle, the peculiar
fitness for which purpose was undoubtedly discovered by him,) he made use of a fibrous or textile
material, covered by the patent to Sawyer and Man, and is, therefore, an infringer. It was admitted,
however, that the third claim -- for a conductor of carbonized paper -- was not infringed.

The two main defences [sic] to this patent are (1) that it is defective upon its face, in attempting to
monopolize the use of all fibrous and textile materials for the purpose of electric illumination; and (2)
that Sawyer and Man were not in fact the first to discover that these were better adapted than mineral
carbons to such purposes.

Is the complainant entitled to a monopoly of all fibrous and textile materials for incandescent
conductors? If the patentees had discovered in fibrous and textile substances a quality common to
them all, or to them generally, as distinguishing them from other materials, such as minerals, etc., and
such quality or characteristic adapted them peculiarly to incandescent conductors, such claim might
not be too broad. If, for instance, minerals or porcelains had always been used for a particular purpose,
and a person should take out a patent for a similar article of wood, and woods generally were adapted
to that purpose, the claim might not be too broad, though defendant used wood of a different kind
from that of the patentee. But if woods generally were not adapted to the purpose, and yet the patentee
had discovered a wood possessing certain qualities, which gave it a peculiar fitness for such purpose,
it would not constitute an infringement for another to discover and use a different kind of wood,
which was found to contain similar or superior qualities. The present case is an apt illustration of this
principle. Sawyer and Man supposed they had discovered in carbonized paper the best material for an
incandescent conductor. Instead of confining themselves to carbonized paper, as they might properly
have done, and in fact did in their third claim, they made a broad claim for every fibrous or textile
material, when in fact an examination of over six thousand vegetable growths showed that none of
them possessed the peculiar qualities that fitted them for that purpose. Was everybody then precluded
by this broad claim from making further investigation? We think not.

The injustice of so holding is manifest in view of the experiments made, and continued for several
months, by Mr. Edison and his assistants, among the different species of vegetable growth, for the

96 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
purpose of ascertaining the one best adapted to an incandescent conductor. Of these he found suitable
for his purpose only about three species of bamboo, one species of cane from the Valley of the
Amazon, impossible to be procured in quantities on account of the climate, and one or two species
of fibres from the agave family. Of the special bamboo, the walls of which have a thickness of about
three-eighths of an inch, he used only about twenty-thousandths of an inch in thickness. In this
portion of the bamboo the fibres are more nearly parallel, the cell walls are apparently smallest, and
the pithy matter between the fibres is at its minimum. It seems that carbon filaments cannot be
made of wood -- that is, exogenous vegetable growth -- because the fibres are not parallel and the
longitudinal fibres are intercepted by radial fibres. The cells composing the fibres are all so large that
the resulting carbon is very porous and friable. Lamps made of this material proved of no commercial
value. After trying as many as thirty or forty different woods of exogenous growth, he gave them
up as hopeless. But finally, while experimenting with a bamboo strip which formed the edge of a
palmleaf fan, cut into filaments, he obtained surprising results. After microscopic examination of the
material, he despatched a man to Japan to make arrangements for securing the bamboo in quantities.
It seems that the characteristic of the bamboo which makes it particularly suitable is, that the fibres
run more nearly parallel than in other species of wood. Owing to this, it can be cut up into filaments
having parallel fibres, running throughout their length, and producing a homogeneous carbon. There
is no generic quality, however, in vegetable fibres, because they are fibrous, which adapts them to the
purpose. Indeed, the fibres are rather a disadvantage. If the bamboo grew solid without fibres, but
had its peculiar cellular formation, it would be a perfect material, and incandescent lamps would last
at least six times as long as at present. All vegetable fibrous growths do not have a suitable cellular
structure. In some the cells are so large that they are valueless for that purpose. No exogenous, and
very few endogenous, growths are suitable. The messenger whom he despatched to different parts
of Japan and China sent him about forty different kinds of bamboo, in such quantities as to enable
him to make a number of lamps, and from a test of these different species he ascertained which
was best for the purpose. From this it appears very clearly that there is no such quality common to
fibrous and textile substances generally as makes them suitable for an incandescent conductor, and
that the bamboo which was finally pitched upon, and is now generally used, was not selected because
it was of vegetable growth, but because it contained certain peculiarities in its fibrous structure which
distinguished it from every other fibrous substance. The question really is whether the imperfectly
successful experiments of Sawyer and Man, with carbonized paper and wood carbon, conceding all
that is claimed for them, authorize them to put under tribute the results of the brilliant discoveries
made by others.

It is required by Rev. Stat.  4888 that the application shall contain a written description of the device
"and of the manner and process of making, constructing, compounding, and using it in such full, clear,
concise, and exact terms as to enable any person, skilled in the art or science to which it appertains or
with which it is most nearly connected, to make, construct, compound, and use the same." The object
of this is to apprise the public of what the patentee claims as his own, the courts of what they are called
upon to construe, and competing manufacturers and dealers of exactly what they are bound to avoid.
Grant v. Raymond, 6 Pet. 218, 247. If the description be so vague and uncertain that no one can tell,
except by independent experiments, how to construct the patented device, the patent is void.

It was said by Mr. Chief Justice Taney in Wood v. Underhill, 5 How. 1, 5, with respect to a patented
compound for the purpose of making brick or tile, which did not give the relative proportions of
the different ingredients: "But when the specification of a new composition of matter gives only the
names of the substances which are to be mixed together, without stating any relative proportion,

                                                                                                                                 7. DISCLOSURE 97
undoubtedly it would be the duty of the court to declare the patent void. And the same rule would
prevail where it was apparent that the proportions were stated ambiguously and vaguely. For in
such cases it would be evident, on the face of the specification, that no one could use the invention
without first ascertaining, by experiment, the exact proportion of the different ingredients required to
produce the result intended to be obtained . . . And if, from the nature and character of the ingredients
to be used, they are not susceptible of such exact description, the inventor is not entitled to a patent."

So in Tyler v. Boston, 7 Wall. 327, 330, wherein the plaintiff professed to have discovered a combination
of fusel oil with the mineral and earthy oils, constituting a burning fluid, the patentee stated that
the exact quantity of fusel oil, which is necessary to produce the most desirable compound, must be
determined by experiment. And the court observed: "Where a patent is claimed for such a discovery
it should state the component parts of the new manufacture claimed with clearness and precision,
and not leave a person attempting to use the discovery to find it out `by experiment.'" See also Bn v.
Jeantet, 129 U.S. 683; Howard v. Detroit Stove Works, 150 U.S. 164, 167; Schneider v. Lovell, 10 Fed. Rep.
666; Welling v. Crane, 14 Fed. Rep. 571.

Applying this principle to the patent under consideration, how would it be possible for a person to
know what fibrous or textile material was adapted to the purpose of an incandescent conductor,
except by the most careful and painstaking experimentation? If, as before observed, there were some
general quality, running through the whole fibrous and textile kingdom, which distinguished it from
every other, and gave it a peculiar fitness for the particular purpose, the man who discovered such
quality might justly be entitled to a patent; but that is not the case here. An examination of materials
of this class carried on for months revealed nothing that seemed to be adapted to the purpose;
and even the carbonized paper and wood carbons specified in the patent, experiments with which
first suggested their incorporation therein, were found to be so inferior to the bamboo, afterwards
discovered by Edison, that the complainant was forced to abandon its patent in that particular, and
take up with the material discovered by its rival. Under these circumstances, to hold that one, who
had discovered that a certain fibrous or textile material answered the required purpose, should obtain
the right to exclude everybody from the whole domain of fibrous and textile materials, and thereby
shut out any further efforts to discover a better specimen of that class than the patentee had employed,
would be an unwarranted extension of his monopoly, and operate rather to discourage than to
promote invention. If Sawyer and Man had discovered that a certain carbonized paper would answer
the purpose, their claim to all carbonized paper would, perhaps, not be extravagant; but the fact that
paper happens to belong to the fibrous kingdom did not invest them with sovereignty over this entire
kingdom, and thereby practically limit other experimenters to the domain of minerals.

In fact, such a construction of this patent as would exclude competitors from making use of any
fibrous or textile material would probably defeat itself, since, if the patent were infringed by the use
of any such material, it would be anticipated by proof of the prior use of any such material. In this
connection it would appear, not only that wood charcoal had been constantly used since the days of
Sir Humphry Davy for arc lighting, but that in the English patent to Greener and Staite of 1846, for
an incandescent light, "charcoal, reduced to a state of powder," was one of the materials employed.
So also, in the English patent of 1841 to De Moleyns, "a finely pulverized boxwood charcoal or
plumbago" was used for an incandescent electric lamp. Indeed, in the experiments of Sir Humphry
Davy, early in the century, pieces of well-burned charcoal were heated to a vivid whiteness by the
electric current, and other experiments were made which evidently contemplated the use of charcoal
heated to the point of incandescence. Mr. Broadnax, the attorney who prepared the application, it
seems, was also of opinion that a broad claim for vegetable carbons could not be sustained because

98 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
charcoal had been used before in incandescent lighting. There is undoubtedly a good deal of testimony
tending to show that, for the past fifty or sixty years, the word "charcoal" has been used in the art, not
only to designate carbonized wood, but mineral or hard carbons, such as were commonly employed
for the carbon pencils of arc lamps. But we think it quite evident that, in the patents and experiments
above referred to, it was used in its ordinary sense of charcoal obtained from wood. The very fact
of the use of such word to designate mineral carbons indicates that such carbons were believed to
possess peculiar properties required for illumination, which before that had been supposed to belong
to wood charcoal.
We have not found it necessary in this connection to consider the amendments that were made to the
original specification, upon which so much stress was laid in the opinion of the court below, since we
are all agreed that the claims of this patent, with the exception of the third, are too indefinite to be the
subject of a valid monopoly.
As these suggestions are of themselves sufficient to dispose of the case adversely to the complainant,
a consideration of the question of priority of invention, or rather of the extent and results of the
Sawyer and Man experiments, which was so fully argued upon both sides, and passed upon by the
court below, becomes unnecessary.
For the reasons above stated the decree of the Circuit Court is
Affirmed.

                                                                                                                                 7. DISCLOSURE 99
AMGEN V. SANOFI (2023)

                                              Amgen Inc. et al. v. Sanofi et al.

                                                       598 U.S. 594 (2023)

Justice GORSUCH delivered the opinion of the Court.

The development of antibody drugs has yielded life-changing therapies. Individuals across the world
now rely on antibody drugs to treat conditions ranging from Crohn's disease to cancer. This case
concerns patents covering antibodies that help reduce levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol,
sometimes called LDL cholesterol (for the obvious reason) or bad cholesterol (because it can lead to
cardiovascular disease, heart attacks, and strokes).

The case comes to us this way. Several years ago, petitioners (Amgen) obtained two patents. Together,
these patents claim a monopoly over all antibodies that (1) bind to specific amino acids on a naturally
occurring protein known as PCSK9, and (2) block PCSK9 from impairing the body's mechanism for
removing LDL cholesterol from the bloodstream. Soon after receiving these patents, Amgen sued
respondents (Sanofi) for infringement. In response, Sanofi argued that the patents were invalid under
112 of the Patent Act. That provision requires a patent applicant to describe its invention "in such
full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art . . . to make and use the
[invention]." 35 U. S. C. 112(a). Sanofi contended that

Amgen's patents failed to meet this standard because they sought to claim for Amgen's exclusive use
potentially millions more antibodies than the company had taught scientists to make. In the end, both
the district court and Federal Circuit sided with Sanofi. The question we face is whether to disturb
their judgment.

                                                                    I

                                                                   A

   The immune system produces antibodies as a defense to foreign agents called antigens. When a
particular antigen-a virus, for example-enters the body, the immune system generates antibodies
to attack it. In a successful attack, the antibodies target and bind to the antigen, stopping it from
causing harm to the body. See Brief for Sir Gregory Paul Winter et al. as Amici Curiae 8 (Winter Brief );
M. Lemley & J. Sherkow, The Antibody Patent Paradox, 132 Yale L. J. 994, 1001-1002 (2023).

Antibodies are incredibly diverse. Some scientists estimate that there may be as many unique
antibodies as there are stars in the galaxy. See id., at 1003; see also B. Briney, A. Inderbitzin, C.
Joyce, & D. Burton, Commonality Despite Exceptional Diversity in the Baseline Human Antibody
Repertoire, 566 Nature 393, 397 (No. 7744, Feb. 2019) (estimating that the immune system could
potentially generate up to a quintillion unique antibodies). This diversity shows up in both structure
and function.

100 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Start with structure. "When scientists refer to an antibody's `structure,' " they may have in mind
"several related concepts," each of which describes "what an antibody is." Winter Brief 10. Antibodies
are made up of amino acids, and scientists commonly identify a particular antibody according to its
specific sequence of amino acids-what they call an antibody's " `primary structure.' " Id., at 9-10. But
antibodies are not just linear chains of amino acids. As the atoms of the amino acids interact with
each other, they create folds that result in complex three-dimensional shapes. Ibid. Scientists refer to
an antibody's intricate topography as its "tertiary structure." Id., at 10.

An antibody's structure does much to dictate its function-its ability to bind to an antigen and, in some
instances, to block other molecules in the body from doing the same. "For an antibody to bind to an
antigen, the two surfaces have to fit together and contact each other at multiple points." Id., at 11. But
just because an antibody can bind to an antigen does not mean that it can also block. To bind and
block, the antibody must establish a sufficiently broad, strong, and stable bond to the antigen. See
ibid. Different antibodies have different binding and blocking capacities based on the amino acids that
compose them and their three-dimensional shapes. See id., at 11-12.

Despite recent advances, aspects of antibody science remain unpredictable. For example, scientists
understand that changing even one amino acid in the sequence can alter an antibody's structure and
function. See id., at 14. But scientists cannot always accurately predict exactly how trading one amino
acid for another will affect an antibody's structure and function. Ibid. As Amgen's expert testified
at trial: " `[T]he way in which you get from sequence to that three-dimensional structure isn't fully
understood today. It's going to get a Nobel Prize for somebody at some point, but translating that
sequence into a known three-dimensional structure is still not possible.' " Id., at 14-15.

                                                                   B

   While the immune system naturally produces an army of antibodies to protect us from various
harms, scientists are now able to engineer antibodies to assist in treating diseases. Some of these
lab-made antibodies target not foreign agents but the body's own proteins, receptors, and ligands.
"While naturally occurring in our bodies, these [proteins, receptors, and ligands] can also be involved
in inflammatory disorders, uncontrolled cell growth, or other biological pathways that may be
associated with disease." Id., at 8.

One part of this effort has focused on the creation of antibodies to treat patients with high LDL
cholesterol. A silent killer, LDL cholesterol can contribute to the formation of plaque in the arteries
that may lead to cardiovascular disease, heart attacks, and strokes. For many people with high LDL
cholesterol, drugs called statins offer an effective treatment. For others, statins do not work well or
come with unwelcome side effects. In those cases, a relatively new antibody-based treatment known
as a PCSK9 inhibitor may be appropriate. See Amgen Inc. v. Sanofi, 872 F. 3d 1367, 1371 (CA Fed.
2017).

PCSK9 is a naturally occurring protein that binds to and degrades LDL receptors. That can pose a
problem because the body produces LDL receptors to perform the beneficial function of extracting
LDL cholesterol from the bloodstream. See ibid. Scientists have understood this much for some time.
But it wasn't until fairly recently that they began exploring how antibodies might be used to inhibit
PCSK9 from binding to and degrading LDL receptors as a way to treat patients with high LDL
cholesterol.

In the mid-2000s, a number of pharmaceutical companies began looking into the possibility of

                                                                                                                               7. DISCLOSURE 101
making antibodies to target PCSK9. See Brief for Respondents 7; Brief for Arnold Ventures et al. as
Amici Curiae 17-20. More precisely, they sought to create antibodies that could bind to a particular
region of PCSK9 called the "sweet spot." See Brief for Petitioners 10-11. The sweet spot is a sequence
of 15 amino acids out of PCSK9's 692 total amino acids. Id., at 11. By binding to the sweet spot,
scientists found, an antibody could prevent PCSK9 from binding to and degrading LDL receptors. See
id., at 10-11; Amgen, 872 F. 3d, at 1371.

Eventually, Amgen developed a PCSK9-inhibiting drug that it marketed under the name Repatha, and
Sanofi produced one it labeled Praluent. Each drug employs a distinct antibody with its own unique
amino acid sequence. See id., at 1371-1372; Brief for Respondents 8-10. In 2011, Amgen obtained a
patent for the antibody employed in Repatha, and Sanofi received one covering the antibody used in
Praluent. See id., at 8, 9. Each patent describes the relevant antibody by its amino acid sequence. See
ibid. Neither of these patents is at issue in this case.

Instead, our dispute focuses on two additional patents Amgen obtained in 2014 that relate back to
the company's 2011 patent. See U. S. Patent No. 8,829,165 (Sept. 9, 2014); U. S. Patent No. 8,859,741
(Oct. 14, 2014). We refer to them as the `165 and `741 patents. In particular, this case revolves around
claims 19 and 29 of the `165 patent and claim 7 of the `741 patent. See 987 F. 3d 1080, 1082 (CA
Fed. 2021). In these claims, Amgen did not seek protection for any particular antibody described by
amino acid sequence. Instead, Amgen purported to claim for itself "the entire genus" of antibodies
that (1) "bind to specific amino acid residues on PCSK9," and (2) "block PCSK9 from binding to [LDL
receptors]." Amgen, 872 F. 3d, at 1372.

As part of its submission to the patent office, Amgen identified the amino acid sequences of 26
antibodies that perform these two functions, and it depicted the three-dimensional structures of
two of these 26 antibodies. 987 F. 3d, at 1083. But beyond that, Amgen only offered scientists two
methods to make other antibodies that perform the binding and blocking functions it described.
The first method is what Amgen calls the "roadmap." Brief for Petitioners 13. At a high level, the
roadmap directs scientists to: (1) generate a range of antibodies in the lab; (2) test those antibodies
to determine whether any bind to PCSK9; (3) test those antibodies that bind to PCSK9 to determine
whether any bind to the sweet spot as described in the claims; and (4) test those antibodies that bind
to the sweet spot as described in the claims to determine whether any block PCSK9 from binding to
LDL receptors. See id., at 13-14. The second method is what Amgen calls "conservative substitution."
Id., at 14, 17. This technique requires scientists to: (1) start with an antibody known to perform the
described functions; (2) replace select amino acids in the antibody with other amino acids known to
have similar properties; and (3) test the resulting antibody to see if it also performs the described
functions. See id., at 14-15.

                                                                   C

   Soon after receiving the `165 and `741 patents, Amgen sued Sanofi for infringing them. Sanofi
replied that it was not liable to Amgen because the relevant claims were invalid as a matter of law.
Invalid, Sanofi said, because Amgen had not enabled a person skilled in the art to make and use
all of the antibodies that perform the two functions Amgen described in its claims. See 987 F. 3d,
at 1083-1085. While Amgen had identified the amino acid sequences of 26 antibodies that bind to
PCSK9 and block it from binding to LDL receptors, Sanofi observed that Amgen's claims cover
potentially millions more undisclosed antibodies that perform these same functions. And, Sanofi
argued, neither of the two methods Amgen had outlined for generating additional antibodies with the

102 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
same functions enable a person skilled in the art to do so reliably. Instead, Sanofi submitted, those
methods require scientists to engage in little more than a trial-and-error process of discovery. See id.,
at 1085.

After lengthy proceedings, the district court granted Sanofi judgment as a matter of law, concluding
that the claims at issue "are not enabled." 2019 WL 4058927, *13 (Del., Aug. 28, 2019). The Federal
Circuit affirmed. 987 F. 3d, at 1088. It determined that "no reasonable factfinder could conclude" that
Amgen had provided "adequate guidance" to make and use the claimed antibodies "beyond the narrow
scope of the [26] working examples" it had identified by their amino acid sequences. Ibid. In response
to Amgen's petition for certiorari, we agreed to take up the case. 598 U. S. ___ (2022).

                                                                   II

   The Constitution vests Congress with the power to "promote the Progress of Science and useful
Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective
Writings and Discoveries." Art. I, 8, cl. 8. Right there in the text, one finds the outline of what
this Court has called the patent "bargain." Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., 489 U. S.
141, 150 (1989). In exchange for bringing "new designs and technologies into the public domain
through disclosure," so they may benefit all, an inventor receives a limited term of "protection from
competitive exploitation." Id., at 151; see also The Federalist No. 43, p. 272 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961)
(J. Madison) (explaining that in such cases "[t]he public good fully coincides . . . with the claims of
individuals").

Congress has exercised this authority from the start. The Patent Act of 1790 promised up to a 14-year
monopoly to any applicant who "invented or discovered any useful art, manufacture, . . . or device, or
any improvement therein not before known or used." Act of Apr. 10, 1790, 1, 1 Stat. 110. Reflecting
the quid-pro-quo premise of patent law, the statute required the applicant to deposit with the Secretary
of State a "specification . . . so particular . . . as not only to distinguish the invention or discovery from
other things before known and used, but also to enable a workman or other person skilled in the
art or manufacture . . . to make, construct, or use the same." 2, ibid. The statute made clear that this
disclosure would ensure "the public may have the full benefit [of the invention or discovery], after the
expiration of the patent term." Ibid.

Even as Congress has revised the patent laws over time, it has left this "enablement" obligation
largely intact. See 35 U. S. C. ㎣111, 112. Section 111 of the current Patent Act provides that a patent
application "shall include . . . a specification as prescribed by section 112." 111(a)(2)(A). Section 112,
in turn, requires a specification to include "a written description of the invention, and of the manner
and process of making and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person
skilled in the art . . . to make and use the same." 112(a). So today, just as in 1790, the law secures for
the public its benefit of the patent bargain by ensuring that, "upon the expiration of [the patent], the
knowledge of the invention [i]nures to the people, who are thus enabled without restriction to practice
it." United States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 289 U. S. 178, 187 (1933); see also Grant v. Raymond, 6
Pet. 218, 247 (1832) (Marshall, C. J.) ("This is necessary in order to give the public, after the privilege
shall expire, the advantage for which the privilege is allowed, and is the foundation of the power to
issue a patent."); Whittemore v. Cutter, 29 F. Cas. 1120, 1122 (No. 17,600) (CC Mass. 1813) (Story, J.) ("If
therefore [the disclosure] be so obscure, loose, and imperfect, that this cannot be done, it is defrauding
the public of all the consideration, upon which the monopoly is granted.").

                                                                                                                               7. DISCLOSURE 103
This Court has addressed the enablement requirement on many prior occasions. See, e.g., Wood v.
Underhill, 5 How. 1 (1846); O'Reilly v. Morse, 15 How. 62 (1854); The Incandescent Lamp Patent, 159 U. S.
465 (1895); Minerals Separation, Ltd. v. Hyde, 242 U. S. 261 (1916); Holland Furniture Co. v. Perkins Glue
Co., 277 U. S. 245 (1928). While the technologies in these older cases may seem a world away from the
antibody treatments of today, the decisions are no less instructive for it.

Begin with Morse. While crossing the Atlantic Ocean in 1832 aboard a ship named Sully, Samuel
Morse found himself in conversation with other passengers about "experiments and discoveries"
around electromagnetism. 15 How., at 68. "In the course of this discussion, it occurred to [Morse] that,
by means of electricity, signs representing figures, letters, or words, might be legibly written down at
any distance." Id., at 69. So clear was the idea in Morse's mind that, "[b]efore he landed in the United
States, he had . . . drawn out in his sketch book . . . the form of an instrument for an electro-magnetic
telegraph." Ibid.

Immediately upon his arrival in New York, Morse showed his brothers his sketches. See id., at 69-70.
He spent the next few years refining his invention. See id., at 70-76. The "great difficulty" he faced was
that "the galvanic current, however strong in the beginning, became gradually weaker as it advanced
on the wire[,] and was not strong enough to produce a mechanical effect, after a certain distance."
Id., at 107. By 1837, Morse had a solution: "combining two or more electric or galvanic circuits,
with independent batteries for the purpose of overcoming the diminished force of electro-magnetism
in long circuits." Id., at 109. Morse demonstrated his telegraph the following year at the Franklin
Institute in Philadelphia, and he displayed it soon after in Congress. See id., at 76. He received a patent
in 1840, which reissued in 1848. See id., at 81-83.

The litigation that brought Morse before this Court concerned a telegraphic system that Henry
O'Reilly had installed between Louisville and Nashville. See id., at 65. Morse sued O'Reilly for
infringement, alleging that O'Reilly's system was "identical with" Morse's own. Id., at 66. O'Reilly
mounted a number of defenses, including that Morse's patent was void because it lacked an adequate
specification. See id., at 99-101, 112.

Morse's patent included eight claims, and this Court had no trouble upholding seven of them-those
limited to the telegraphic structures and systems he had designed. See id., at 85-86, 112, 117. But the
Court paused on the eighth. That claim covered "the essence" of the invention, which Morse described
as "the use of the motive power of the electric or galvanic current . . . however developed for marking
or printing intelligible characters, signs, or letters, at any distances." Id., at 112 (internal quotation
marks omitted). Leaving no doubt about this claim's scope, Morse stated plainly: " `I do not propose to
limit myself to the specific machinery or parts of machinery described in the foregoing specification
and claims.' " Ibid.

The Court held the eighth claim "too broad, and not warranted by law." Id., at 113. The problem was
that it covered all means of achieving telegraphic communication, yet Morse had not described how
to make and use them all. See id., at 113-117; see also 3 Chisum on Patents 7.03[1], pp. 7-18 to 7-19
(2021). "[I]f the eighth claim . . . can be maintained," the Court concluded, "there was no necessity
for any specification, further than to say that he had discovered that, by using the motive power of
electro-magnetism, he could print intelligible characters at any distance." 15 How., at 119. "[I]t will be
admitted on all hands, that no patent could have issued on such a specification." Ibid.

Consider, too, Incandescent Lamp. For much of the 19th century, gas lamps helped illuminate streets

104 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
and supplemented candles inside homes, factories, offices, and theaters. But gas lighting had
drawbacks. It took effort to ignite lamps each night and extinguish them each morning. Then there
were the problems of soot and fumes. See R. Stross, The Wizard of Menlo Park 84-85 (2007) (Stross).
By the 1870s, many had experimented with other forms of lighting, including incandescence and the
arc light. 159 U. S., at 470. But these alternatives burned unreliably or with unbearable brightness. See
id., at 470-471. The latter problem in particular led one observer to lament this "new sort of urban
star," which shines "horrible, unearthly, obnoxious" light. R. L. Stevenson, A Plea for Gas Lamps, in
Virginibus Puerisque and Other Papers 295 (1881).

Enter Thomas Edison. From his laboratory in Menlo Park, Edison and a team toiled to improve
upon the prevailing method of incandescent lighting, which tended to employ carbon filaments. 159
U. S., at 471-473. The problem with carbon filaments was that they disintegrated rapidly. In a sense,
"carbon contained in itself the elements of its own destruction." Id., at 471. Seeking an alternative,
Edison tinkered for a time with platinum, but it was expensive and difficult to bring to the point of
incandescence without melting. Stross 78, 82. Eventually, Edison dispatched men across the globe to
collect specimens of bamboo. Id., at 109-110. One sample from Japan worked brilliantly because "[its]
fibres [ran] more nearly parallel than in other species of wood." 159 U. S., at 473. Satisfied, Edison
arranged to have a Japanese farmer supply all of the bamboo he would ever need. Stross 110.

But there was a catch. William Sawyer and Albon Man had obtained a patent for an " `electric lamp' "
with an " `incandescing conductor' " made of " `carbonized fibrous or textile material,' " which they
claimed was an improvement over conductors made of " `mineral or gas carbon.' " 159 U. S., at 466,
468. Sawyer and Man's patent had not won them commercial success. They had designed a lamp with
a conductor made of carbonized paper, but the lamp proved defective and quickly fell out of use. See
id., at 471-472. Still, their failure did not stop them from seeking to share in some of Edison's success.
Sawyer and Man alleged that Edison's lamp infringed their patent because it "made use of a fibrous or
textile material, covered by the patent." Id., at 471. What was that offending material? Bamboo.

This Court sided with Edison. It held that Sawyer and Man's patent claimed much but enabled
little. "Sawyer and Man supposed they had discovered in carbonized paper the best material for an
incandescent conductor." Id., at 472. But "[i]nstead of confining themselves to carbonized paper, as
they might properly have done, and in fact did in their third claim, they made a broad claim for every
fibrous and textile material." Ibid. Even that broad claim "might" have been permissible, the Court
allowed, if Sawyer and Man had disclosed "a quality common" to fibrous and textile substances that
made them "peculiarly" adapted to incandescent lighting. Ibid. Had they done so, others would have
known how to select among such materials to make an operable lamp. But the record showed that
most fibrous and textile materials failed to work. Only through "painstaking experimentation" did
Edison discover that bamboo "answered the required purpose." Id., at 475-476. The Court summed
up things this way: "[T]he fact that paper happens to belong to the fibrous kingdom did not invest
[Sawyer and Man] with sovereignty over this entire kingdom." Id., at 476.

The Court returned to these principles in Holland Furniture. There, the evidence indicated that animal
glue has properties that have long made it excellent for wood veneering. See 277 U. S., at 247. Seeking
a substitute, Perkins Glue Company had developed and patented a starch glue similar enough to
animal glue that craftsmen could also use it for wood veneering. See ibid. Yet Perkins's patent included
a claim that went beyond the specific starch glue it manufactured. See id., at 250-251. This claim
covered all "starch glue which, [when] combined with about three parts or less by weight of water, will
have substantially the same properties as animal glue." Id., at 251. Perkins's specification instructed

                                                                                                                               7. DISCLOSURE 105
  gluemakers to choose a "starch ingredient" with "such qualities" that it would yield a product " `as good
  as animal glue' " for wood veneering "when combined with three parts of water and with alkali." Id., at
  256.

  The Court held this broad claim invalid for lack of enablement. Id., at 258. The specification described
  the key input-the "starch ingredient"-in terms of its "use or function" rather than its "physical
  characteristics or chemical properties." Id., 256. And that left gluemakers in a bind. As the Court put it:
  "One attempting to use or avoid the use of Perkins' discovery as so claimed and described functionally
  could do so only after elaborate experimentation" with different starches. Id., at 257. To be sure, the
  Court held, Perkins was entitled to its patent on the specific starch glue it had invented. See id., at
  255. The specification described that glue's "characteristic ingredient" with "particularity." Ibid. But
  just as Morse could not claim all means of telegraphic communication, and Sawyer and Man could
  not claim all fibrous and textile materials for incandescence, Perkins could not claim all starch glues
  made from whatever starch happened to perform as well as animal glue. To hold otherwise, the Court
  said, "would extend the monopoly beyond the invention." Id., at 258.

  Our decisions in Morse, Incandescent Lamp, and Holland Furniture reinforce the simple statutory
  command. If a patent claims an entire class of processes, machines, manufactures, or compositions of
  matter, the patent's specification must enable a person skilled in the art to make and use the entire
  class. In other words, the specification must enable the full scope of the invention as defined by its
  claims. The more one claims, the more one must enable. See 112(a); see also Continental Paper Bag Co.
  v. Eastern Paper Bag Co., 210 U. S. 405, 419 (1908) ("[T]he claims measure the invention.").

  That is not to say a specification always must describe with particularity how to make and use every
  single embodiment within a claimed class. For instance, it may suffice to give an example (or a few
  examples) if the specification also discloses "some general quality . . . running through" the class that
  gives it "a peculiar fitness for the particular purpose." Incandescent Lamp, 159 U. S., at 475. In some
  cases, disclosing that general quality may reliably enable a person skilled in the art to make and use all
  of what is

  claimed, not merely a subset. See id., at 475-476.1

  Nor is a specification necessarily inadequate just because it leaves the skilled artist to engage in some
  measure of adaptation or testing. In Wood, a patent claimed a process for making bricks by mixing
  coal dust into clay. 5 How., at 4. The patent included "a general rule" about the proportion of dust and
  clay to use and offered two alternative proportions "where the clay has some peculiarity." Id., at 5. The
  Court upheld the claim, recognizing that "some small difference in the proportions must occasionally
  be required" given the varieties of clay. Ibid. Similarly, in Minerals Separation, the Court dismissed a
  challenge to a claimed process for separating metal from mineral ores. 242 U. S., at 270. The record
  showed that "preliminary tests" were required to adapt the process to any particular ore. Ibid. Once
  more, the Court explained that "the certainty which the law requires in patents is not greater than is

1. See also Bn v. Jeantet, 129 U. S. 683, 684-686 (1889) (rejecting claim to method of shrinking coarse hair because the
   specification failed to give "one skilled in chemistry such an idea of the particular kinds and character of the chemicals, or
   combination of chemicals, with the relative proportions of each, as would enable him to use the invention without having
   to resort to experiments of his own to discover those ingredients"); Corona Cord Tire Co. v. Dovan Chemical Corp., 276
   U. S. 358, 385 (1928) (rejecting claims to process of treating rubber with " `a disubstituted guanidine' " because "between
   fifty and one hundred substances" fit that description and the specification did not disclose "any general quality common to
   disubstituted guanidines which makes them all effective").

  106 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  reasonable." Ibid. And because the "composition of ores varies infinitely," it was "impossible to specify
  in a patent the precise treatment which would be most successful and economical in each case." Id., at
  271.2

  Decisions such as Wood and Minerals Separation establish that a specification may call for a reasonable
  amount of experimentation to make and use a patented invention. What is reasonable in any case
  will depend on the nature of the invention and the underlying art. See Minerals Separation, 242
  U. S., at 270-271; see also Mowry v. Whitney, 14 Wall. 620, 644 (1872) ("[T]he definiteness of a
  specification must vary with the nature of its subject. Addressed as it is to those skilled in the art, it
  may leave something to their skill in applying the invention."). But in allowing that much tolerance,
  courts cannot detract from the basic statutory requirement that a patent's specification describe the
  invention "in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art"
  to "make and use" the invention. 112(a). Judges may no more subtract from the requirements for
  obtaining a patent that Congress has prescribed than they may add to them. See Bilski v. Kappos, 561
  U. S. 593, 602-603, 612 (2010).

                                                                     III

      With these principles in mind, we return to claims 19 and 29 of the `165 patent and claim 7 of
  the `741 patent. In doing so, we do not doubt that Amgen's specification enables the 26 exemplary
  antibodies it identifies by their amino acid sequences. Even Sanofi concedes that description is
  enough to allow a person skilled in the art to make and use those embodiments. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
  68. But the claims before us sweep much broader than those 26 antibodies. And we agree with the
  lower courts that Amgen has failed to enable all that it has claimed, even allowing for a reasonable
  degree of experimentation.

  While the technology at the heart of this case is thoroughly modern, from the law's perspective
  Amgen's claims bear more than a passing resemblance to those this Court faced long ago in Morse,
  Incandescent Lamp, and Holland Furniture. Amgen seeks to monopolize an entire class of things defined
  by their function-every antibody that both binds to particular areas of the sweet spot of PCSK9
  and blocks PCSK9 from binding to LDL receptors. The record reflects that this class of antibodies
  does not include just the 26 that Amgen has described by their amino acid sequences, but a "vast"
  number of additional antibodies that it has not. 987 F. 3d, at 1085, 1088; see 2019 WL 4058927, *8
  ("at least millions of candidates"); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 52-53. Much as Morse sought to claim
  all telegraphic forms of communication, Sawyer and Man sought to claim all fibrous and textile
  materials for incandescence, and Perkins sought to claim all starch glues that work as well as animal
  glue for wood veneering, Amgen seeks to claim "sovereignty over [an] entire kingdom" of antibodies.
  Incandescent Lamp, 159 U. S., at 476.

  That poses Amgen with a challenge. For if our cases teach anything, it is that the more a party claims,
  the broader the monopoly it demands, the more it must enable. That holds true whether the case
  involves telegraphs devised in the 19th century, glues invented in the 20th, or antibody treatments

2. See also, e.g., Ives v. Hamilton, 92 U. S. 426, 429, 432 (1876) (upholding claim "for an improvement in sawmills" based on
   "curved guides at the upper end of the saw," even though the specification did not "stat[e] the nature of the curve," because
   a "good mechanic acquainted with the construction of sawmills, and having the patent and diagram before him, would have
   no difficulty in adopting the improvement, and making suitable curves"); Tilghman v. Proctor, 102 U. S. 707, 732-733 (1881)
   (upholding claim for process of separating fats and oils even though the specification "suggests a trial . . . with different
   degrees of heat so as to ascertain that which is best for each particular kind of fat").

                                                                                                                                  7. DISCLOSURE 107
developed in the 21st. To be fair, Amgen does not dispute this much. It freely admits that it seeks
to claim for itself an entire universe of antibodies. Still, it says, its broad claims are enabled because
scientists can make and use every undisclosed but functional antibody if they simply follow the
company's "roadmap" or its proposal for "conservative substitution."

We cannot agree. These two approaches amount to little more than two research assignments. The
first merely describes step-by-step Amgen's own trial-and-error method for finding functional
antibodies-calling on scientists to create a wide range of candidate antibodies and then screen each
to see which happen to bind to PCSK9 in the right place and block it from binding to LDL receptors.
See Part I-B, supra; 987 F. 3d, at 1088; 2019 WL 4058927, *10-*13. The second isn't much different.
It requires scientists to make substitutions to the amino acid sequences of antibodies known to
work and then test the resulting antibodies to see if they do too-an uncertain prospect given the
state of the art. See Parts I-A, I-B, supra; 987 F. 3d, at 1088; 2019 WL 4058927, *10-*13. Whether
methods like a "roadmap" or "conservative substitution" might suffice to enable other claims in
other patents-perhaps because, as this Court suggested in Incandescent Lamp, the inventor identifies a
quality common to every functional embodiment, supra, at 13-they do not here. They leave a scientist
about where Sawyer and Man left Edison: forced to engage in "painstaking experimentation" to see
what works. 159 U. S., at 475. That is not enablement. More nearly, it is "a hunting license." Brenner v.
Manson, 383 U. S. 519, 536 (1966).

Think about it this way. "Imagine a combination lock with 100 tumblers, each of which can be set
to 20 different positions." Brief for Intellectual Property Law Professors and Scholars as Amici Curiae
20. "Through trial and error, imagine that an inventor finds and discloses 26 different successful
lock combinations." Ibid. But imagine, too, "that the inventor tries to claim much more, namely all
successful combinations," while instructing others "to randomly try a large set of combinations and
then record the successful ones." Id., at 21. Sure enough, that kind of "roadmap" would produce
functional combinations. Ibid. But it would not enable others to make and use functional
combinations; it would instead leave them to "random trial-and-error discovery." Ibid. Like many
analogies, this one may oversimplify a bit, but it captures the gist of the problem.

Failing in its primary argument that it has enabled all of the antibodies it claims, Amgen tries a few
alternative lines of attack. First, it suggests that the Federal Circuit erred by applying an enablement
test unmoored from the statutory text. As Amgen sees it, that court conflated the question whether
an invention is enabled with the question how long may it take a person skilled in the art to make
every embodiment within a broad claim. See Brief for Petitioners 24-29; see also id., at 2, 19-20, 30-36.
We do not see it that way. While we agree with Amgen that enablement is not measured against the
cumulative time and effort it takes to make every embodiment within a claim, we are not so sure the
Federal Circuit thought otherwise. That court went out of its way to say that it "do[es] not hold that
the effort required to exhaust a genus is dispositive." 987 F. 3d, at 1088 (emphasis deleted). Instead, the
court stressed, the problem it saw is the same problem we see: Amgen offers persons skilled in the art
little more than advice to engage in "trial and error." Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). In any
event, we review judgments of the lower courts, not statements in their opinions. See Black v. Cutter
Laboratories, 351 U. S. 292, 297 (1956).

Taking a similar tack, Amgen next argues that the Federal Circuit erroneously "raise[d] the bar" for
enablement of claims that, like Amgen's, encompass an entire "genus" of embodiments defined by
their function. Brief for Petitioners 25 (internal quotation marks omitted). This is impermissible,
Amgen argues, because the Patent Act "provides a single, universal enablement standard for all

108 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
invention[s]." Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). Here, too, we agree with Amgen in principle:
There is one statutory enablement standard. But, once more, we do not understand the Federal
Circuit to have thought differently. Instead, we understand that court to have recognized only that the
more a party claims for itself the more it must enable. As we have seen, that much is entirely consistent
with Congress's directive and this Court's precedents.
Finally, Amgen warns that an affirmance risks "destroy[ing] incentives for breakthrough inventions."
Id., at 38. But striking the proper balance between incentivizing inventors and ensuring the public
receives the full benefit of their innovations is a policy judgment that belongs to Congress. Since 1790,
Congress has included an enablement mandate as one feature among many designed to achieve the
balance it wishes. Our only duty in this case lies in applying that mandate faithfully.

                                                                  ***
   Section 112 of the Patent Act reflects Congress's judgment that if an inventor claims a lot, but
enables only a little, the public does not receive its benefit of the bargain. For more than 150 years, this
Court has enforced the statutory enablement requirement according to its terms. If the Court had not
done so in Incandescent Lamp, it might have been writing decisions like Holland Furniture in the dark.
Today's case may involve a new technology, but the legal principle is the same. The judgment is
Affirmed.

                                                                                                                               7. DISCLOSURE 109
                 8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT

   Learning Objectives: Unit 8

   Upon completion of unit 8, you should be able to:
           Explain the concept of direct infringement.
           Explain the processes and methods for construing claim terms.
           Analyze a hypothetical claim term.

35 U.S.C.  271(a) states that

        "whoever without authority makes, uses, offers to sell, or sells any patented invention, within the
        United States or imports into the United States any patented invention during the term of the
        patent therefor, infringes the patent.

The "patented invention" is understood to be the "claimed invention." Thus, patent infringement
consists of making, using offering to sell, selling or importing the claimed invention.
INFRINGEMENT
Determinations of whether a patent is infringed involve two basic questions: was a prohibited act
performed and did it involve the claimed invention?
Although there can be disagreements over whether a prohibited act was performed (particularly
when the claimed invention involves a method rather than a product), most infringement disputes
involve the issue of whether the claimed invention was involved. Answering this question involves
a comparison between the accused product or method and the relevant patent claim. If all of the
limitations of the claim are met by an accused product or method, the claim is deemed to be literally
infringed.
This comparison is easier said than done, however. Infringement analyses, like novelty analyses,
involve a limitation-by-limitation approach rather than a holistic comparison. Think of the
limitations in a claim as stars in a constellation. The question is whether each of the stars is present
in an accused product. Just as different people might see different pictures in the stars, differences in

110 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
other aspects between the accused product and the embodiment shown in the patent are irrelevant.
Put another way, infringement and novelty analyses involve looking at the parts rather than at the
whole.

Infringement litigation is typically filed in a US District Court, but infringement disputes can be heard
in other courts such as the Court of Federal Claims or the Court of International Trade. Decisions
made with respect to patent infringement are appealed to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit,
and possibly later to the Supreme Court.

CLAIM CONSTRUCTION

In addition, as you likely have already noticed, most claims are not particularly easy to read. Nor are
the words necessarily ones with only a singular meaning. Language is imprecise, and since claims are
written in English, they can exhibit all the ambiguities and uncertainties our language contains. Just
as statutes and contracts can be subjected to multiple interpretations, so to can patent claims.

Sometimes there are claim terms that must be interpreted so that the meaning can be properly
understood by the fact finder. The process of interpreting the words of a patent claim and then giving
those interpretations legal meaning is known as claim construction. Because many patent disputes
can turn on the meaning of a particular term in the claim, numerous opinions have been written
that construe those terms. Claim construction is only done in the context of a dispute, such as
infringement litigation or validity challenges, because there is no need to construe a claim in the
abstract.

More recently, questions have been raised involving the issue of who gets to construe claim terms and
what form of appellate review is appropriate. The Supreme Court recently addressed this issue in
Teva v. Sandoz (2015), a case I will discuss in class.

Begin by reading 35 U.S.C.  271(a) for yourself. Next, read Phillips v. AWH.

   35 U.S.C. 271. Infringement of patent (2010)

   a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, whoever without authority makes, uses, offers to sell, or sells
   any patented invention, within the United States or imports into the United States any patented invention
   during the term of the patent therefor, infringes the patent.

   b) Whoever actively induces infringement of a patent shall be liable as an infringer.

   c) Whoever offers to sell or sells within the United States or imports into the United States a component of
   a patented machine, manufacture, combination or composition, or a material or apparatus for use in
   practicing a patented process, constituting a material part of the invention, knowing the same to be
   especially made or especially adapted for use in an infringement of such patent, and not a staple article or
   commodity of commerce suitable for substantial noninfringing use, shall be liable as a contributory
   infringer.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 111
U.S. PATENT NO. 4,677,798

112 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 113
114 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 115
116 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 117
118 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 119
120 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
PHILLIPS V. AWH CORPORATION (FED. CIR. 2005)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is claim construction?
           What is the process for claim construction? How is it actually done?
           What policy rationales underlie the Phillips process for claim construction?

                                                Phillips v. AWH Corporation
                                         415 F.3d 1303 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc)
Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge BRYSON, in which Chief Judge MICHEL and Circuit
Judges CLEVENGER, RADER, SCHALL, GAJARSA, LINN, DYK, and PROST join; and in which
Circuit Judge LOURIE joins with respect to parts I, II, III, V, and VI; and in which Circuit Judge
NEWMAN joins with respect to parts I, II, III, and V. Opinion concurring in part and dissenting in
part filed by Circuit Judge LOURIE, in which Circuit Judge NEWMAN joins. Dissenting opinion filed
by Circuit Judge MAYER, in which Circuit Judge NEWMAN joins.
BRYSON, Circuit Judge.
Edward H. Phillips invented modular, steel-shell panels that can be welded together to form
vandalism-resistant walls. The panels are especially useful in building prisons because they are load-
bearing and impact-resistant, while also insulating against fire and noise. Mr. Phillips obtained a
patent on the invention, U.S. Patent No. 4,677,798 ("the `798 patent"), and he subsequently entered
into an arrangement with AWH Corporation, Hopeman Brothers, Inc., and Lofton Corporation
(collectively "AWH") to market and sell the panels. That arrangement ended in 1990. In 1991,
however, Mr. Phillips received a sales brochure from AWH that suggested to him that AWH was
continuing to use his trade secrets and patented technology without his consent. In a series of
letters in 1991 and 1992, Mr. Phillips accused AWH of patent infringement and trade secret
misappropriation. Correspondence between the parties regarding the matter ceased after that time.
In February 1997, Mr. Phillips brought suit in the United States District Court for the District of
Colorado charging AWH with misappropriation of trade secrets and infringement of claims 1, 21,
22, 24, 25, and 26 of the `798 patent. Phillips v. AWH Corp., No. 97-N-212 (D.Colo.). The district
court dismissed the trade secret misappropriation claim as barred by Colorado's three-year statute of
limitations.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 121
With regard to the patent infringement issue, the district court focused on the language of claim
1, which recites "further means disposed inside the shell for increasing its load bearing capacity
comprising internal steel baffles extending inwardly from the steel shell walls." The court interpreted
that language as "a means . . . for performing a specified function," subject to 35 U.S.C.  112,
paragraph 6, which provides that such a claim "shall be construed to cover the corresponding
structure, material, or acts described in the specification and equivalents thereof." Looking to the
specification of the `798 patent, the court noted that "every textual reference in the Specification and
its diagrams show baffle deployment at an angle other than 90 to the wall faces" and that "placement
of the baffles at such angles creates an intermediate interlocking, but not solid, internal barrier." The
district court therefore ruled that, for purposes of the `798 patent, a baffle must "extend inward from
the steel shell walls at an oblique or acute angle to the wall face" and must form part of an interlocking
barrier in the interior of the wall module. Because Mr. Phillips could not prove infringement under
that claim construction, the district court granted summary judgment of noninfringement.

Mr. Phillips appealed with respect to both the trade secret and patent infringement claims. A panel
of this court affirmed on both issues. Phillips v. AWH Corp., 363 F.3d 1207 (Fed.Cir.2004). As to
the trade secret claim, the panel unanimously upheld the district court's ruling that the claim was
barred by the applicable statute of limitations. Id. at 1215. As to the patent infringement claims, the
panel was divided. The majority sustained the district court's summary judgment of noninfringement,
although on different grounds. The dissenting judge would have reversed the summary judgment of
noninfringement.

The panel first determined that because the asserted claims of the `798 patent contain a sufficient
recitation of structure, the district court erred by construing the term "baffles" to invoke the "means-
plus-function" claim format authorized by section 112, paragraph 6. Id. at 1212. Nonetheless, the
panel concluded that the patent uses the term "baffles" in a restrictive manner. Based on the patent's
written description, the panel held that the claim term "baffles" excludes structures that extend at
a 90 degree angle from the walls. The panel noted that the specification repeatedly refers to the
ability of the claimed baffles to deflect projectiles and that it describes the baffles as being "disposed
at such angles that bullets which might penetrate the outer steel panels are deflected." `798 patent,
col. 2, ll. 13-15; see also id. at col. 5, ll. 17-19 (baffles are "disposed at angles which tend to deflect
the bullets"). In addition, the panel observed that nowhere in the patent is there any disclosure of a
baffle projecting from the wall at a right angle and that baffles oriented at 90 degrees to the wall were
found in the prior art. Based on "the specification's explicit descriptions," the panel concluded "that
the patentee regarded his invention as panels providing impact or projectile resistance and that the
baffles must be oriented at angles other than 90." Phillips, 363 F.3d at 1213. The panel added that the
patent specification "is intended to support and inform the claims, and here it makes it unmistakably
clear that the invention involves baffles angled at other than 90." Id. at 1214. The panel therefore
upheld the district court's summary judgment of noninfringement.

The dissenting judge argued that the panel had improperly limited the claims to the particular
embodiment of the invention disclosed in the specification, rather than adopting the "plain meaning"
of the term "baffles." The dissenting judge noted that the parties had stipulated that "baffles" are a
"means for obstructing, impeding, or checking the flow of something," and that the panel majority
had agreed that the ordinary meaning of baffles is "something for deflecting, checking, or otherwise
regulating flow." Phillips, 363 F.3d at 1216-17. In the dissent's view, nothing in the specification
redefined the term "baffles" or constituted a disclaimer specifically limiting the term to less than the
full scope of its ordinary meaning. Instead, the dissenting judge contended, the specification "merely

122 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
identifies impact resistance as one of several objectives of the invention." Id. at 1217. In sum, the
dissent concluded that "there is no reason to supplement the plain meaning of the claim language
with a limitation from the preferred embodiment." Id. at 1218. Consequently, the dissenting judge
argued that the court should have adopted the general purpose dictionary definition of the term
baffle, i.e., "something for deflecting, checking, or otherwise regulating flow," id., and therefore should
have reversed the summary judgment of noninfringement.

This court agreed to rehear the appeal en banc and vacated the judgment of the panel. Phillips v.
AWH Corp., 376 F.3d 1382 (Fed.Cir.2004). We now affirm the portion of the district court's judgment
addressed to the trade secret misappropriation claims. However, we reverse the portion of the court's
judgment addressed to the issue of infringement.

I

Claim 1 of the `798 patent is representative of the asserted claims with respect to the use of the term
"baffles." It recites:

Building modules adapted to fit together for construction of fire, sound and impact resistant security
barriers and rooms for use in securing records and persons, comprising in combination, an outer
shell . . ., sealant means . . . and further means disposed inside the shell for increasing its load bearing
capacity comprising internal steel baffles extending inwardly from the steel shell walls.

As a preliminary matter, we agree with the panel that the term "baffles" is not means-plus-function
language that invokes 35 U.S.C.  112, paragraph 6. To be sure, the claim refers to "means disposed
inside the shell for increasing its load bearing capacity," a formulation that would ordinarily be
regarded as invoking the means-plus-function claim format. However, the claim specifically identifies
"internal steel baffles" as structure that performs the recited function of increasing the shell's load-
bearing capacity. In contrast to the "load bearing means" limitation, the reference to "baffles" does not
use the word "means," and we have held that the absence of that term creates a rebuttable presumption
that section 112, paragraph 6, does not apply. See Personalized Media Communications, LLC v. Int'l Trade
Comm'n, 161 F.3d 696, 703-04 (Fed.Cir.1998).

Means-plus-function claiming applies only to purely functional limitations that do not provide the
structure that performs the recited function. See Watts v. XL Sys., Inc., 232 F.3d 877, 880-81 (Fed.Cir.
2000). While the baffles in the `798 patent are clearly intended to perform several functions, the
term "baffles" is nonetheless structural; it is not a purely functional placeholder in which structure
is filled in by the specification. See TurboCare Div. of Demag Delaval Turbomachinery Corp. v. Gen. Elec.
Co., 264 F.3d 1111, 1121 (Fed.Cir.2001) (reasoning that nothing in the specification or prosecution
history suggests that the patentee used the term "compressed spring" to denote any structure that is
capable of performing the specified function); Greenberg v. Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., 91 F.3d 1580,
1583 (Fed.Cir.1996) (construing the term "detent mechanism" to refer to particular structure, even
though the term has functional connotations). The claims and the specification unmistakably establish
that the "steel baffles" refer to particular physical apparatus. The claim characterizes the baffles as
"extend[ing] inwardly" from the steel shell walls, which plainly implies that the baffles are structures.
The specification likewise makes clear that the term "steel baffles" refers to particular internal wall
structures and is not simply a general description of any structure that will perform a particular
function. See, e.g., `798 patent, col. 4, ll. 25-26 ("the load bearing baffles 16 are optionally used with
longer panels"); id., col. 4, ll. 49-50 (opposing panels are "compressed between the flange 35 and the

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 123
baffle 26"). Because the term "baffles" is not subject to section 112, paragraph 6, we agree with the
panel that the district court erred by limiting the term to corresponding structures disclosed in the
specification and their equivalents. Accordingly, we must determine the correct construction of the
structural term "baffles," as used in the `798 patent.

II

The first paragraph of section 112 of the Patent Act, 35 U.S.C.  112, states that the specification

shall contain a written description of the invention, and of the manner and process of making and
using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art to which
it pertains . . . to make and use the same . . . .

The second paragraph of section 112 provides that the specification

shall conclude with one or more claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject
matter which the applicant regards as his invention.

Those two paragraphs of section 112 frame the issue of claim interpretation for us. The second
paragraph requires us to look to the language of the claims to determine what "the applicant regards
as his invention." On the other hand, the first paragraph requires that the specification describe the
invention set forth in the claims. The principal question that this case presents to us is the extent to
which we should resort to and rely on a patent's specification in seeking to ascertain the proper scope
of its claims.

This is hardly a new question. The role of the specification in claim construction has been an issue in
patent law decisions in this country for nearly two centuries. We addressed the relationship between
the specification and the claims at some length in our en banc opinion in Markman v. Westview
Instruments, Inc., 52 F.3d 967, 979-81 (Fed.Cir.1995) (en banc), aff'd, 517 U.S. 370, 116 S.Ct. 1384, 134
L.Ed.2d 577 (1996). We again summarized the applicable principles in Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic,
Inc., 90 F.3d 1576 (Fed.Cir.1996), and more recently in Innova/Pure Water, Inc. v. Safari Water Filtration
Systems, Inc., 381 F.3d 1111 (Fed.Cir.2004). What we said in those cases bears restating, for the basic
principles of claim construction outlined there are still applicable, and we reaffirm them today. We
have also previously considered the use of dictionaries in claim construction. What we have said in
that regard requires clarification.

A

It is a "bedrock principle" of patent law that "the claims of a patent define the invention to which the
patentee is entitled the right to exclude." Innova, 381 F.3d at 1115; see also Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582
("we look to the words of the claims themselves . . . to define the scope of the patented invention");
Markman, 52 F.3d at 980 ("The written description part of the specification itself does not delimit the
right to exclude. That is the function and purpose of claims."). That principle has been recognized
since at least 1836, when Congress first required that the specification include a portion in which
the inventor "shall particularly specify and point out the part, improvement, or combination, which
he claims as his own invention or discovery." Act of July 4, 1836, ch. 357,  6, 5 Stat. 117, 119. In
the following years, the Supreme Court made clear that the claims are "of primary importance, in
the effort to ascertain precisely what it is that is patented." Merrill v. Yeomans, 94 U.S. 568, 570, 24
L.Ed. 235 (1876). Because the patentee is required to "define precisely what his invention is," the Court

124 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
explained, it is "unjust to the public, as well as an evasion of the law, to construe it in a manner
different from the plain import of its terms." White v. Dunbar, 119 U.S. 47, 52, 7 S.Ct. 72, 30 L.Ed. 303
(1886); see also Cont'l Paper Bag Co. v. E. Paper Bag Co., 210 U.S. 405, 419, 28 S.Ct. 748, 52 L.Ed. 1122
(1908) ("the claims measure the invention"); McCarty v. Lehigh Valley R.R. Co., 160 U.S. 110, 116, 16
S.Ct. 240, 40 L.Ed. 358 (1895) ("if we once begin to include elements not mentioned in the claim, in
order to limit such claim . . ., we should never know where to stop"); Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top
Replacement Co., 365 U.S. 336, 339, 81 S.Ct. 599, 5 L.Ed.2d 592 (1961) ("the claims made in the patent
are the sole measure of the grant").

We have frequently stated that the words of a claim "are generally given their ordinary and customary
meaning." Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582; see also Toro Co. v. White Consol. Indus., Inc., 199 F.3d 1295, 1299
(Fed.Cir.1999); Renishaw PLC v. Marposs Societa' per Azioni, 158 F.3d 1243, 1249 (Fed.Cir.1998).
We have made clear, moreover, that the ordinary and customary meaning of a claim term is the
meaning that the term would have to a person of ordinary skill in the art in question at the time of
the invention, i.e., as of the effective filing date of the patent application. See Innova, 381 F.3d at 1116
("A court construing a patent claim seeks to accord a claim the meaning it would have to a person of
ordinary skill in the art at the time of the invention."); Home Diagnostics, Inc. v. LifeScan, Inc., 381 F.3d
1352, 1358 (Fed.Cir.2004) ("customary meaning" refers to the "customary meaning in [the] art field");
Ferguson Beauregard/Logic Controls v. Mega Sys., LLC, 350 F.3d 1327, 1338 (Fed.Cir.2003) (claim terms
"are examined through the viewing glass of a person skilled in the art"); see also PC Connector Solutions
LLC v. SmartDisk Corp., 406 F.3d 1359, 1363 (Fed.Cir.2005) (meaning of claim "must be interpreted
as of [the] effective filing date" of the patent application); Schering Corp. v. Amgen Inc., 222 F.3d 1347,
1353 (Fed. Cir.2000) (same).

The inquiry into how a person of ordinary skill in the art understands a claim term provides an
objective baseline from which to begin claim interpretation. See Innova, 381 F.3d at 1116. That
starting point is based on the well-settled understanding that inventors are typically persons skilled
in the field of the invention and that patents are addressed to and intended to be read by others of
skill in the pertinent art. See Verve, LLC v. Crane Cams, Inc., 311 F.3d 1116, 1119 (Fed.Cir.2002) (patent
documents are meant to be "a concise statement for persons in the field"); In re Nelson, 47 C.C.P.A.
1031, 280 F.2d 172, 181 (1960) ("The descriptions in patents are not addressed to the public generally,
to lawyers or to judges, but, as section 112 says, to those skilled in the art to which the invention
pertains or with which it is most nearly connected.").

Importantly, the person of ordinary skill in the art is deemed to read the claim term not only in the
context of the particular claim in which the disputed term appears, but in the context of the entire
patent, including the specification. This court explained that point well in Multiform Desiccants, Inc. v.
Medzam, Ltd., 133 F.3d 1473, 1477 (Fed.Cir.1998):

It is the person of ordinary skill in the field of the invention through whose eyes the claims are
construed. Such person is deemed to read the words used in the patent documents with an
understanding of their meaning in the field, and to have knowledge of any special meaning and
usage in the field. The inventor's words that are used to describe the invention--the inventor's
lexicography--must be understood and interpreted by the court as they would be understood and
interpreted by a person in that field of technology. Thus the court starts the decision making process
by reviewing the same resources as would that person, viz., the patent specification and the
prosecution history.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 125
See also Medrad, Inc. v. MRI Devices Corp., 401 F.3d 1313, 1319 (Fed.Cir.2005) ("We cannot look at
the ordinary meaning of the term . . . in a vacuum. Rather, we must look at the ordinary meaning
in the context of the written description and the prosecution history."); V-Formation, Inc. v. Benetton
Group SpA, 401 F.3d 1307, 1310 (Fed.Cir.2005) (intrinsic record "usually provides the technological
and temporal context to enable the court to ascertain the meaning of the claim to one of ordinary skill
in the art at the time of the invention"); Unitherm Food Sys., Inc. v. Swift-Eckrich, Inc., 375 F.3d 1341,
1351 (Fed.Cir.2004) (proper definition is the "definition that one of ordinary skill in the art could
ascertain from the intrinsic evidence in the record").

B

In some cases, the ordinary meaning of claim language as understood by a person of skill in the
art may be readily apparent even to lay judges, and claim construction in such cases involves little
more than the application of the widely accepted meaning of commonly understood words. See
Brown v. 3M, 265 F.3d 1349, 1352 (Fed. Cir.2001) (holding that the claims did "not require elaborate
interpretation"). In such circumstances, general purpose dictionaries may be helpful. In many cases
that give rise to litigation, however, determining the ordinary and customary meaning of the claim
requires examination of terms that have a particular meaning in a field of art. Because the meaning
of a claim term as understood by persons of skill in the art is often not immediately apparent, and
because patentees frequently use terms idiosyncratically, the court looks to "those sources available to
the public that show what a person of skill in the art would have understood disputed claim language
to mean." Innova, 381 F.3d at 1116. Those sources include "the words of the claims themselves, the
remainder of the specification, the prosecution history, and extrinsic evidence concerning relevant
scientific principles, the meaning of technical terms, and the state of the art." Id.; see also Gemstar-TV
Guide Int'l, Inc. v. Int'l Trade Comm'n, 383 F.3d 1352, 1364 (Fed.Cir.2004); Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582-83;
Markman, 52 F.3d at 979-80.

1

Quite apart from the written description and the prosecution history, the claims themselves provide
substantial guidance as to the meaning of particular claim terms. See Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582; see
also ACTV, Inc. v. Walt Disney Co., 346 F.3d 1082, 1088 (Fed.Cir.2003) ("the context of the surrounding
words of the claim also must be considered in determining the ordinary and customary meaning of
those terms").

To begin with, the context in which a term is used in the asserted claim can be highly instructive. To
take a simple example, the claim in this case refers to "steel baffles," which strongly implies that the
term "baffles" does not inherently mean objects made of steel. This court's cases provide numerous
similar examples in which the use of a term within the claim provides a firm basis for construing the
term. See, e.g., Mars, Inc. v. H.J. Heinz Co., 377 F.3d 1369, 1374 (Fed.Cir.2004) (claim term "ingredients"
construed in light of the use of the term "mixture" in the same claim phrase); Process Control Corp. v.
HydReclaim Corp., 190 F.3d 1350, 1356 (Fed.Cir.1999) (claim term "discharge rate" construed in light
of the use of the same term in another limitation of the same claim).

Other claims of the patent in question, both asserted and unasserted, can also be valuable sources
of enlightenment as to the meaning of a claim term. Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582. Because claim terms
are normally used consistently throughout the patent, the usage of a term in one claim can often
illuminate the meaning of the same term in other claims. See Rexnord Corp. v. Laitram Corp., 274 F.3d

126 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
1336, 1342 (Fed.Cir.2001); CVI/Beta Ventures, Inc. v. Tura LP, 112 F.3d 1146, 1159 (Fed.Cir.1997).
Differences among claims can also be a useful guide in understanding the meaning of particular claim
terms. See Laitram Corp. v. Rexnord, Inc., 939 F.2d 1533, 1538 (Fed.Cir.1991). For example, the presence
of a dependent claim that adds a particular limitation gives rise to a presumption that the limitation
in question is not present in the independent claim. See Liebel-Flarsheim Co. v. Medrad, Inc., 358 F.3d
898, 910 (Fed.Cir.2004).

2

The claims, of course, do not stand alone. Rather, they are part of "a fully integrated written
instrument," Markman, 52 F.3d at 978, consisting principally of a specification that concludes with the
claims. For that reason, claims "must be read in view of the specification, of which they are a part." Id.
at 979. As we stated in Vitronics, the specification "is always highly relevant to the claim construction
analysis. Usually, it is dispositive; it is the single best guide to the meaning of a disputed term." 90 F.3d
at 1582.

This court and its predecessors have long emphasized the importance of the specification in claim
construction. In Autogiro Co. of America v. United States, 181 Ct.Cl. 55, 384 F.2d 391, 397-98 (1967),
the Court of Claims characterized the specification as "a concordance for the claims," based on the
statutory requirement that the specification "describe the manner and process of making and using"
the patented invention. The Court of Customs and Patent Appeals made a similar point. See In re Fout,
675 F.2d 297, 300 (CCPA 1982) ("Claims must always be read in light of the specification. Here, the
specification makes plain what the appellants did and did not invent . . . .").

Shortly after the creation of this court, Judge Rich wrote that "[t]he descriptive part of the
specification aids in ascertaining the scope and meaning of the claims inasmuch as the words of the
claims must be based on the description. The specification is, thus, the primary basis for construing
the claims." Standard Oil Co. v. Am. Cyanamid Co., 774 F.2d 448, 452 (Fed.Cir.1985). On numerous
occasions since then, we have reaffirmed that point, stating that "[t]he best source for understanding
a technical term is the specification from which it arose, informed, as needed, by the prosecution
history." Multiform Desiccants, 133 F.3d at 1478; Metabolite Labs., Inc. v. Lab. Corp. of Am. Holdings, 370
F.3d 1354, 1360 (Fed.Cir. 2004) ("In most cases, the best source for discerning the proper context
of claim terms is the patent specification wherein the patent applicant describes the invention."); see
also, e.g., Kinik Co. v. Int'l Trade Comm'n, 362 F.3d 1359, 1365 (Fed. Cir.2004) ("The words of patent
claims have the meaning and scope with which they are used in the specification and the prosecution
history."); Moba, B.V. v. Diamond Automation, Inc., 325 F.3d 1306, 1315 (Fed.Cir.2003) ("[T]he best
indicator of claim meaning is its usage in context as understood by one of skill in the art at the time
of invention.").

That principle has a long pedigree in Supreme Court decisions as well. See Hogg v. Emerson, 47 U.S. (6
How.) 437, 482, 12 L.Ed. 505 (1848) (the specification is a "component part of the patent" and "is as
much to be considered with the [letters patent] in construing them, as any paper referred to in a deed
or other contract"); Bates v. Coe, 98 U.S. 31, 38, 25 L.Ed. 68 (1878) ("in case of doubt or ambiguity it
is proper in all cases to refer back to the descriptive portions of the specification to aid in solving the
doubt or in ascertaining the true intent and meaning of the language employed in the claims"); White
v. Dunbar, 119 U.S. 47, 51, 7 S.Ct. 72, 30 L.Ed. 303 (1886) (specification is appropriately resorted to
"for the purpose of better understanding the meaning of the claim"); Schriber-Schroth Co. v. Cleveland
Trust Co., 311 U.S. 211, 217, 61 S.Ct. 235, 85 L.Ed. 132 (1940) ("The claims of a patent are always to

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 127
be read or interpreted in light of its specifications."); United States v. Adams, 383 U.S. 39, 49, 86 S.Ct.
708, 15 L.Ed.2d 572 (1966) ("[I]t is fundamental that claims are to be construed in the light of the
specifications and both are to be read with a view to ascertaining the invention.").

The importance of the specification in claim construction derives from its statutory role. The close
kinship between the written description and the claims is enforced by the statutory requirement that
the specification describe the claimed invention in "full, clear, concise, and exact terms." 35 U.S.C. 
112, para. 1; see Netword, LLC v. Centraal Corp., 242 F.3d 1347, 1352 (Fed.Cir.2001) ("The claims are
directed to the invention that is described in the specification; they do not have meaning removed
from the context from which they arose."); see also Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc., 517 U.S.
370, 389, 116 S.Ct. 1384, 134 L.Ed.2d 577 (1996) ("[A claim] term can be defined only in a way that
comports with the instrument as a whole."). In light of the statutory directive that the inventor provide
a "full" and "exact" description of the claimed invention, the specification necessarily informs the
proper construction of the claims. See Merck & Co. v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 347 F.3d 1367, 1371
(Fed.Cir. 2003) ("A fundamental rule of claim construction is that terms in a patent document are
construed with the meaning with which they are presented in the patent document. Thus claims
must be construed so as to be consistent with the specification, of which they are a part.") (citations
omitted). In Renishaw, this court summarized that point succinctly:

Ultimately, the interpretation to be given a term can only be determined and confirmed with a
full understanding of what the inventors actually invented and intended to envelop with the claim.
The construction that stays true to the claim language and most naturally aligns with the patent's
description of the invention will be, in the end, the correct construction.

158 F.3d at 1250 (citations omitted).

Consistent with that general principle, our cases recognize that the specification may reveal a special
definition given to a claim term by the patentee that differs from the meaning it would otherwise
possess. In such cases, the inventor's lexicography governs. See CCS Fitness, Inc. v. Brunswick Corp., 288
F.3d 1359, 1366 (Fed.Cir.2002). In other cases, the specification may reveal an intentional disclaimer,
or disavowal, of claim scope by the inventor. In that instance as well, the inventor has dictated
the correct claim scope, and the inventor's intention, as expressed in the specification, is regarded
as dispositive. See SciMed Life Sys., Inc. v. Advanced Cardiovascular Sys., Inc., 242 F.3d 1337, 1343-44
(Fed.Cir.2001).

The pertinence of the specification to claim construction is reinforced by the manner in which a
patent is issued. The Patent and Trademark Office ("PTO") determines the scope of claims in patent
applications not solely on the basis of the claim language, but upon giving claims their broadest
reasonable construction "in light of the specification as it would be interpreted by one of ordinary
skill in the art." In re Am. Acad. of Sci. Tech. Ctr., 367 F.3d 1359, 1364 (Fed.Cir.2004). Indeed, the
rules of the PTO require that application claims must "conform to the invention as set forth in the
remainder of the specification and the terms and phrases used in the claims must find clear support or
antecedent basis in the description so that the meaning of the terms in the claims may be ascertainable
by reference to the description." 37 C.F.R.  1.75(d)(1). It is therefore entirely appropriate for a court,
when conducting claim construction, to rely heavily on the written description for guidance as to the
meaning of the claims.

3

128 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
In addition to consulting the specification, we have held that a court "should also consider the
patent's prosecution history, if it is in evidence." Markman, 52 F.3d at 980; see also Graham v. John
Deere Co., 383 U.S. 1, 33, 86 S.Ct. 684, 15 L.Ed.2d 545 (1966) ("[A]n invention is construed not
only in the light of the claims, but also with reference to the file wrapper or prosecution history
in the Patent Office."). The prosecution history, which we have designated as part of the "intrinsic
evidence," consists of the complete record of the proceedings before the PTO and includes the prior
art cited during the examination of the patent. Autogiro, 384 F.2d at 399. Like the specification, the
prosecution history provides evidence of how the PTO and the inventor understood the patent. See
Lemelson v. Gen. Mills, Inc., 968 F.2d 1202, 1206 (Fed.Cir.1992). Furthermore, like the specification,
the prosecution history was created by the patentee in attempting to explain and obtain the patent.
Yet because the prosecution history represents an ongoing negotiation between the PTO and the
applicant, rather than the final product of that negotiation, it often lacks the clarity of the specification
and thus is less useful for claim construction purposes. See Inverness Med. Switz. GmbH v. Warner
Lambert Co., 309 F.3d 1373, 1380-82 (Fed.Cir.2002) (the ambiguity of the prosecution history made
it less relevant to claim construction); Athletic Alternatives, Inc. v. Prince Mfg., Inc., 73 F.3d 1573,
1580 (Fed.Cir.1996) (the ambiguity of the prosecution history made it "unhelpful as an interpretive
resource" for claim construction). Nonetheless, the prosecution history can often inform the meaning
of the claim language by demonstrating how the inventor understood the invention and whether the
inventor limited the invention in the course of prosecution, making the claim scope narrower than
it would otherwise be. Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582-83; see also Chimie v. PPG Indus., Inc., 402 F.3d 1371,
1384 (Fed.Cir. 2005) ("The purpose of consulting the prosecution history in construing a claim is to
`exclude any interpretation that was disclaimed during prosecution.'"), quoting ZMI Corp. v. Cardiac
Resuscitator Corp., 844 F.2d 1576, 1580 (Fed.Cir.1988); Southwall Techs., Inc. v. Cardinal IG Co., 54 F.3d
1570, 1576 (Fed.Cir.1995).

C

Although we have emphasized the importance of intrinsic evidence in claim construction, we have
also authorized district courts to rely on extrinsic evidence, which "consists of all evidence external to
the patent and prosecution history, including expert and inventor testimony, dictionaries, and learned
treatises." Markman, 52 F.3d at 980, citing Seymour v. Osborne, 78 U.S. (11 Wall.) 516, 546, 20 L.Ed. 33
(1870); see also Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1583. However, while extrinsic evidence "can shed useful light on
the relevant art," we have explained that it is "less significant than the intrinsic record in determining
`the legally operative meaning of claim language.'" C.R. Bard, Inc. v. U.S. Surgical Corp., 388 F.3d 858,
862 (Fed.Cir.2004), quoting Vanderlande Indus. Nederland BV v. Int'l Trade Comm'n, 366 F.3d 1311, 1318
(Fed.Cir.2004); see also Astrazeneca AB v. Mutual Pharm. Co., 384 F.3d 1333, 1337 (Fed.Cir.2004).

Within the class of extrinsic evidence, the court has observed that dictionaries and treatises can be
useful in claim construction. See Renishaw, 158 F.3d at 1250; Rexnord, 274 F.3d at 1344. We have
especially noted the help that technical dictionaries may provide to a court "to better understand
the underlying technology" and the way in which one of skill in the art might use the claim terms.
Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1584 n. 6. Because dictionaries, and especially technical dictionaries, endeavor
to collect the accepted meanings of terms used in various fields of science and technology, those
resources have been properly recognized as among the many tools that can assist the court in
determining the meaning of particular terminology to those of skill in the art of the invention. See
Teleflex, Inc. v. Ficosa N. Am. Corp., 299 F.3d 1313, 1325 (Fed.Cir.2002). Such evidence, we have held,
may be considered if the court deems it helpful in determining "the true meaning of language used in
the patent claims." Markman, 52 F.3d at 980.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 129
We have also held that extrinsic evidence in the form of expert testimony can be useful to a court
for a variety of purposes, such as to provide background on the technology at issue, to explain how
an invention works, to ensure that the court's understanding of the technical aspects of the patent is
consistent with that of a person of skill in the art, or to establish that a particular term in the patent
or the prior art has a particular meaning in the pertinent field. See Pitney Bowes, Inc. v. Hewlett-Packard
Co., 182 F.3d 1298, 1308-09 (Fed.Cir.1999); Key Pharms. v. Hercon Labs. Corp., 161 F.3d 709, 716
(Fed.Cir.1998). However, conclusory, unsupported assertions by experts as to the definition of a claim
term are not useful to a court. Similarly, a court should discount any expert testimony "that is clearly
at odds with the claim construction mandated by the claims themselves, the written description, and
the prosecution history, in other words, with the written record of the patent." Key Pharms., 161 F.3d
at 716.

We have viewed extrinsic evidence in general as less reliable than the patent and its prosecution
history in determining how to read claim terms, for several reasons. First, extrinsic evidence by
definition is not part of the patent and does not have the specification's virtue of being created at
the time of patent prosecution for the purpose of explaining the patent's scope and meaning. Second,
while claims are construed as they would be understood by a hypothetical person of skill in the art,
extrinsic publications may not be written by or for skilled artisans and therefore may not reflect the
understanding of a skilled artisan in the field of the patent. Third, extrinsic evidence consisting of
expert reports and testimony is generated at the time of and for the purpose of litigation and thus can
suffer from bias that is not present in intrinsic evidence. The effect of that bias can be exacerbated if
the expert is not one of skill in the relevant art or if the expert's opinion is offered in a form that is not
subject to cross-examination. See Senmed, Inc. v. Richard-Allan Med. Indus., Inc., 888 F.2d 815, 819 n. 8
(Fed.Cir.1989). Fourth, there is a virtually unbounded universe of potential extrinsic evidence of some
marginal relevance that could be brought to bear on any claim construction question. In the course of
litigation, each party will naturally choose the pieces of extrinsic evidence most favorable to its cause,
leaving the court with the considerable task of filtering the useful extrinsic evidence from the fluff. See
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharms., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 595, 113 S.Ct. 2786, 125 L.Ed.2d 469 (1993) ("Expert
evidence can be both powerful and quite misleading because of the difficulty in evaluating it."). Finally,
undue reliance on extrinsic evidence poses the risk that it will be used to change the meaning of claims
in derogation of the "indisputable public records consisting of the claims, the specification and the
prosecution history," thereby undermining the public notice function of patents. Southwall Techs., 54
F.3d at 1578.

In sum, extrinsic evidence may be useful to the court, but it is unlikely to result in a reliable
interpretation of patent claim scope unless considered in the context of the intrinsic evidence.
Nonetheless, because extrinsic evidence can help educate the court regarding the field of the
invention and can help the court determine what a person of ordinary skill in the art would
understand claim terms to mean, it is permissible for the district court in its sound discretion to admit
and use such evidence. In exercising that discretion, and in weighing all the evidence bearing on claim
construction, the court should keep in mind the flaws inherent in each type of evidence and assess
that evidence accordingly.

III

Although the principles outlined above have been articulated on numerous occasions, some of this
court's cases have suggested a somewhat different approach to claim construction, in which the court
has given greater emphasis to dictionary definitions of claim terms and has assigned a less prominent

130 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
role to the specification and the prosecution history. The leading case in this line is Texas Digital
Systems, Inc. v. Telegenix, Inc., 308 F.3d 1193 (Fed.Cir. 2002).

A

In Texas Digital, the court noted that "dictionaries, encyclopedias and treatises are particularly useful
resources to assist the court in determining the ordinary and customary meanings of claim terms."
308 F.3d at 1202. Those texts, the court explained, are "objective resources that serve as reliable
sources of information on the established meanings that would have been attributed to the terms
of the claims by those of skill in the art," and they "deserve no less fealty in the context of claim
construction" than in any other area of law. Id. at 1203. The court added that because words often
have multiple dictionary meanings, the intrinsic record must be consulted to determine which of the
different possible dictionary meanings is most consistent with the use of the term in question by
the inventor. If more than one dictionary definition is consistent with the use of the words in the
intrinsic record, the court stated, "the claim terms may be construed to encompass all such consistent
meanings." Id.

The Texas Digital court further explained that the patent's specification and prosecution history must
be consulted to determine if the patentee has used "the words [of the claim] in a manner clearly
inconsistent with the ordinary meaning reflected, for example, in a dictionary definition." 308 F.3d at
1204. The court identified two circumstances in which such an inconsistency may be found. First, the
court stated, "the presumption in favor of a dictionary definition will be overcome where the patentee,
acting as his or her own lexicographer, has clearly set forth an explicit definition of the term different
from its ordinary meaning." Id. Second, "the presumption also will be rebutted if the inventor has
disavowed or disclaimed scope of coverage, by using words or expressions of manifest exclusion or
restriction, representing a clear disavowal of claim scope." Id.

The Texas Digital court explained that it advanced the methodology set forth in that opinion in
an effort to combat what this court has termed "one of the cardinal sins of patent law--reading
a limitation from the written description into the claims," SciMed Life Sys., 242 F.3d at 1340. The
court concluded that it is improper to consult "the written description and prosecution history as a
threshold step in the claim construction process, before any effort is made to discern the ordinary and
customary meanings attributed to the words themselves." Texas Digital, 308 F.3d at 1204. To do so, the
court reasoned, "invites a violation of our precedent counseling against importing limitations into the
claims." Id. Summarizing its analysis, the Texas Digital court stated:

By examining relevant dictionaries, encyclopedias, and treatises to ascertain possible meanings that
would have been attributed to the words of the claims by those skilled in the art, and by further
utilizing the intrinsic record to select from those possible meanings the one or ones most consistent
with the use of the words by the inventor, the full breadth of the limitations intended by the inventor
will be more accurately determined and the improper importation of unintended limitations from the
written description into the claims will be more easily avoided.

Id. at 1205.

B

Although the concern expressed by the court in Texas Digital was valid, the methodology it adopted
placed too much reliance on extrinsic sources such as dictionaries, treatises, and encyclopedias and

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 131
too little on intrinsic sources, in particular the specification and prosecution history. While the court
noted that the specification must be consulted in every case, it suggested a methodology for claim
interpretation in which the specification should be consulted only after a determination is made,
whether based on a dictionary, treatise, or other source, as to the ordinary meaning or meanings of
the claim term in dispute. Even then, recourse to the specification is limited to determining whether
the specification excludes one of the meanings derived from the dictionary, whether the presumption
in favor of the dictionary definition of the claim term has been overcome by "an explicit definition of
the term different from its ordinary meaning," or whether the inventor "has disavowed or disclaimed
scope of coverage, by using words or expressions of manifest exclusion or restriction, representing a
clear disavowal of claim scope." 308 F.3d at 1204. In effect, the Texas Digital approach limits the role of
the specification in claim construction to serving as a check on the dictionary meaning of a claim term
if the specification requires the court to conclude that fewer than all the dictionary definitions apply,
or if the specification contains a sufficiently specific alternative definition or disavowal. See, e.g., Texas
Digital, 308 F.3d at 1202 ("unless compelled otherwise, a court will give a claim term the full range of
its ordinary meaning"); Nystrom v. TREX Co., 374 F.3d 1105, 1111-13 (Fed. Cir.2004) (ascertaining the
"full range" of the ordinary meaning of the term "board" through a collection of dictionary definitions,
and stating that those candidate definitions should be removed from consideration only if they were
"disclaimed" in the written description or prosecution history); Inverness Med. Switz., 309 F.3d at 1379
(claim should be construed to encompass multiple dictionary meanings unless "the specification or
prosecution history clearly demonstrates that only one of the multiple meanings was intended"). That
approach, in our view, improperly restricts the role of the specification in claim construction.

Assigning such a limited role to the specification, and in particular requiring that any definition of
claim language in the specification be express, is inconsistent with our rulings that the specification
is "the single best guide to the meaning of a disputed term," and that the specification "acts as a
dictionary when it expressly defines terms used in the claims or when it defines terms by implication."
Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582; Irdeto Access, Inc. v. Echostar Satellite Corp., 383 F.3d 1295, 1300 (Fed.Cir.2004)
("Even when guidance is not provided in explicit definitional format, the specification may define
claim terms by implication such that the meaning may be found in or ascertained by a reading of
the patent documents.") (citations omitted); Novartis Pharms. Corp. v. Abbott Labs., 375 F.3d 1328,
1334-35 (Fed.Cir.2004) (same); Bell Atl. Network Servs., Inc. v. Covad Communications Group, Inc., 262
F.3d 1258, 1268 (Fed.Cir.2001) ("[A] claim term may be clearly redefined without an explicit statement
of redefinition.").

The main problem with elevating the dictionary to such prominence is that it focuses the inquiry
on the abstract meaning of words rather than on the meaning of claim terms within the context of
the patent. Properly viewed, the "ordinary meaning" of a claim term is its meaning to the ordinary
artisan after reading the entire patent. Yet heavy reliance on the dictionary divorced from the intrinsic
evidence risks transforming the meaning of the claim term to the artisan into the meaning of the term
in the abstract, out of its particular context, which is the specification. The patent system is based
on the proposition that claims cover only the invented subject matter. As the Supreme Court has
stated, "[i]t seems to us that nothing can be more just and fair, both to the patentee and the public,
than that the former should understand, and correctly describe, just what he has invented, and for
what he claims a patent." Merrill v. Yeomans, 94 U.S. at 573-74. The use of a dictionary definition can
conflict with that directive because the patent applicant did not create the dictionary to describe the
invention. Thus, there may be a disconnect between the patentee's responsibility to describe and claim

132 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
his invention, and the dictionary editors' objective of aggregating all possible definitions for particular
words.

Although the Texas Digital line of cases permit the dictionary definition to be narrowed in some
circumstances even when there is not an explicit disclaimer or redefinition in the specification, too
often that line of cases has been improperly relied upon to condone the adoption of a dictionary
definition entirely divorced from the context of the written description. The problem is that if the
district court starts with the broad dictionary definition in every case and fails to fully appreciate how
the specification implicitly limits that definition, the error will systematically cause the construction
of the claim to be unduly expansive. The risk of systematic overbreadth is greatly reduced if the court
instead focuses at the outset on how the patentee used the claim term in the claims, specification, and
prosecution history, rather than starting with a broad definition and whittling it down.

Dictionaries, by their nature, provide an expansive array of definitions. General dictionaries, in
particular, strive to collect all uses of particular words, from the common to the obscure. By design,
general dictionaries collect the definitions of a term as used not only in a particular art field, but in
many different settings. In such circumstances, it is inevitable that the multiple dictionary definitions
for a term will extend beyond the "construction of the patent [that] is confirmed by the avowed
understanding of the patentee, expressed by him, or on his behalf, when his application for the
original patent was pending." Goodyear Dental Vulcanite Co. v. Davis, 102 U.S. 222, 227, 26 L.Ed. 149
(1880). Thus, the use of the dictionary may extend patent protection beyond what should properly be
afforded by the inventor's patent. See Smith v. Snow, 294 U.S. 1, 14, 55 S.Ct. 279, 79 L.Ed. 721 (1935)
("if the claim were fairly susceptible of two constructions, that should be adopted which will secure to
the patentee his actual invention") (emphasis added). For that reason, we have stated that "a general-
usage dictionary cannot overcome art-specific evidence of the meaning" of a claim term. Vanderlande
Indus. Nederland, 366 F.3d at 1321; see also Renishaw, 158 F.3d at 1250, quoting Liebscher v. Boothroyd,
46 C.C.P.A. 701, 258 F.2d 948, 951 (CCPA 1958) ("Indiscriminate reliance on definitions found in
dictionaries can often produce absurd results . . . . One need not arbitrarily pick and choose from the
various accepted definitions of a word to decide which meaning was intended as the word is used
in a given claim. The subject matter, the context, etc., will more often than not lead to the correct
conclusion.").

Even technical dictionaries or treatises, under certain circumstances, may suffer from some of these
deficiencies. There is no guarantee that a term is used in the same way in a treatise as it would be by
the patentee. In fact, discrepancies between the patent and treatises are apt to be common because
the patent by its nature describes something novel. See Autogiro, 384 F.2d at 397 ("Often the invention
is novel and words do not exist to describe it. The dictionary does not always keep abreast of the
inventor. It cannot.").

Moreover, different dictionaries may contain somewhat different sets of definitions for the same
words. A claim should not rise or fall based upon the preferences of a particular dictionary editor, or
the court's independent decision, uninformed by the specification, to rely on one dictionary rather
than another. Finally, the authors of dictionaries or treatises may simplify ideas to communicate
them most effectively to the public and may thus choose a meaning that is not pertinent to the
understanding of particular claim language. See generally Ellen P. Aprill, The Law of the Word: Dictionary
Shopping in the Supreme Court, 30 Ariz. St. L.J. 275, 293-314 (1998). The resulting definitions therefore
do not necessarily reflect the inventor's goal of distinctly setting forth his invention as a person of
ordinary skill in that particular art would understand it.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 133
As we have noted above, however, we do not intend to preclude the appropriate use of dictionaries.
Dictionaries or comparable sources are often useful to assist in understanding the commonly
understood meaning of words and have been used both by our court and the Supreme Court in claim
interpretation. See Exhibit Supply Co. v. Ace Patents Corp., 315 U.S. 126, 134, 62 S.Ct. 513, 86 L.Ed.
736 (1942) (relying on dictionaries to construe the claim term "embedded"); Weber Elec. Co. v. E.H.
Freeman Elec. Co., 256 U.S. 668, 678, 41 S.Ct. 600, 65 L.Ed. 1162 (1921) (approving circuit court's use
of dictionary definitions to define claim terms); Renishaw, 158 F.3d at 1247-53 (approving the use of
dictionaries with proper respect for the role of intrinsic evidence). A dictionary definition has the
value of being an unbiased source "accessible to the public in advance of litigation." Vitronics, 90 F.3d at
1585. As we said in Vitronics, judges are free to consult dictionaries and technical treatises "at any time
in order to better understand the underlying technology and may also rely on dictionary definitions
when construing claim terms, so long as the dictionary definition does not contradict any definition
found in or ascertained by a reading of the patent documents." Id. at 1584 n. 6.

We also acknowledge that the purpose underlying the Texas Digital line of cases--to avoid the danger
of reading limitations from the specification into the claim--is sound. Moreover, we recognize that
the distinction between using the specification to interpret the meaning of a claim and importing
limitations from the specification into the claim can be a difficult one to apply in practice. See Comark
Communications, Inc. v. Harris Corp., 156 F.3d 1182, 1186-87 (Fed.Cir.1998) ("there is sometimes a fine
line between reading a claim in light of the specification, and reading a limitation into the claim from
the specification"). However, the line between construing terms and importing limitations can be
discerned with reasonable certainty and predictability if the court's focus remains on understanding
how a person of ordinary skill in the art would understand the claim terms. For instance, although
the specification often describes very specific embodiments of the invention, we have repeatedly
warned against confining the claims to those embodiments. See, e.g., Nazomi Communications, Inc.
v. ARM Holdings, PLC, 403 F.3d 1364, 1369 (Fed.Cir.2005) (claims may embrace "different subject
matter than is illustrated in the specific embodiments in the specification"); Liebel-Flarsheim, 358 F.3d
at 906-08; Teleflex, 299 F.3d at 1327; SRI Int'l v. Matsushita Elec. Corp. of Am., 775 F.2d 1107, 1121
(Fed.Cir.1985). In particular, we have expressly rejected the contention that if a patent describes only
a single embodiment, the claims of the patent must be construed as being limited to that embodiment.
Gemstar-TV Guide, 383 F.3d at 1366. That is not just because section 112 of the Patent Act requires
that the claims themselves set forth the limits of the patent grant, but also because persons of ordinary
skill in the art rarely would confine their definitions of terms to the exact representations depicted in
the embodiments.

To avoid importing limitations from the specification into the claims, it is important to keep in mind
that the purposes of the specification are to teach and enable those of skill in the art to make and use
the invention and to provide a best mode for doing so. See Spectra-Physics, Inc. v. Coherent, Inc., 827
F.2d 1524, 1533 (Fed.Cir.1987). One of the best ways to teach a person of ordinary skill in the art
how to make and use the invention is to provide an example of how to practice the invention in a
particular case. Much of the time, upon reading the specification in that context, it will become clear
whether the patentee is setting out specific examples of the invention to accomplish those goals, or
whether the patentee instead intends for the claims and the embodiments in the specification to be
strictly coextensive. See SciMed Life Sys., 242 F.3d at 1341. The manner in which the patentee uses a
term within the specification and claims usually will make the distinction apparent. See Snow v. Lake
Shore & M.S. Ry. Co., 121 U.S. 617, 630, 7 S.Ct. 1343, 30 L.Ed. 1004 (1887) (it was clear from the

134 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
specification that there was "nothing in the context to indicate that the patentee contemplated any
alternative" embodiment to the one presented).

In the end, there will still remain some cases in which it will be hard to determine whether a person
of skill in the art would understand the embodiments to define the outer limits of the claim term
or merely to be exemplary in nature. While that task may present difficulties in some cases, we
nonetheless believe that attempting to resolve that problem in the context of the particular patent is
likely to capture the scope of the actual invention more accurately than either strictly limiting the
scope of the claims to the embodiments disclosed in the specification or divorcing the claim language
from the specification.

In Vitronics, this court grappled with the same problem and set forth guidelines for reaching the
correct claim construction and not imposing improper limitations on claims. 90 F.3d at 1582. The
underlying goal of our decision in Vitronics was to increase the likelihood that a court will
comprehend how a person of ordinary skill in the art would understand the claim terms. See id. at
1584. In that process, we recognized that there is no magic formula or catechism for conducting claim
construction. Nor is the court barred from considering any particular sources or required to analyze
sources in any specific sequence, as long as those sources are not used to contradict claim meaning
that is unambiguous in light of the intrinsic evidence. See id. at 1583-84; Intel Corp. v. VIA Techs., Inc.,
319 F.3d 1357, 1367 (Fed.Cir.2003). For example, a judge who encounters a claim term while reading
a patent might consult a general purpose or specialized dictionary to begin to understand the meaning
of the term, before reviewing the remainder of the patent to determine how the patentee has used the
term. The sequence of steps used by the judge in consulting various sources is not important; what
matters is for the court to attach the appropriate weight to be assigned to those sources in light of
the statutes and policies that inform patent law. Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582. In Vitronics, we did not
attempt to provide a rigid algorithm for claim construction, but simply attempted to explain why, in
general, certain types of evidence are more valuable than others. Today, we adhere to that approach
and reaffirm the approach to claim construction outlined in that case, in Markman, and in Innova. We
now turn to the application of those principles to the case at bar.

IV

A

The critical language of claim 1 of the `798 patent--"further means disposed inside the shell for
increasing its load bearing capacity comprising internal steel baffles extending inwardly from the
steel shell walls"--imposes three clear requirements with respect to the baffles. First, the baffles must
be made of steel. Second, they must be part of the load-bearing means for the wall section. Third,
they must be pointed inward from the walls. Both parties, stipulating to a dictionary definition,
also conceded that the term "baffles" refers to objects that check, impede, or obstruct the flow of
something. The intrinsic evidence confirms that a person of skill in the art would understand that the
term "baffles," as used in the `798 patent, would have that generic meaning.

The other claims of the `798 patent specify particular functions to be served by the baffles. For
example, dependent claim 2 states that the baffles may be "oriented with the panel sections disposed
at angles for deflecting projectiles such as bullets able to penetrate the steel plates." The inclusion
of such a specific limitation on the term "baffles" in claim 2 makes it likely that the patentee did
not contemplate that the term "baffles" already contained that limitation. See Dow Chem. Co. v.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 135
United States, 226 F.3d 1334, 1341-42 (Fed.Cir.2000) (concluding that an independent claim should
be given broader scope than a dependent claim to avoid rendering the dependent claim redundant).
Independent claim 17 further supports that proposition. It states that baffles are placed "projecting
inwardly from the outer shell at angles tending to deflect projectiles that penetrate the outer shell."
That limitation would be unnecessary if persons of skill in the art understood that the baffles
inherently served such a function. See TurboCare, 264 F.3d at 1123 (claim terms should not be read
to contain a limitation "where another claim restricts the invention in exactly the [same] manner").
Dependent claim 6 provides an additional requirement for the baffles, stating that "the internal baffles
of both outer panel sections overlap and interlock at angles providing deflector panels extending from
one end of the module to the other." If the baffles recited in claim 1 were inherently placed at specific
angles, or interlocked to form an intermediate barrier, claim 6 would be redundant.

The specification further supports the conclusion that persons of ordinary skill in the art would
understand the baffles recited in the `798 patent to be load-bearing objects that serve to check,
impede, or obstruct flow. At several points, the specification discusses positioning the baffles so as
to deflect projectiles. See `798 patent, col. 2, II. 13-15; id., col. 5, II. 17-19. The patent states that one
advantage of the invention over the prior art is that "[t]here have not been effective ways of dealing
with these powerful impact weapons with inexpensive housing." Id., col. 3, II. 28-30. While that
statement makes clear the invention envisions baffles that serve that function, it does not imply that
in order to qualify as baffles within the meaning of the claims, the internal support structures must
serve the projectile-deflecting function in all the embodiments of all the claims. The specification
must teach and enable all the claims, and the section of the written description discussing the use of
baffles to deflect projectiles serves that purpose for claims 2, 6, 17, and 23, which specifically claim
baffles that deflect projectiles. See In re Wright, 999 F.2d 1557, 1561 (Fed.Cir.1993).

The specification discusses several other purposes served by the baffles. For example, the baffles are
described as providing structural support. The patent states that one way to increase load-bearing
capacity is to use "at least in part inwardly directed steel baffles 15, 16." `798 patent, col. 4, II. 14-15.
The baffle 16 is described as a "strengthening triangular baffle." Id., col. 4, line 37. Importantly, Figures
4 and 6 do not show the baffles as part of an "intermediate interlocking, but not solid, internal barrier."
In those figures, the baffle 16 simply provides structural support for one of the walls, as depicted
below:

                                          [Reference Figures 4 and 6 in Patent]

Other uses for the baffles are listed in the specification as well. In Figure 7, the overlapping flanges
"provide for overlapping and interlocking the baffles to produce substantially an intermediate barrier
wall between the opposite [wall] faces":

                                               [Reference Figure 7 in Patent]

`798 patent, col. 5, II. 26-29. Those baffles thus create small compartments that can be filled with
either sound and thermal insulation or rock and gravel to stop projectiles. Id., col. 5, II. 29-34. By
separating the interwall area into compartments (see, e.g., compartment 55 in Figure 7), the user of
the modules can choose different types of material for each compartment, so that the module can
be "easily custom tailored for the specific needs of each installation." Id., col. 5, II. 36-37. When
material is placed into the wall during installation, the baffles obstruct the flow of material from one
compartment to another so that this "custom tailoring" is possible.

136 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The fact that the written description of the `798 patent sets forth multiple objectives to be served by
the baffles recited in the claims confirms that the term "baffles" should not be read restrictively to
require that the baffles in each case serve all of the recited functions. We have held that "[t]he fact that a
patent asserts that an invention achieves several objectives does not require that each of the claims be
construed as limited to structures that are capable of achieving all of the objectives." Liebel-Flarsheim,
358 F.3d at 908; see also Resonate Inc. v. Alteon Websystems, Inc., 338 F.3d 1360, 1367 (Fed.Cir.2003).
Although deflecting projectiles is one of the advantages of the baffles of the `798 patent, the patent
does not require that the inward extending structures always be capable of performing that function.
Accordingly, we conclude that a person of skill in the art would not interpret the disclosure and claims
of the `798 patent to mean that a structure extending inward from one of the wall faces is a "baffle" if
it is at an acute or obtuse angle, but is not a "baffle" if it is disposed at a right angle.

B

Invoking the principle that "claims should be so construed, if possible, as to sustain their validity,"
Rhine v. Casio, Inc., 183 F.3d 1342, 1345 (Fed.Cir.1999), AWH argues that the term "baffles" should
be given a restrictive meaning because if the term is not construed restrictively, the asserted claims
would be invalid.

While we have acknowledged the maxim that claims should be construed to preserve their validity,
we have not applied that principle broadly, and we have certainly not endorsed a regime in which
validity analysis is a regular component of claim construction. See Nazomi Communications, 403 F.3d at
1368-69. Instead, we have limited the maxim to cases in which "the court concludes, after applying all
the available tools of claim construction, that the claim is still ambiguous." Liebel-Flarsheim, 358 F.3d at
911; see also Generation II Orthotics Inc. v. Med. Tech. Inc., 263 F.3d 1356, 1365 (Fed.Cir.2001) ("[C]laims
can only be construed to preserve their validity where the proposed claim construction is `practicable,'
is based on sound claim construction principles, and does not revise or ignore the explicit language
of the claims."); Elekta Instrument S.A. v. O.U.R. Scientific Int'l, Inc., 214 F.3d 1302, 1309 (Fed.Cir.2000)
("having concluded that the amended claim is susceptible of only one reasonable construction, we
cannot construe the claim differently from its plain meaning in order to preserve its validity"); E.I. du
Pont de Nemours & Co. v. Phillips Petroleum Co., 849 F.2d 1430, 1434 (Fed.Cir.1988) (rejecting argument
that limitations should be added to claims to preserve the validity of the claims). In such cases, we have
looked to whether it is reasonable to infer that the PTO would not have issued an invalid patent, and
that the ambiguity in the claim language should therefore be resolved in a manner that would preserve
the patent's validity.

That is the rationale that gave rise to the maxim in the first place. In Klein v. Russell, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.)
433, 466, 22 L.Ed. 116 (1873), the owner of a reissued patent argued for a narrow construction of
the patent, while the accused infringer argued for a broader construction. The Court noted that the
law "required that the reissue should be for the same invention as the original patent." Id. Because
the reissue, which was granted under the predecessor to 35 U.S.C.  251, would have been improper
under the broader construction, the Court "presumed the Commissioner did his duty" and did not
issue an invalid patent. For that reason, among others, the Court construed the disputed claim
language in a manner that "sustain[ed] the patent and the construction claimed by the patentee," since
that "can be done consistently with the language which he has employed." Id. The applicability of the
doctrine in a particular case therefore depends on the strength of the inference that the PTO would
have recognized that one claim interpretation would render the claim invalid, and that the PTO would
not have issued the patent assuming that to be the proper construction of the term.

                                                                             8. CLAIM CONSTRUCTION AND INFRINGEMENT 137
In this case, unlike in Klein and other cases in which the doctrine of construing claims to preserve
their validity has been invoked, the claim term at issue is not ambiguous. Thus, it can be construed
without the need to consider whether one possible construction would render the claim invalid while
the other would not. The doctrine of construing claims to preserve their validity, a doctrine of limited
utility in any event, therefore has no applicability here.

In sum, we reject AWH's arguments in favor of a restrictive definition of the term "baffles." Because
we disagree with the district court's claim construction, we reverse the summary judgment of
noninfringement. In light of our decision on claim construction, it is necessary to remand the
infringement claims to the district court for further proceedings.

V

With respect to Mr. Phillips's allegation of misappropriation of trade secrets, we agree with the panel's
decision upholding the district court's ruling on that issue, in which the district court dismissed the
trade secret claim on statute of limitations grounds. See Phillips, 363 F.3d at 1214-1216. Accordingly,
based on the panel's disposition of that issue, we affirm the district court's dismissal of the trade secret
claim. With respect to AWH's cross-appeal, we also agree with the panel's reasoning and its conclusion
that the cross-appeal is improper. See id. at 1216. We therefore dismiss the cross-appeal.

VI

In our order granting rehearing en banc, we asked the parties to brief various questions, including
the following: "Consistent with the Supreme Court's decision in Markman v. Westview Instruments, 517
U.S. 370, 116 S.Ct. 1384, 134 L.Ed.2d 577 (1996), and our en banc decision in Cybor Corp. v. FAS
Technologies, Inc., 138 F.3d 1448 (Fed.Cir.1998), is it appropriate for this court to accord any deference
to any aspect of trial court claim construction rulings? If so, on what aspects, in what circumstances,
and to what extent?" After consideration of the matter, we have decided not to address that issue at
this time. We therefore leave undisturbed our prior en banc decision in Cybor.

Each party shall bear its own costs for this appeal.

AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, DISMISSED IN PART, and REMANDED.

LOURIE, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and dissenting in part, with whom NEWMAN, Circuit
Judge, joins.

***

MAYER, Circuit Judge, with whom NEWMAN, Circuit Judge, joins, dissenting.

***

138 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                INTERLUDE: PATENT ELIGIBLE SUBJECT MATTER

Now that you know most of the fundamentals of patent law, you might still be wondering about
a topic that we skipped over at the start of this unit: other than newness and utility, are there any
other constraints on what can be patented? The answer to this question typically involves the topic of
patent-eligible subject matter.

One approach to the question of patent eligible subject matter is to begin with two texts: the
Intellectual Property clause of the U.S. Constitution and 35 U.S.C.  101, which states that:

Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition
of matter, or any new or useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the
conditions and requirements of this title.

"Process," in turn is defined as "process, art or method, and includes a new use of a known process,
machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material." 35 U.S.C.  100(b).

In addition to these texts, there are numerous Supreme Court decisions focusing on the issue of
patent eligible subject matter. The Court has simultaneously broadly interpreted the four statutory
categories--especially "process"--while also concluding that there are "exceptions" that limit the
eligible subject matter for patents. These exceptions generally hold that things that already exist in
nature, natural laws, and abstract ideas cannot be patented. In addition, various other subject matters
have traditionally been disfavored by the patent office, mostly notably inventions in which the only
difference between the prior art and the claimed invention consists of "printed matter" (for example,
placing pictures of the University of Iowa Hawkeye Marching Band on a deck of playing cards would
not be given patentable weight).

PRODUCTS OF NATURE

One category of subject matter that has historically not been considered patent eligible are things that
already exist in nature. The general consensus is that naturally occurring products aren't eligible for a
patent. For example, if I were to discover a new tree and pick a leaf off that tree, I couldn't patent that
leaf. The issue, is that often these naturally occurring things require substantial purification processes
or other steps to obtain the "natural product."

Two Supreme Court opinions illustrate this point. In its 1980 decision in Diamond v. Chakrabarty,
the Supreme Court rejected the argument that there is a blanket prohibition on patenting living
organisms. In the facts giving rise to that case, Dr. Chakrabarty filed a patent application for a
genetically modified micro-organism, but his claims were rejected by the examiner who reasoned
the claims were unpatentable because (1) the micro-organism was a product of nature, which is not
patent eligible, and (2) living things, including the claimed micro-organism, are not patent eligible
subject matter. The Supreme Court reversed the examiner's rejection, concluding that the claims was

                                                                            INTERLUDE: PATENT ELIGIBLE SUBJECT MATTER 139
directed to patent eligible subject matter because the micro-organism is "a non-naturally occurring
composition of matter" that is "product of human ingenuity." In holding that Chakrabarty's micro-
organism is in fact patent eligible, the Court also rejected the idea that there is a per se rule prohibiting
patenting of living things.

Thirty-three years later, the question of whether various forms of DNA could be patented came
before the Court in AMP v. Myriad. Myriad had obtained patent claims that covered "isolated DNA"
fragments of the genes for BRCA 1 and BRCA 2. While substantial work went into identifying
these sequences, the Court held that they were not patent eligible subject matter because they simply
claimed something that existed in nature--Myriad did not create or alter the genetic sequence or
structure. At the same time, the Court held that the claims directed to "cDNA," which consisted of the
isolated DNA with sections that did not code for proteins removed, was patent eligible subject matter
because (in the court's understanding) the cDNA did not exist in that state in nature and Myriad had
needed to do things to create it.

ABSTRACT IDEAS

While the distinction between products of nature and human-made creations provides an entry into
the concept of patent eligible subject matter, the main issues in this space have arisen over claims to
processes. Processes, unlike machines, manufactures and compositions of matter, are not "things";
rather, they might generally be described as a series of steps to achieve some desired outcome. Subject
matter issues relating to the patentability of processes have manifested in two major ways: concerns
that the claimed invention is too "abstract" to be patentable and concerns that the claim monopolizes
a natural law rather than a human application of that law.

For the period between 1981 and 2010, disputes over patentable subject matter were relatively
minimal and there were no Supreme Court decisions addressing patent eligibility. The Federal
Circuit gradually acceded to broader and broader patent eligible subject matter, allowing (among
other things) patents on methods of doing business.
This landscape changed, first with the Federal Circuit's adoption of a strict test for subject matter
eligibility in In re Bilski in 2008, and then with the Supreme Court's 2010 decision in Bilski v. Kappos,
130 S.Ct. 3218. The issue in Bilski was whether a method of hedging risk to maximize investment
profits is an abstract idea that would not be considered patent eligible subject matter. Even as it
rejected the strict test adopted by the Federal Circuit, the Court concluded that risk hedging was an
abstract idea that did not constitute patent eligible subject matter. Mayo v. Prometheus (2012), Ass'n for
Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics (2013), and Alice v. CLS Bank (2014) followed.
In two of these cases the Supreme Court developed a two-part framework for analyzing patent
eligible subject matter questions. Called the Alice/Mayo framework, this two-step analysis first asks
whether the claim is "directed to" a patent-ineligible concept. If it is, the decisionmaker asks whether
there is anything else in the claims that constitutes an "inventive concept sufficient to transform the
claimed abstract idead into a patent-eligible application." Alice v. CLS Bank (2014). If the answer to
question one is yes and step two is no, then the claim is not directed to eligible subject matter.
Since the Supreme Court's four patent eligible subject matter cases in 2010-2014, that issue has taken
center stage in patent law. It has been characterized by hundreds of appellate decisions, dozens of law
review articles, strident commentary, attempted legislative changes, and a variety of responses at the
USPTO--first reflecting the position that patent eligible subject matter should be a substantial barrier

140 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
to patentability and then shifting to reflect a position that the patent office should narrowly interpret
the Supreme Court's decisions in Bilski, Mayo and Alice.

                                                                            INTERLUDE: PATENT ELIGIBLE SUBJECT MATTER 141
                                       9. DESIGN PATENTS

The following chapter was originally published in Sarah Burstein, Sarah Wasserman Rajec, & Andres
Sawicki, Patent Law: An Open Access Casebook (2021), and is available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3890945. The full textbook is available at https://patentlawcasebook.com/.
This chapter contains some images in color. In order to keep publishing costs low, physical copies of
this book have been printed in black and white. Color images can be viewed in the original version of
the chapter, the digital version of this book, or on this book's Pressbooks site.

142 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
BURSTEIN, RAJEC & SAWICKI, ONE DAY ON DESIGNS

Design patents, which have existed since 1842, are available for "any new, original and ornamental
design for an article of manufacture." 35 U.S.C.  171. Unlike utility patents, which protect how things
work, design patents protect how things look.

The statutory subject matter provision for design patents is 35 U.S.C.  171. In re Finch, 535 F.2d 70,
71-72 (C.C.P.A. 1976). Section 171(a) provides: "Whoever invents any new, original and ornamental
design for an article of manufacture may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and
requirements of this title." Therefore, "design patents are granted only for a design applied to an article
of manufacture, and not a design per se . . . ." Curver Luxembourg, SARL v. Home Expressions Inc., 938 F.3d
1334, 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2019).

What types of designs might be applied to an article of manufacture? There are three longstanding
types of patentable designs:

        (1) A design for "surface ornamentation applied to an article";

        (2) A design for "the configuration or shape of an article"; or

        (3) A design for the combination of both.

See U.S. Dep't of Commerce, Patent & Trademark Office, Manual of Patent Examining Procedure 
1504.01 (9th ed. Jan. 2018) ("MPEP"). Today, applicants can obtain design patents for any of these
types of designs, or any part (or parts) thereof. See In re Zahn, 617 F.2d 261 (C.C.P.A. 1980). The
USPTO also allows applicants to claim designs that "encompass multiple articles or multiple parts
within that article." MPEP  1504.01(b).

Section 171(b) states that "[t]he provisions of this title relating to patents for inventions shall apply
to patents for designs, except as otherwise provided." So what is "otherwise provided"? Sections
171-173 provide specific rules that apply only to design patents--specifically,  172 provides only
six months priority for international applications and  173 sets the term of a design patent as "15
years from the date of grant." Section 289 provides a special remedy that is only available for certain
acts of design patent infringement. Otherwise, the statutory provisions we've studied in connection
with utility patents also apply to design patents. So, for example, a patentable design must be novel
and nonobvious. 35 U.S.C. ㎣ 102, 103. And a design patent must satisfy the requirements of  112.
However, the application of these sections and the tests used to analyze a design's compliance with
them are quite different. This sometimes strikes those who've studied only utility patents as odd
or even troubling. But design patents cover fundamentally different types of inventions and use
an entirely different claiming system; under these circumstances, it would be odd if the statutory
requirements weren't applied differently. Principles or practices developed with only utility patents
in mind may or may not make sense for design patents and there is no reason why such principles or
practices necessarily need to be applied to designs.

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 143
Like other patents, design patents are granted by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office (USPTO)
following substantive examination. Who examines design patent claims? Design patent examiners
are not drawn from the general USPTO examiner corps. Instead, the USPTO hires people with
backgrounds in design--people who majored (or have the equivalent experience) in fields like
industrial design, architecture, graphic design, and fine arts--as design patent examiners. But you still
have to have a technical background (i.e., be a member of the "patent bar") to prosecute design patents
for other people or to be lead counsel in a design patent proceeding before the PTAB. Does that make
sense? For one argument for change, see Christopher Buccafusco & Jeanne C. Curtis, The Design Patent
Bar: An Occupational Licensing Failure, 37 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.J. 263 (2019).

A. SCOPE

Before diving into the design patent validity doctrines, it's important to understand the scope of a
design patent. So we'll start with how designs are claimed and then look at the test for design patent
infringement.

1. CLAIMING

A design patent can only have one claim and that "claim shall be in formal terms to the ornamental
design for the article (specifying name) as shown, or as shown and described." 37 C.F.R.  1.153(a).
How is a design "shown and described"? The applicant must submit drawings or photographs,
including "a sufficient number of views to constitute a complete disclosure of the appearance of the
design." 37 C.F.R.  1.152. See also MPEP  1503.02 (noting that photographs are also allowed). Color
can also be claimed as part of a design, either by using color drawings or photographs or by using
certain color shading conventions. Id.

For line drawings, anything shown in full lines is part of the claimed design. Applicants are also
allowed to use broken lines in their design patent drawings:

The two most common uses of broken lines are to disclose the environment related to the claimed
design and to define the bounds of the claim. Structure that is not part of the claimed design, but is
considered necessary to show the environment in which the design is associated, may be represented
in the drawing by broken lines. This includes any portion of an article in which the design is
embodied, or applied to, that is not considered part of the claimed design. See In re Zahn, 617 F.2d 261
(CCPA 1980).

MPEP  1503.02. (Note that the rules for broken line use have changed over time; don't assume that
broken lines in older design patents mean the same things they mean today.) An applicant might use
broken lines to show how a claimed design might look in use, as in this drawing from a design patent
that claims a design for a "Litter Box":

144 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
U.S. Patent D816,281, fig. 1 (issued Apr . 24 , 2018). The cat is shown in broken lines and, therefore,
is not a part of the claimed design. (If you look closely, you can see some other details of the litter box
are also disclaimed.)
Broken lines can also be used to disclaim parts of an article's shape or surface ornamentation.
Consider, for example, this illustration from a design patent that claims a design for a "Pressed
Shredded Potato Product":

U.S. Patent No. D857,332, fig. 7 (issued Aug. 27 , 2019). The entire shape is shown in solid lines;
therefore, the claim covers the entire shape. Compare that drawing to this one, from a design patent
that was issued to the same patentee:

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 145
       U.S. Patent D884,309 fig. 7 (issued May 19 ,
       2020). Why would an applicant want to disclaim
       part of a design? They do it to increase the scope
       of the design patent. As we'll see below, a design
       patent is infringed when an accused product
       looks the same as the claimed design. If the claim
       only covers part of an article's shape or surface
       ornamentation, then only the corresponding
       part of the accused product has to look the same.
       So this claim could be infringed by a pressed,
       shredded potato product that was round or
       square or any shape--as long as the dimple
       pattern (the part shown in solid lines) looks the

same.

Broken lines can also be used to show unclaimed boundaries. In this case, "[i]t would be understood
that the claimed design extends to the boundary but does not include the boundary." MPEP  1503.02.
These boundary lines are often (though not always) depicted using dot-dash lines, while
environmental and disclaimer lines are often depicted using plain dashed lines. Here is an example of
a drawing, from a design patent that claims a design for "Footwear," that uses both dashed disclaimer
lines and dot-dash boundary lines:

U.S. Patent D787,798, fig. 1 (issued May 30, 2017). Why would someone want to draft a claim like
this? Is it a "design for an article of manufacture"? See 35 U.S.C.  171(a).

2. INFRINGEMENT

It is an infringement to make, use, sell, offer to sell, or import a patented design (or to do any of the
other things specified in 35 U.S.C.  271). But how do we know if someone has made, used, or sold
a patented design? The rules that have been developed to evaluate utility patent infringement don't
work for design patents because the claims and the inventions are so different. Indeed, ever since

146 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
the Supreme Court's first design patent case, Gorham v. White, courts have recognized that different
infringement rules are needed.
Gorham Co. v. White, involved U.S. Patent D1,440, issued in 1861 for a design for a "Fork and Spoon
Handle." Here is a representative drawing from that patent:

The lower court held that:
        A patent for a design, like a patent for an improvement in machinery, must be for the means
        of producing a certain result or appearance, and not for the result or appearance itself. The
        plaintiffs' patent is for their described means of producing a certain appearance in the
        completed handle. Even if the same appearance is produced by another design, if the means
        used in such other design to produce the appearance are substantially different from the means
        used in the prior patented design to produce such appearance, the later design is not an
        infringement of the patented one.

10 F. Cas. 827, 830 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1870). The lower court also held that infringement was to be
determined from the point of view of an expert ("a person in the trade"), not from the perspective
of "an ordinary purchaser." Id. The patent owner appealed to the Supreme Court (which at that time,
heard direct appeals in patent cases). As you read the excerpt below, pay close attention to how the
Court answers the following questions: (1) What is the test for identity (infringement) of a design? and
(2) From whose perspective should infringement be evaluated?

                                                     Gorham Co. v. White
                                                        81 U.S. 511 (1871)

Mr. Justice STRONG delivered the opinion of the court.
The sole question is one of fact. Has there been an infringement? Are the designs used by the
defendant substantially the same as that owned by the complainants? To answer these questions
correctly, it is indispensable to understand what constitutes identity of design, and what amounts to
infringement?
The acts of Congress which authorize the grant of patents for designs were plainly intended to give
encouragement to the decorative arts. They contemplate not so much utility as appearance, and that,
not an abstract impression, or picture, but an aspect given to those objects mentioned in the acts. . . .
The law manifestly contemplates that giving certain new and original appearances to a manufactured

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 147
article may enhance its salable value, may enlarge the demand for it, and may be a meritorious service
to the public. It therefore proposes to secure for a limited time to the ingenious producer of those
appearances the advantages flowing from them. . . . The appearance may be the result of peculiarity
of configuration, or of ornament alone, or of both conjointly, but, in whatever way produced, it is the
new thing, or product, which the patent law regards. To speak of the invention as a combination or
process, or to treat it as such, is to overlook its peculiarities. As the acts of Congress embrace only
designs applied, or to be applied, they must refer to finished products of invention rather than to the
process of finishing them, or to the agencies by which they are developed. . . .

We are now prepared to inquire what is the true test of identity of design. Plainly, it must be sameness
of appearance . . . .

If, then, identity of appearance, or sameness of effect upon the eye, is the main test of substantial
identity of design, the only remaining question upon this part of the case is, whether it is essential that
the appearance should be the same to the eye of an expert. The court below . . . . thought there could be
no infringement unless there was `substantial identity' `in view of the observation of a person versed
in designs in the particular trade in question--of a person engaged in the manufacture or sale of
articles containing such designs--of a person accustomed to compare such designs one with another,
and who sees and examines the articles containing them side by side.' There must, he thought, be a
comparison of the features which make up the two designs. With this we cannot concur. Such a test
would destroy all the protection which the act of Congress intended to give. There never could be
piracy of a patented design, for human ingenuity has never yet produced a design, in all its details,
exactly like another, so like, that an expert could not distinguish them. No counterfeit bank note is
so identical in appearance with the true that an experienced artist cannot discern a difference. . . .
Experts, therefore, are not the persons to be deceived. Much less than that which would be substantial
identity in their eyes would be undistinguishable in the eyes of men generally, of observers of ordinary
acuteness, bringing to the examination of the article upon which the design has been placed that
degree of observation which men of ordinary intelligence give. . . . The purpose of the law must be
effected if possible; but, plainly, it cannot be if, while the general appearance of the design is preserved,
minor differences of detail in the manner in which the appearance is produced, observable by experts,
but not noticed by ordinary observers, by those who buy and use, are sufficient to relieve an imitating
design from condemnation as an infringement.

We hold, therefore, that if, in the eye of an ordinary observer, giving such attention as a purchaser
usually gives, two designs are substantially the same, if the resemblance is such as to deceive such an
observer, inducing him to purchase one supposing it to be the other, the first one patented is infringed
by the other. . . .

Context & Application

1. What does Gorham tell us about the purpose or purposes of design patent law? Do the goals
identified by the Supreme Court seem like good goals for the system?

2. The most-quoted line from Gorham--"We hold, therefore, that if, in the eye of an ordinary observer,
giving such attention as a purchaser usually gives, two designs are substantially the same, if the
resemblance is such as to deceive such an observer, inducing him to purchase one supposing it to
be the other, the first one patented is infringed by the other"--may strike contemporary readers as
setting forth a trademark-like "likelihood of confusion" test. But that is not how the test was originally
understood nor how it is understood today. Unette Corp. v. Unit Pack Co., 785 F.2d 1026, 1027 (Fed.

148 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Cir. 1986) (answering the question of "whether `likelihood of confusion' is a factor to be determined
under the Gorham test for infringement of a design patent" in the negative). See also Braun Inc. v.
Dynamics Corp. of Am., 975 F.2d 815, 820 (Fed. Cir. 1992) ("Design patent infringement does not
concern itself with the broad issue of consumer behavior in the marketplace."). Read in the context
of the case as a whole, Gorham sets forth a test of visual similarity. That most-quoted line tells us how
similar the designs must be--so similar that an ordinary observer would mistake one for the other.
See, e.g., Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. v. Hercules Tire & Rubber Co., 162 F.3d 1113, 1118 (Fed. Cir. 1998)
("Infringement of a design patent requires that the designs have the same general visual appearance, such
that it is likely that the purchaser would be deceived into confusing the design of the accused article
with the patented design.") (emphasis added); Hector T. Fenton, The Law of Patents for Designs 129
(1889) ("The general rule for the determination of the question of infringement of design patents was
enunciated by the Supreme Court, in Gorham v. White, to be similarity of general appearance to the eye
of average observers.") (emphasis added).

3. In Egyptian Goddess, Inc. v. Swisa, Inc., the en banc Federal Circuit stated that:

        In some instances, the claimed design and the accused design will be sufficiently distinct that it
        will be clear without more that the patentee has not met its burden of proving the two designs
        would appear "substantially the same" to the ordinary observer . . . . In other instances, when
        the claimed and accused designs are not plainly dissimilar, resolution of the question whether
        the ordinary observer would consider the two designs to be substantially the same will benefit
        from a comparison of the claimed and accused designs with the prior art, as in many of the
        cases discussed above and in the case at bar. Where there are many examples of similar prior art
        designs . . . differences between the claimed and accused designs that might not be noticeable
        in the abstract can become significant to the hypothetical ordinary observer who is conversant
        with the prior art.

543 F.3d 665, 678-89 (2008). So there are two steps. First, the claimed design and the accused
design must be compared. If the designs are "sufficiently distinct that it will be clear without more
that the patentee has not met its burden of proving the two designs would appear `substantially the
same' to the ordinary observer," then there is no infringement. Second, if the designs are "not plainly
dissimilar," the prior art (i.e., earlier designs) may be used to narrow the presumptive scope of the
patent. This is a one-way ratchet--the prior art can only be used to narrow the presumptive scope of
a design patent, not to expand it. Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc. v. Covidien, Inc., 796 F.3d 1312, 1337 (Fed.
Cir. 2015) ("[C]omparing the claimed and accused designs with the prior art is beneficial only when
the claimed and accused designs are not plainly dissimilar.") (emphasis added). How does this work in
practice? An example might help. Here is the asserted design patent and accused product from Snap-
On Inc. v. Harbor Freight Tools USA, Inc., No. 2:16-cv-01265, 2017 WL 44833 (E.D. Wis. Jan. 4, 2017):

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 149
Considered in the abstract, these designs might not be plainly dissimilar. But when viewed in light
of the prior art, visual differences between the claimed design (top left) and accused design (bottom
right) become more apparent:

150 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
9. DESIGN PATENTS 151
See id. at *4. The court concluded that the patent owner was not likely to succeed on the merits and
denied the patent owner's motion for a preliminary injunction.

    4. How close is too close under Egyptian Goddess? In Lin v. Belkin International, Inc., the plaintiff
         alleged that this USB cable infringed this design patent:

The court granted summary judgment of noninfringement. Based on its own visual review, the court
found that the designs were so "sufficiently distinct and plainly dissimilar . . . that no reasonable jury
could find the two designs to be substantially the same." Lin v. Belkin Int'l, Inc., No. 8:16-cv-00628,
2017 WL 2903261, at *6 (C.D. Cal. May 12, 2017).
In Wallace v. Ideavillage Products Corp., the plaintiff alleged that this spinning brush infringed this
design patent:

152 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The district court granted the defendant's motion for summary judgment of noninfringement,
concluding, upon visual review, that the designs were "sufficiently distinct" and that the plaintiff could
not, "as a matter of law, prove that the designs appear substantially the same." Wallace v. Ideavillage
Prods. Corp., No. 2:06-cv-05673, 2014 WL 4637216, at *4 (D.N.J. Sept. 15, 2014), aff'd, 640 F. App'x
970, 972 (Fed. Cir. 2016).
In Performance Designed Products LLC v. Mad Catz, Inc., the plaintiff alleged that this video game
controller infringed this design patent:

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 153
The judge dismissed the claim with prejudice under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6),
concluding that these designs were so "plainly dissimilar" under Egyptian Goddess that any attempt
to amend the claim would be "futile." Performance Designed Prods. LLC v. Mad Catz, Inc., No.
3:16-cv-00629, 2016 WL 3552063, at *6-7 (S.D. Cal. June 29, 2016).
In Boost Oxygen, LLC v. Oxygen Plus, Inc., No. 0:17-cv-05004, 2020 WL 4582253, at *6 (D. Minn. Aug.
10, 2020), the court ruled that this accused product was plainly dissimilar from this patented design:

154 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
By contrast, in C&A Mktg., Inc. v. GoPro, Inc., No. 1:15-cv-07854, 2016 WL 1626018, at *1 (D.N.J. Apr.
25, 2016), the court ruled that these designs were not plainly dissimilar:

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 155
To be clear: A finding that an accused design is "not plainly dissimilar" is not the same as a finding of
infringement. Even if the designs are not plainly dissimilar, there is still a second step of the Egyptian
Goddess test. At step two, the accused infringer can introduce evidence of prior art designs to narrow
the presumptive scope of the asserted patent. And the ultimate test is whether the designs look the
same to the ordinary observer. See Sarah Burstein, Intelligent Design & Egyptian Goddess: A Response to
Professors Buccafusco, Lemley & Masur, 68 Duke L.J. Online 94 (2019).

Courts sometimes give--or allow juries to give--design patents a broader scope. For example, in Apple
v. Samsung, where the jury found that this design patent for a graphical user interface was infringed
by various devices, including this one:

156 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
See Amended

Verdict Form

at 7, Apple Inc.

v. Samsung

Elecs. Co., No.

5:11-cv-01846

(N.D. Cal.

Aug. 24, 2012),

ECF 1931. Is

the       jury's

verdict

consistent

with the other

examples

you've seen in

this chapter?

Note:

Samsung did

not         seek

summary

judgment of

noninfringement on this and similar claims. See Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., No. 5:11-cv-01846,
2012 WL 2571719, at *20 (N.D. Cal. June 30, 2012).

5. As you can see from these representative examples, design patents have narrow scopes. So
    why do people want them? One answer is remedies. Design patent owners are entitled to all of
    the basic patent remedies, such as injunctive relief under  283 of the Patent Act and "damages
    adequate to compensate for the infringement, but in no event less than a reasonable royalty"
    under  284. But, for certain acts of infringement, design patent owners have an additional
    remedy--namely, an award of the infringer's "total profits" under  289. Note that  289
    provides an alternative form of monetary relief; a design patent owner cannot recover under
    both  289 and  284 for the same act of infringement. Also, while a court may treble a
    damages award under  284, it may not treble an award under  289. Therefore, depending on
    the circumstances, a  284 award may well be larger than a  289 award. This "total profits"
    remedy has been around since 1887 but it's still not entirely clear how it should be
    applied--especially in light of the contemporary broken-line claiming system. See Samsung
    Elecs. Co., Ltd. v. Apple Inc., 137 S. Ct. 429, 436 (2016) (creating a two-part test for applying
     289 but "declin[ing] to lay out a test for the first step . . . ."). For some suggestions about how
    courts should apply  289 post-Samsung, see Pamela Samuelson & Mark Gergen, The
    Disgorgement Remedy of Design Patent Law, 108 Cal. L. Rev. 183, 184 (2020) and Sarah Burstein,
    The "Article of Manufacture" Today, 31 Harv. J.L. & Tech. 781, 835 (2018).

9. DESIGN PATENTS 157
B. THE REQUIREMENTS OF PATENTABILITY
Like other types of inventions, a design must be novel and nonobvious to be patentable. 35 U.S.C.
㎣ 102, 103. A patentable design must also be "ornamental." 35 U.S.C.  171(a). In theory, these might
sound like difficult requirements to satisfy. We'll see how the Federal Circuit has applied them in
practice.

                                    High Point Design LLC v. Buyers Direct, Inc.
                                                730 F.3d 1301 (Fed. Cir. 2013)

SCHALL, Circuit Judge.
Buyer's Direct, Inc. ("BDI") appeals from a final judgment of the United States District Court for the
Southern District of New York holding BDI's asserted design patent invalid on summary judgment
and also dismissing BDI's trade dress claims with prejudice. For the reasons set forth below, we
reverse the grant of summary judgment of invalidity . . . and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.

                                                             Background
                                                                    I

BDI is the owner of U.S. Design Patent No. D598,183 (the "'183 patent") and the manufacturer of
slippers known as SNOOZIES. An exemplary pair of SNOOZIES slippers is shown below:

The '183 patent recites one claim, for "the ornamental design for a slipper, as shown and described."
[One] of the drawings included in the 183 patent [is] shown below:

158 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
As additional design features, the '183 patent discloses two different soles: a smooth bottom (as shown
in Figure 8) and a sole with two groups of raised dots (as shown in Figure 7):

BDI alleges that SNOOZIES are an embodiment of the design disclosed in the '183 patent.
                                                                   II

High Point Design LLC ("High Point") manufactures and distributes the accused FUZZY BABBA
slippers, which are sold through various retailers, including appellees Meijer, Inc., Sears Holdings
Corporation, and WalMart Stores, Inc. (collectively, the "Retail Entities"). An exemplary pair of
FUZZY BABBA slippers is shown below:

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 159
On June 22, 2011, after becoming aware of the manufacturing and sale of FUZZY BABBA slippers,
BDI sent High Point a cease and desist letter, in which BDI asserted infringement of the '183 patent.
With a responsive letter sent on July 6, 2011, High Point included a copy of a complaint for
declaratory judgment that it had filed five days earlier in federal district court. In the complaint, High
Point alleged (1) that the manufacturing and sale of FUZZY BABBA slippers did not infringe the
'183 patent and (2) that the '183 patent is invalid and/or unenforceable.
In its answer to High Point's declaratory judgment complaint, filed on December 29, 2011, BDI lodged
counterclaims for infringement of the '183 patent and for infringement of the trade dress found
in BDI's SNOOZIES slippers. That same day, BDI filed a third-party complaint alleging that the
Retail Entities infringed the '183 patent and infringed BDI's trade dress based on sales of High Point's
FUZZY BABBA slippers.

                                                                   III
On May 15, 2012, the district court granted the motion for summary judgment, holding the '183
patent invalid on the ground that the design claimed in it was . . . obvious in light of the prior art
. . . . The court characterized the '183 patent as disclosing "slippers with an opening for a foot that
contain a fuzzy (fleece) lining and have a smooth outer surface." As to the prior art, the court found
that a consumer apparel company, known as Woolrich, had, prior to the effective filing date of the
'183 patent, sold two different models of footwear: the "Penta" and the "Laurel Hill" (collectively, the
"Woolrich Prior Art"). The Penta and the Laurel Hill models are shown in photographs below:

160 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
J.A. 486-87 (Penta).

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 161
J.A. 490-91 (Laurel Hill).
The [district] court found that the Penta "looks indistinguishable from the drawing shown in the
'183 Patent," and that the Laurel Hill, "while having certain differences with the Penta slipper that
are insubstantial and might be referred to as streamlining, nonetheless has the precise look that an
ordinary observer would think of as a physical embodiment of the drawings shown on the '183
Patent."
The district court also identified two secondary references--U.S. Design Patent Nos. D566,934 and
D540,517 (collectively, the "Secondary References")--that disclose "slippers with a pattern of small
dots on the bottom surface." Representative drawings from the Secondary References are shown
below:

U.S. Design Patent No. D566,934 fig. 1.

162 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
U.S. Design Patent No. D540,517 fig. 1. Based on these findings, the court concluded that the design
in the '183 patent was invalid as obvious:

        The overall visual effect created by the Woolrich prior art is the same overall visual effect
        created by the 183 patent. To an ordinary observer, they are the same slippers. The only
        difference between the slippers relates to the sole of the slippers, which is quite minor in the
        context of the overall slipper. Even if, however, this Court were to find that the differences in
        the sole design were of any note, the design of the dots on the '183 patent are anticipated by the
        dots on the Secondary References.

        Since both of those design patents were noted on the face of the '183 patent, and since both
        relate to slippers, they would have been available to a slipper designer skilled in the art--and
        would have easily suggested the addition of "dots" to the sole of a slipper. Combining the dots
        shown on those two design patents with the prior art in the Woolrich slipper would have
        been obvious to any designer. That combination would have created a slipper with a virtually
        identical visual impression as the '183 patent.

                                                              Discussion

On appeal, BDI challenges both the grant of summary judgment of invalidity . . . .

                                                                   II

                                                                   A

When assessing the potential obviousness of a design patent, a finder of fact employs two distinct
steps: first, "one must find a single reference, a something in existence, the design characteristics
of which are basically the same as the claimed design"; second, "once this primary reference is
found, other references may be used to modify it to create a design that has the same overall visual
appearance as the claimed design." Durling v. Spectrum Furniture Co., 101 F.3d 100, 103 (Fed. Cir. 1996)
(internal quotations omitted); see also Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., 678 F.3d 1314, 1329 (Fed. Cir.
2012).

Under the first step, a court must both "(1) discern the correct visual impression created by the
patented design as a whole; and (2) determine whether there is a single reference that creates `basically
the same' visual impression." Durling, 101 F.3d at 103. The ultimate inquiry in an obviousness analysis

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 163
is "whether the claimed design would have been obvious to a designer of ordinary skill who designs
articles of the type involved."

                                                                   B

BDI asserts that the district court erred by using the Woolrich Prior Art as primary references because
their design characteristics are not "basically the same as the claimed design," as required under the
first step set forth in Durling. Specifically, BDI relies on the Rake Declaration to argue that various
design features distinguish the '183 patent from the Woolrich Prior Art, including differences in (1)
the fleece collars, (2) the height of the sidewalls, and (3) the thickness of the soles. According to BDI,
these alleged differences create genuine issues of material facts as to whether the Woolrich Prior Art
can properly serve as primary references.

Next, BDI asserts that the district court identified no motivation to modify the Woolrich Prior Art to
achieve the "same overall visual appearance as the claimed design," as required under the second step
set forth in Durling. According to BDI, the court erred by ignoring the design features that distinguish
the 183 patent from the Woolrich Prior Art, and finding that the only differences relate to the soles.

BDI also argues that the district court failed to perform a proper obviousness analysis. First, BDI
asserts that the court erred by applying an "ordinary observer" standard, because this court's case
law requires application of an "ordinary designer" standard in an obviousness analysis relating to a
design patent. Second, BDI argues that the district court failed to properly communicate its reasoning
in either step of the obviousness analysis. Finally, BDI asserts that the court erred by not addressing
secondary considerations, including copying and commercial sales.

In response, High Point and the Retail Entities (collectively, the "Appellees") assert that either the
Penta or the Laurel Hill could act as the primary reference for the obviousness analysis because they
are both "basically the same as the claimed design," which, according to the Appellees, is all that is
required under the first step. The Appellees assert that BDI seeks to apply a "virtual identity" standard
in the first step, rather than the proper standard, which allows for minor differences. According to
the Appellees, under this court's case law, a district court can assess the "overall visual appearance," as
required by the second step under Durling, without expert testimony and "almost instinctively."

The Appellees also argue that the district court properly discounted the Rake Declaration because
obviousness should be assessed from the vantage point of the ordinary observer, not an ordinary
designer such as Mr. Rake. According to the Appellees, the district court properly applied the ordinary
observer standard to find obviousness based on the combination of either the Penta or the Laurel Hill
with the Secondary References.

As to secondary considerations, the Appellees argue that BDI failed to show the nexus necessary
to demonstrate that either the alleged copying or the commercial sale of SNOOZIES support the
nonobviousness of the 183 patent. Specifically, the Appellees assert that BDI has not established
that SNOOZIES actually embody the '183 patent, as is necessary to support BDI's nonobviousness
arguments.

                                                                   C

We first address the standard applied by the district court here. The use of an "ordinary observer"
standard to assess the potential obviousness of a design patent runs contrary to the precedent of this

164 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
court and our predecessor court, under which the obviousness of a design patent must, instead, be
assessed from the viewpoint of an ordinary designer. Given this precedent, the district court erred in
applying the ordinary observer standard to assess the obviousness of the design patent at issue.

Although obviousness is assessed from the vantage point of an ordinary designer in the art, "an
expert's opinion on the legal conclusion of obviousness is neither necessary nor controlling." That
said, an expert's opinion may be relevant to the factual aspects of the analysis leading to that legal
conclusion. For that reason, the district court erred by categorically disregarding the Rake
Declaration.

We now turn to what we conclude were additional errors in the district court's application of the
two-step analysis set forth in Durling. As to the first part of the first step--"discerning the correct
visual impression created by the patented design as a whole"--the district court erred by failing to
translate the design of the '183 patent into a verbal description. See Durling, 101 F.3d at 103 ("From
this translation, the parties and appellate courts can discern the internal reasoning employed by the
trial court to reach its decision as to whether or not a prior art design is basically the same as the
claimed design."). The closest to the necessary description was the court's comment characterizing the
design in the '183 patent as "slippers with an opening for a foot that can contain a fuzzy (fleece) lining
and have a smooth outer surface." This, however, represents "too high a level of abstraction" by failing
to focus "on the distinctive visual appearances of the reference and the claimed design." On remand,
the district court should add sufficient detail to its verbal description of the claimed design to evoke a
visual image consonant with that design.

As to the second part of the first step--"determining whether there is a single reference that creates
`basically the same' visual impression"--the court erred by failing to provide its reasoning, as required
under this court's precedent. Absent such reasoning, we cannot discern how the district court
concluded that the Woolrich Prior Art was "basically the same as the claimed design," so that either
design could act as a primary reference. On remand, the district court should do a side-by-side
comparison of the two designs to determine if they create the same visual impression. See, e.g.,
Apple, 678 F.3d at 1330 (comparing images of the claimed design to images of the asserted primary
references). In addition, based on the record before us, there appear to be genuine issues of material
fact as to whether the Woolrich Prior Art are, in fact, proper primary references. For this additional
reason, summary judgment must be reversed.

To the extent that the obviousness of the '183 patent remains at issue on remand, the district court
will, after properly completing the first step under Durling, be in a better position to assess whether or
not the Woolrich Prior Art, modified by the Secondary References, provide a design with the "same
overall visual appearance as the claimed design," as required under the second step of Durling.3

        3 Having setting forth the proper framework for the obviousness analysis, we take no position
        on whether the district court could or should find obviousness under the proper standard.

Finally, we turn to secondary considerations, which the district court did not address in the Final
Decision. This court has held that "evidence rising out of the so-called `secondary considerations'
must always when present be considered en route to a determination of obviousness." Here, BDI
alleged both commercial success of the claimed design as well as copying. To the extent that the
obviousness of the '183 patent remains at issue on remand, the district court should address any
evidence of secondary considerations.

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 165
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the grant of summary judgment of obviousness and remand the
case to the district court.

Context & Application

1. What test does the Federal Circuit use to evaluate whether or not a claimed design is obvious?

2. The "primary reference" is sometimes called a "Rosen reference." In In re Rosen, the C.C.P.A. held
that "there must be a reference, a something in existence, the design characteristics of which are
basically the same as the claimed design in order to support a holding of obviousness." 673 F.2d 388,
391 (C.C.P.A. 1982). This reference is required "whether the holding is based on the basic reference
alone or on the basic reference in view of modifications suggested by secondary references." Id. Once
a proper primary reference is identified, "other references may be used to modify it to create a design
that has the same overall visual appearance as the claimed design." Durling v. Spectrum Furniture Co.,
101 F.3d 100, 103 (Fed. Cir. 1996). But "secondary references may only be used to modify the primary
reference if they are so related to the primary reference that the appearance of certain ornamental
features in one would suggest the application of those features to the other." Id. What does that mean?
The case law is less than clear. And in light of the high standard of visual similarity the Federal Circuit
requires for primary references, few cases reach this second step at all. For more on these issues, see
Sarah Burstein, Visual Invention, 16 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 169, 214 (2012).

3. The court states in High Point "evidence rising out of the so-called `secondary considerations' must
always when present be considered en route to a determination of obviousness." These secondary
considerations include commercial success and copying. Are these considerations a good fit for
designs?

                                    High Point Design LLC v. Buyers Direct, Inc.

                                              621 F. App'x 632 (Fed. Cir. 2015)

CHEN, Circuit Judge.

This is the second time this case has been appealed to our court. In High Point Design LLC v. Buyers
Direct, Inc., 730 F.3d 1301 (Fed. Cir. 2013) ("High Point I"), we reversed the . . . grant of summary
judgment of invalidity of the design patent belonging to Buyers Direct, Inc. (BDI). . . .

On remand, the district court again granted summary judgment, finding that: (1) the asserted patent
was anticipated; (2) the accused products did not infringe; . . . .

BDI challenges each of these determinations on appeal. For the reasons set forth below, we reverse
summary judgment of invalidity [and] affirm summary judgment of non-infringement . . . .

                                                                    I

The background of the case is set forth in High Point I . . . . We recount below only the facts pertinent
to the issues on appeal.

BDI owns a design patent for the ornamental appearance of a fuzzy slipper, U.S. Patent No. D598,183
(the D'183 patent). The D'183 patent is entitled "Slipper," and recites one claim for "the ornamental
design for a slipper, as shown and described" in eight figures. . . .

166 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The claimed design discloses two embodiments for the slipper soles. One embodiment has a sole with
two groups of raised dots, and the other has a sole with a smooth bottom.

BDI manufactures a slipper called the SNOOZIE (Snoozie), which it contends is an embodiment of
the design disclosed in the D'183 patent. . . .

High Point Design LLC (High Point) manufactures and distributes the accused FUZZY BABBA
slipper (Fuzzy Babba). . . .

D

On remand, the district court again granted summary judgment of invalidity. This time the district
court found that the D'183 patent was anticipated by the Woolrich Prior Art. The district court
offered the following description of the claimed design in support of its decision:

        To an ordinary observer, the '183 Patent is the design of a slipper with a formed body, a
        protrusion of fuzz or fluff, and a sole with some solidity. The outside of the slipper appears
        durable and looks to be made of a relatively tough material; the inside looks soft, plush, and
        made of a warm material. The sole appears to be fairly thick and looks sturdy.

Addressing each of the prior art designs in turn, the district court first determined that the Laurel Hill
anticipated because it also had "a structured body, a soft-looking fluff surrounding the opening of the
slipper, and a sole that appears durable and fairly thick." The district court then found that the Penta
also anticipated, concluding that the Penta was even more similar to the D'183 patent than the Laurel
Hill. The court found that the Penta "conveys the visual effect of a slipper, the body and sole of which
have some defined shape and solidity but which has a protrusion of fluff or fuzz emanating from the
foot opening." Although the district court noted that a close study of the patented and prior art designs
revealed differences, those differences were "minor" and insufficient to defeat anticipation.

The district court also ruled in favor of High Point on grounds that the Fuzzy Babba slipper did not
infringe the patented design. In particular, the district court found:

        The Fuzzy Babba conveys the visual effect of an entirely soft and malleable body with an
        indistinguishable sole; it is soft and malleable all around. In contrast, the visual effect of the '183
        Patent is of a formed body and sole with some solidity; and a body distinct from the sole.

                                                                   II

                                                                   A

We turn first to the district court's grant of summary judgment on anticipation.

Design patents are presumed to be valid. 35 U.S.C.  282(a). A party seeking to invalidate a patent
on the basis of anticipation must do so by clear and convincing evidence. Design patent anticipation
requires a showing that a single prior art reference is "identical in all material respects" to the
claimed invention. In other words, the two designs must be substantially the same. Two designs
are substantially the same "if the resemblance is such as to deceive an ordinary observer, inducing
him to purchase one supposing it to be the other." Anticipation is a question of fact. Summary
judgment is proper only when the evidence underlying anticipation is clear and convincing such that
no reasonable fact-finder could find otherwise.

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 167
Viewing all evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party--BDI--we conclude that a
reasonable jury could have found there was not clear and convincing evidence of anticipation.

In High Point I, we instructed that on remand, the district court should "add sufficient detail to its
verbal description of the claimed design to evoke a visual image consonant with the claimed design."
We also instructed that the district court should perform a side-by-side comparison of the claimed
and prior art designs as part of the proper obviousness determination. Notably, we cautioned that
there appeared to be "genuine issues of material fact as to whether the Woolrich Prior Art are, in fact,
proper primary references" for obviousness purposes under 35 U.S.C.  103.

On remand, the district court did not perform a side-by-side comparison, but concluded that the
claimed and prior art designs share the "same characteristics" because they share "a structured body,
a soft-looking fluff surrounding the opening of the slipper, and a sole that appears durable and fairly
thick."

We find again that the district court fundamentally erred in its analysis by analyzing the designs
from "too high a level of abstraction" and failing to focus "on the distinctive visual appearances of
the reference and the claimed design." Specifically, the court's description does little more than point
out the main concepts of the claimed design: a structured slipper having fuzzy material at the foot
opening. In doing so, the court failed to properly consider the ornamental aspects of the designs at
issue. There are numerous such features in the body, the fuzzy material, and the sole of the designs,
all of which were overlooked in the district court's analysis.

For example, there are meaningful differences between the curvatures of the slipper body designs.
The body of the patented design has a distinct `S' curve between the foot opening and the front of
the slipper as viewed from the side, which ends in a downward slope toward the front of the body.
By contrast, the Laurel Hill has a prominent upward curve near the front. The Penta is also different
because it has a noticeably flatter, more even slope from the foot opening towards the front.

There are also clear differences between the protruding fuzz of the claimed and prior art designs. In
particular, the Woolrich Prior Art appears to differ from the claims in that both prior art slippers have
a pronounced fleece overlap oriented outward and which obscures the top edge of the foot opening.
By contrast, no such overlap is visible in the patented design.

We also find that the district court failed to take into consideration the substantial differences
between the ornamental aspects of the soles of the claimed design and the prior art designs. As we
stated in Contessa Food Prods., Inc. v. Conagra, Inc., "our precedent makes clear that all of the ornamental
features illustrated in the figures must be considered in evaluating design patent infringement." 282
F.3d 1370, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2002).

The district court did not address the ornamental aspects of the soles in the Remand Order, but stated
in the 2012 Order that "the only difference between the slippers relates to the sole of the slippers,
which is quite minor in the context of the overall slipper." We disagree. There are unmistakable
differences between the sole design of the D'183 patent and the Woolrich Prior Art. The patent claims
one embodiment, shown in Figure 7, where the sole has dots. Those dots are arranged in a uniformly
spaced pattern of rows and columns in two separate groups. One group is positioned closer to the
front of the slipper, and narrows slightly toward the toe area. The other group is placed closer to the
rear, and has a corresponding taper toward the rear area. The other embodiment, shown in Figure 8,
has a smooth sole. Neither of the Woolrich Prior Art designs has either of these design components.

168 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The prior art designs instead each have their own distinct ornamental designs. The Laurel Hill sole
has embedded within it images of four trees and two moose. The Laurel Hill also has a grooved border
not present in the claimed design. The Penta sole has a large "WOOLRICH" image imprinted thereon
and is also decorated with a distinct pattern. Like the Laurel Hill--but unlike the claimed design--the
Penta also has a grooved border.

As we cautioned in High Point I, there appeared to be genuine issues of material fact regarding whether
the Woolrich Prior Art properly served as base references under this court's obviousness law. We now
similarly hold that the evidence is not so clear and convincing such that a reasonable fact-finder could
not find for BDI on anticipation. For these reasons, we reverse summary judgment of invalidity.

                                                                   B

We turn next to the district court's grant of summary judgment of non-infringement.

Infringement is a question of fact and must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. Summary
judgment of non-infringement is appropriate when no reasonable fact-finder could find the accused
design substantially similar to the claimed design.

Infringement of design patents is judged by the same test as anticipation--whether two designs are
"substantially the same." See Egyptian Goddess, 543 F.3d at 678 (adopting test set forth in Gorham, 81
U.S. at 528 as sole test for design patent infringement). Under Egyptian Goddess, where the claimed
and accused designs are "sufficiently distinct" and "plainly dissimilar," the patentee does not meet its
burden of proving infringement. Only if the claimed and accused designs are not plainly dissimilar
does the inquiry potentially benefit from comparison of the claimed and the accused designs . . . with
the prior art. We agree with the district court that it is not necessary to resort to a comparison with
the prior art in ruling on infringement here.

The district court conducted a side-by-side comparison between the claimed design and the accused
Fuzzy Babba slippers, and concluded that "the Fuzzy Babba's appearance evokes a soft, gentle image,
while the D'183 patent appears robust and durable." Finding that a consumer would not confuse the
two designs, the court then granted summary judgment of non-infringement.

We conclude that the patented and accused designs bring to mind different impressions. The Fuzzy
Babba design appears soft and formless, whereas the claimed design appears structured and formed.
These differences are reflected in the ornamental aspects of each of the designs. For example, the side
profile of the Fuzzy Babba shows a relatively smooth, downward slope from the rear toward the front
area of the slipper. By contrast, the D'183 patent design has a relatively defined, curved opening that
is lower in the middle and higher at the edges. Further, the Fuzzy Babba has a relatively straight rear
line, whereas the rear of [the] claimed design bulges outward. The front areas of the two designs are
also substantially dissimilar. The Fuzzy Babba has a relatively flatly sloping side profile, whereas the
patented design has a curved profile, roughly following in an `S' curve shape.

As we did with respect to invalidity, we also find that there are meaningful differences in the soles
which affect the overall visual effect of the two designs. Unlike the D'183 patent design, the Fuzzy has
a continuous distribution of dots throughout almost the entire length of the sole. These dots are of a
constant width and in one group, in contrast to the varying width of dot columns displayed in Figure
7, and in further contrast to the embodiment in Figure 8 that has a smooth sole and no dots.

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 169
We recognize that both designs essentially consist of a slipper with a fuzzy portion extending upward
out of the foot opening. Such high-level similarities, however, are not sufficient to demonstrate
infringement.

BDI also argues that the district court erred by not performing a comparison of the accused Fuzzy
Babba slipper to BDI's alleged commercial embodiment, the Snoozie. We have long-cautioned that
it is generally improper to determine infringement by comparing an accused product with the
patentee's purported commercial embodiment.

If a patentee is able to show that there is no substantial difference between the claimed design and the
purported commercial embodiment, a comparison between that embodiment and the accused design
is permissible. Contrary to BDI's suggestion, however, we have never mandated such comparisons
and decline to do so here. The proper test for infringement is performed by measuring the accused
products against the claimed design.

BDI also argues that the district court erred by failing to take into account how the accused products
appeared as worn. We disagree. Even as worn, there are meaningful differences in the visual
impression between the two designs. The Fuzzy Babba lacks the distinctive `S' curve of the front area
visible in Figure 4 of the claimed design. Moreover, the protrusion of fuzz in the Fuzzy Babba remains
thicker toward the back then toward the front of the foot opening. And critically, there remain the
aforementioned differences in the soles of the two designs.

For all these reasons, we affirm the district court's grant of summary judgment of non-infringement.

Context & Application

1. What is the Federal Circuit's test for anticipation of a design patent? Is it an easy standard for a
challenger to meet?

2. When can a patentee's commercial embodiment be used in the infringement inquiry? Who has the
burden of proving that a product is, in fact, a commercial embodiment of a claimed design?

3. In High Point, the court mentioned that the patent-in-suit "disclose[d] two embodiments for the
slipper soles." Although a design patent can only have one claim, "[m]ore than one embodiment of
a design may be protected by a single claim. However, such embodiments may be presented only if
they involve a single inventive concept according to the nonstatutory double patenting practice for
designs." MPEP  1504.05 (citing In re Rubinfield, 270 F.2d 391 (C.C.P.A. 1959)). What does it mean to
have the same inventive concept? To be a different "embodiment" of the same "design"? It's not clear.
In practice, some attorneys report that it's really a matter of what you can "get past the examiner." But
overaggressive embodiment claiming is a risky strategy, because the doctrine of prosecution history
estoppel also applies to design patents. See Pac. Coast Marine Windshields Ltd. v. Malibu Boats, LLC, 739
F.3d 694, 697 (Fed. Cir. 2014).

4. In a portion of High Point I that was omitted above, the Federal Circuit reversed the district court's
determination that the claimed design was invalid as "functional." See 730 F.3d 1301, 1317 (Fed. Cir.
2013). The Federal Circuit has interpreted the design patent requirement of ornamentality, see 35
U.S.C.  171(a), as being the opposite of "functional." But the case law is less than clear on the issue of
how to analyze functionality. (One word of warning for those who have studied trademark law: The
word "functional" does not mean the same thing in contemporary design patent law that it does in

170 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
contemporary trademark law. See Sarah Burstein, Faux Amis in Design Law, 105 Trademark Rep. 1455
(2015).)

Many cases say that a design is not functional if there are alternative designs. See, e.g., Best Lock Corp.
v. Ilco Unican Corp., 94 F.3d 1563, 1566 (Fed. Cir. 1996) ("[I]f the design claimed in a design patent is
dictated solely by the function of the article of manufacture, the patent is invalid because the design
is not ornamental. A design is not dictated solely by its function when alternative designs for the
article of manufacture are available."). A few other cases, citing dicta from Berry Sterling Corp. v. Pescor
Plastics, Inc., 122 F.3d 1452 (Fed. Cir. 1997), say that other factors can be used to evaluate design
patent functionality. In a recent decision, the court summarized--and attempted to reconcile--these
different lines of cases as follows:

In determining whether a claimed design is primarily functional, "the function of the article itself
must not be confused with `functionality' of the design of the article." Hupp v. Siroflex of Am., Inc.,
122 F.3d 1456, 1462 (Fed. Cir. 1997). In Hupp, we separated the function inherent in a concrete
mold--producing a simulated stone pathway by molding concrete--from the particular pattern of the
stone produced by the mold itself--an aesthetic design choice. . . . Because there was no utilitarian
reason the mold had to impress the particular claimed rock walkway pattern into the concrete, we
determined that the claimed design was "primarily ornamental," and not invalid as functional. In High
Point Design LLC v. Buyers Direct, Inc., we found that the district court had incorrectly relied on the
functional aspects of a slipper--a seam connecting two components, a curved front accommodating
the foot, an opening facilitating ingress and egress of the foot, a forward lean of the heel keeping the
heel in place, and a fleece interior providing warmth--to find the particular ornamental design of
that slipper to be impermissibly functional. 730 F.3d 1301, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2013). We explained that a
claimed design was not invalid as functional simply because the "primary features" of the design could
perform functions. . . .

By contrast, in Best Lock, we affirmed a district court's determination that a design patent to the
blade of a key was invalid as functional, finding no clear error in the district court's conclusion that
the claimed key blade design was dictated by functional concerns. 94 F.3d at 1567. In Best Lock, the
claimed design was limited to a specific shape of a blank key blade. The parties did not dispute that
the claimed key blade shape was designed specifically to perform its intended function--to fit into
a similarly-shaped cylinder lock keyhole. Further, the patentee presented no evidence of alternative
compatible key blade designs, admitting that no differently-shaped key blade could fit into the keyhole
of the corresponding cylinder lock. Because no alternative design would allow the underlying article
to perform its intended function, we determined the district court did not clearly err by finding that
the claimed key blade design was dictated by function, and therefore invalid.

. . .

We have not mandated applying any particular test for determining whether a claimed design is
dictated by its function and therefore impermissibly functional. We have often focused, however, on
the availability of alternative designs as an important--if not dispositive--factor in evaluating the
legal functionality of a claimed design. For example, the district court in L.A. Gear referenced the
evidence of many alternative designs that accomplished the same functionality associated with the
underlying athletic sneaker. 988 F.2d at 1123. In view of that evidence, we noted that "when there
are several ways to achieve the function of an article of manufacture, the design of the article is more
likely to serve a primarily ornamental purpose." Id. See also Rosco, 304 F.3d at 1378 ("[I]f other designs

                                                                                                                        9. DESIGN PATENTS 171
could produce the same or similar functional capabilities, the design of the article in question is likely
ornamental, not functional."); Best Lock, 94 F.3d at 1566 (same); Hupp, 122 F.3d at 1460 (same).
Here, the district court appeared to discount the existence and availability of alternative designs in
determining that the claimed Design Patents were "primarily functional" based on its evaluation of
the five considerations identified in PHG, 469 F.3d at 1366 (quoting Berry Sterling, 122 F.3d at 1456).
In Berry Sterling, we vacated and remanded a district court's grant of summary judgment of invalidity
where it had failed to "elicit the appropriate factual underpinnings for a determination of invalidity of
a design patent due to functionality." 122 F.3d at 1454. In our instructions on remand, we explained
that where the existence of alternative designs is not dispositive of the invalidity inquiry, the district
court may look to several other factors for its analysis:

        whether the protected design represents the best design; whether alternative designs would
        adversely affect the utility of the specified article; whether there are any concomitant utility
        patents; whether the advertising touts particular features of the design as having specific utility;
        and whether there are any elements in the design or an overall appearance clearly not dictated
        by function.
Id. at 1456. We explained that evaluating these other considerations "might" be relevant to assessing
whether the overall appearance of a claimed design is dictated by functional considerations. Id. Thus,
while the Berry Sterling factors can provide useful guidance, an inquiry into whether a claimed design
is primarily functional should begin with an inquiry into the existence of alternative designs.
Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc. v. Covidien, Inc., 796 F.3d 1312, 1328-30 (Fed. Cir. 2015). What is the
status of the Berry Sterling factors following Ethicon? When (and how) should courts use them? Is
the court's attempt to reconcile these lines of precedent convincing? For more on design patent
functionality--and on design patents in general--see Chapter 12 in Sarah Burstein, Sarah R.
Wasserman Rajec & Andres Sawicki, Patent Law: An Open-Access Casebook (2021).

172 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                   10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND
                    THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND

                                               FIXATION

   Learning Objectives: Unit 10

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the facts and legal holding of Feist v. Rural.
           Explain the Court's analysis in Feist v. Rural and the concept of "thin" copyright
              protection.
           Explain the meaning of author, originality, and the fact/expression dichotomy in the
              context of copyright law.
           Recall the basic statutory structure of copyright law.

A fundamental question in intellectual property law is whether the subject matter over which a legal
right is being asserted is the kind of stuff that is within the scope of a given intellectual property right.
This question matters because it effectuates a policy decision that a given legal right will only apply
to certain types of human-created intangibles. Feist v. Rural exemplifies this issue. It involves a claim
of copyright infringement over a telephone directory--or, at least, the contents of that directory. To
understand the issue of subject matter and the problem posed in Feist v. Rural, you will first necessary
to have a background knowledge of the relevant provisions of the Copyright Act. Before reading Feist,
you should read 17 U.S.C. ㎣ 101, 102, 103, 104, & 105.

   17 U.S.C. 101. Definitions (2010)

   ...
   A "collective work" is a work, such as a periodical issue, anthology, or encyclopedia, in which a number of
   contributions, constituting separate and independent works in themselves, are assembled into a collective
   whole.
   ...
   A "compilation" is a work formed by the collection and assembling of preexisting materials or of data that
   are selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a way that the resulting work as a whole constitutes an
   original work of authorship. The term "compilation" includes collective works.
   ...

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 173
   "Copies" are material objects, other than phonorecords, in which a work is fixed by any method now
   known or later developed, and from which the work can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise
   communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. The term "copies" includes the
   material object, other than a phonorecord, in which the work is first fixed.
   ...
   A "derivative work" is a work based upon one or more preexisting works, such as a translation, musical
   arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture version, sound recording, art reproduction,
   abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which a work may be recast, transformed, or adapted. A
   work consisting of editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications which, as a whole,
   represent an original work of authorship, is a "derivative work".

   17 U.S.C. 102. Subject matter of copyright: In general (1990)

   (a) Copyright protection subsists, in accordance with this title, in original works of authorship fixed in any
   tangible medium of expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be perceived,
   reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. Works of
   authorship include the following categories:

            (1) literary works;
            (2) musical works, including any accompanying words;
            (3) dramatic works, including any accompanying music;
            (4) pantomimes and choreographic works;
            (5) pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works;
            (6) motion pictures and other audiovisual works;
            (7) sound recordings; and
            (8) architectural works.

   (b) In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea, procedure,
   process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery

   17 U.S. Code 103. Subject matter of copyright: Compilations and derivative works
   (1976)

   (a) The subject matter of copyright as specified by section 102 includes compilations and derivative works,
   but protection for a work employing preexisting material in which copyright subsists does not extend to
   any part of the work in which such material has been used unlawfully.

   (b) The copyright in a compilation or derivative work extends only to the material contributed by the
   author of such work, as distinguished from the preexisting material employed in the work, and does not
   imply any exclusive right in the preexisting material. The copyright in such work is independent of, and
   does not affect or enlarge the scope, duration, ownership, or subsistence of, any copyright protection in the
   preexisting material.

174 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S. Code 104. Subject matter of copyright: National origin (1998)

(a) Unpublished Works.-- The works specified by sections 102 and 103, while unpublished, are subject to
protection under this title without regard to the nationality or domicile of the author.

(b) Published Works.--The works specified by sections 102 and 103, when published, are subject to
protection under this title if--

         1. on the date of first publication, one or more of the authors is a national or domiciliary of the
         United States, or is a national, domiciliary, or sovereign authority of a treaty party, or is a stateless
         person, wherever that person may be domiciled; or
         2. the work is first published in the United States or in a foreign nation that, on the date of first
         publication, is a treaty party; or
         3. the work is a sound recording that was first fixed in a treaty party; or
         4. the work is a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work that is incorporated in a building or other
         structure, or an architectural work that is embodied in a building and the building or structure is
         located in the United States or a treaty party; or
         5. the work is first published by the United Nations or any of its specialized agencies, or by the
         Organization of American States; or
         6. the work comes within the scope of a Presidential proclamation

         For purposes of paragraph (2), a work that is published in the United States or a treaty party within
         30 days after publication in a foreign nation that is not a treaty party shall be considered to be first
         published in the United States or such treaty party, as the case may be.

(c) Effect of Berne Convention.--No right or interest in a work eligible for protection under this title may
be claimed by virtue of, or in reliance upon, the provisions of the Berne Convention, or the adherence of
the United States thereto. Any rights in a work eligible for protection under this title that derive from this
title, other Federal or State statutes, or the common law, shall not be expanded or reduced by virtue of, or
in reliance upon, the provisions of the Berne Convention, or the adherence of the United States thereto.
...

17 U.S. Code  105. Subject matter of copyright: United States Government works
(2019)

(a) In General.-- Copyright protection under this title is not available for any work of the United States
Government, but the United States Government is not precluded from receiving and holding copyrights
transferred to it by assignment, bequest, or otherwise.
...

                   10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                    FIXATION 175
FEIST PUBLICATIONS, INC. V. RURAL TELEPHONE SERVICE (1991)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read this opinion, ask yourself the following questions:
           What underlying policies are at play in this opinion? How do those policies manifest themselves in
              the law?
           What is the primary legal issue in this case? How and why does the Court draw the line that it
              does?
           Based on this opinion, how would you determine whether something is or is not subject to
              copyright?
           Would the outcome of this case be the same if it involved a directory of businesses that was
              organized by business type instead of alphabetically (i.e.: a "yellow pages")? What
              if businesses had to pay to be included in that directory?
           What is meant by "thin" copyright protection?

                                 Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service
                                                       499 U.S. 340 (1991)

JUSTICE O'CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case requires us to clarify the extent of copyright protection available to telephone directory
white pages.
I
Rural Telephone Service Company, Inc., is a certified public utility that provides telephone service to
several communities in northwest Kansas. It is subject to a state regulation that requires all telephone
companies operating in Kansas to issue annually an updated telephone directory. Accordingly, as a
condition of its monopoly franchise, Rural publishes a typical telephone directory, consisting of white
pages and yellow pages. The white pages list in alphabetical order the names of Rural's subscribers,
together with their towns and telephone numbers. The yellow pages list Rural's business subscribers
alphabetically by category and feature classified advertisements of various sizes. Rural distributes its
directory free of charge to its subscribers, but earns revenue by selling yellow pages advertisements.
Feist Publications, Inc., is a publishing company that specializes in area-wide telephone directories.
Unlike a typical directory, which covers only a particular calling area, Feist's area-wide directories
cover a much larger geographical range, reducing the need to call directory assistance or consult

176 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
multiple directories. The Feist directory that is the subject of this litigation covers 11 different
telephone service areas in 15 counties and contains 46,878 white pages listings--compared to Rural's
approximately 7,700 listings. Like Rural's directory, Feist's is distributed free of charge and includes
both white pages and yellow pages. Feist and Rural compete vigorously for yellow pages advertising.

As the sole provider of telephone service in its service area, Rural obtains subscriber information quite
easily. Persons desiring telephone service must apply to Rural and provide their names and addresses;
Rural then assigns them a telephone number. Feist is not a telephone company, let alone one with
monopoly status, and therefore lacks independent access to any subscriber information. To obtain
white pages listings for its area-wide directory, Feist approached each of the 11 telephone companies
operating in northwest Kansas and offered to pay for the right to use its white pages listings.

Of the 11 telephone companies, only Rural refused to license its listings to Feist. Rural's refusal
created a problem for Feist, as omitting these listings would have left a gaping hole in its area-wide
directory, rendering it less attractive to potential yellow pages advertisers. In a decision subsequent
to that which we review here, the District Court determined that this was precisely the reason
Rural refused to license its listings. The refusal was motivated by an unlawful purpose "to extend its
monopoly in telephone service to a monopoly in yellow pages advertising." Rural Telephone Service Co.
v. Feist Publications, Inc., 737 F. Supp. 610, 622 (Kan. 1990).

Unable to license Rural's white pages listings, Feist used them without Rural's consent. Feist began by
removing several thousand listings that fell outside the geographic range of its area-wide directory,
then hired personnel to investigate the 4,935 that remained. These employees verified the data
reported by Rural and sought to obtain additional information. As a result, a typical Feist listing
includes the individual's street address; most of Rural's listings do not. Notwithstanding these
additions, however, 1,309 of the 46,878 listings in Feist's 1983 directory were identical to listings in
Rural's 1982-1983 white pages. App. 54 ( 15-16), 57. Four of these were fictitious listings that Rural
had inserted into its directory to detect copying.

Rural sued for copyright infringement in the District Court for the District of Kansas taking the
position that Feist, in compiling its own directory, could not use the information contained in Rural's
white pages. Rural asserted that Feist's employees were obliged to travel door-to-door or conduct a
telephone survey to discover the same information for themselves. Feist responded that such efforts
were economically impractical and, in any event, unnecessary because the information copied was
beyond the scope of copyright protection. The District Court granted summary judgment to Rural,
explaining that "[c]ourts have consistently held that telephone directories are copyrightable" and
citing a string of lower court decisions. 663 F. Supp. 214, 218 (1987). In an unpublished opinion, the
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed "for substantially the reasons given by the district
court." App. to Pet. for Cert. 4a, judgt. order reported at 916 F. 2d 718 (1990). We granted certiorari,
498 U. S. 808 (1990), to determine whether the copyright in Rural's directory protects the names,
towns, and telephone numbers copied by Feist.

II

A

This case concerns the interaction of two well-established propositions. The first is that facts are not
copyrightable; the other, that compilations of facts generally are. Each of these propositions possesses
an impeccable pedigree. That there can be no valid copyright in facts is universally understood. The

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 177
most fundamental axiom of copyright law is that "[n]o author may copyright his ideas or the facts he
narrates." Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U. S. 539, 556 (1985). Rural wisely
concedes this point, noting in its brief that "[f]acts and discoveries, of course, are not themselves
subject to copyright protection." Brief for Respondent 24. At the same time, however, it is beyond
dispute that compilations of facts are within the subject matter of copyright. Compilations were
expressly mentioned in the Copyright Act of 1909, and again in the Copyright Act of 1976.

There is an undeniable tension between these two propositions. Many compilations consist of
nothing but raw data-- i.e., wholly factual information not accompanied by any original written
expression. On what basis may one claim a copyright in such a work? Common sense tells us that 100
uncopyrightable facts do not magically change their status when gathered together in one place. Yet
copyright law seems to contemplate that compilations that consist exclusively of facts are potentially
within its scope.

The key to resolving the tension lies in understanding why facts are not copyrightable. The sine qua
non of copyright is originality. To qualify for copyright protection, a work must be original to the
author. See Harper & Row, supra, at 547-549. Original, as the term is used in copyright, means only
that the work was independently created by the author (as opposed to copied from other works), and
that it possesses at least some minimal degree of creativity. 1 M. Nimmer & D. Nimmer, Copyright
㎣ 2.01[A], [B] (1990) (hereinafter Nimmer). To be sure, the requisite level of creativity is extremely
low; even a slight amount will suffice. The vast majority of works make the grade quite easily, as they
possess some creative spark, "no matter how crude, humble or obvious" it might be. Id.,  1.08[C][1].
Originality does not signify novelty; a work may be original even though it closely resembles other
works so long as the similarity is fortuitous, not the result of copying. To illustrate, assume that
two poets, each ignorant of the other, compose identical poems. Neither work is novel, yet both are
original and, hence, copyrightable. See Sheldon v. Metro-Goldwyn Pictures Corp., 81 F. 2d 49, 54 (CA2
1936).

Originality is a constitutional requirement. The source of Congress' power to enact copyright laws
is Article I,  8, cl. 8, of the Constitution, which authorizes Congress to "secur[e] for limited Times
to Authors . . . the exclusive Right to their respective Writings." In two decisions from the late 19th
century--The Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U. S. 82 (1879); and Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111
U. S. 53 (1884)--this Court defined the crucial terms "authors" and "writings." In so doing, the Court
made it unmistakably clear that these terms presuppose a degree of originality.

In The Trade-Mark Cases, the Court addressed the constitutional scope of "writings." For a particular
work to be classified "under the head of writings of authors," the Court determined, "originality is
required." 100 U. S., at 94. The Court explained that originality requires independent creation plus
a modicum of creativity: "[W]hile the word writings may be liberally construed, as it has been, to
include original designs for engraving, prints, &c., it is only such as are original, and are founded in
the creative powers of the mind. The writings which are to be protected are the fruits of intellectual
labor, embodied in the form of books, prints, engravings, and the like." Ibid. (emphasis in original).

In Burrow-Giles, the Court distilled the same requirement from the Constitution's use of the word
"authors." The Court defined "author," in a constitutional sense, to mean "he to whom anything owes
its origin; originator; maker." 111 U. S., at 58 (internal quotation marks omitted). As in The Trade-
Mark Cases, the Court emphasized the creative component of originality. It described copyright as
being limited to "original intellectual conceptions of the author," 111 U. S., at 58, and stressed the

178 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
importance of requiring an author who accuses another of infringement to prove "the existence of
those facts of originality, of intellectual production, of thought, and conception." Id., at 59-60.

The originality requirement articulated in The Trade-Mark Cases and Burrow-Giles remains the
touchstone of copyright protection today. See Goldstein v. California, 412 U. S. 546, 561-562 (1973).
It is the very "premise of copyright law." Miller v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 650 F. 2d 1365, 1368
(CA5 1981). Leading scholars agree on this point. As one pair of commentators succinctly puts it: "The
originality requirement is constitutionally mandated for all works." Patterson & Joyce, Monopolizing
the Law: The Scope of Copyright Protection for Law Reports and Statutory Compilations, 36 UCLA
L. Rev. 719, 763, n. 155 (1989) (emphasis in original) (hereinafter Patterson & Joyce). Accord, id.,
at 759-760, and n. 140; Nimmer  1.06[A] ("[O]riginality is a statutory as well as a constitutional
requirement"); id.,  1.08[C][1] ("[A] modicum of intellectual labor . . . clearly constitutes an essential
constitutional element").

It is this bedrock principle of copyright that mandates the law's seemingly disparate treatment of facts
and factual compilations. "No one may claim originality as to facts." Id.,  2.11[A], p. 2-157. This is
because facts do not owe their origin to an act of authorship. The distinction is one between creation
and discovery: The first person to find and report a particular fact has not created the fact; he or she
has merely discovered its existence. To borrow from Burrow-Giles, one who discovers a fact is not its
"maker" or "originator." 111 U. S., at 58. "The discoverer merely finds and records." Nimmer  2.03[E].
Census takers, for example, do not "create" the population figures that emerge from their efforts;
in a sense, they copy these figures from the world around them. Denicola, Copyright in Collections
of Facts: A Theory for the Protection of Nonfiction Literary Works, 81 Colum. L. Rev. 516, 525
(1981) (hereinafter Denicola). Census data therefore do not trigger copyright because these data are
not "original" in the constitutional sense. Nimmer  2.03[E]. The same is true of all facts--scientific,
historical, biographical, and news of the day. "[T]hey may not be copyrighted and are part of the public
domain available to every person." Miller, supra, at 1369.

Factual compilations, on the other hand, may possess the requisite originality. The compilation author
typically chooses which facts to include, in what order to place them, and how to arrange the collected
data so that they may be used effectively by readers. These choices as to selection and arrangement,
so long as they are made independently by the compiler and entail a minimal degree of creativity,
are sufficiently original that Congress may protect such compilations through the copyright laws.
Nimmer ㎣ 2.11[D], 3.03; Denicola 523, n. 38. Thus, even a directory that contains absolutely no
protectible written expression, only facts, meets the constitutional minimum for copyright protection
if it features an original selection or arrangement. See Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 547. Accord,
Nimmer  3.03.

This protection is subject to an important limitation. The mere fact that a work is copyrighted does
not mean that every element of the work may be protected. Originality remains the sine qua non of
copyright; accordingly, copyright protection may extend only to those components of a work that
are original to the author. Patterson & Joyce 800-802; Ginsburg, Creation and Commercial Value:
Copyright Protection of Works of Information, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 1865, 1868, and n. 12 (1990)
(hereinafter Ginsburg). Thus, if the compilation author clothes facts with an original collocation of
words, he or she may be able to claim a copyright in this written expression. Others may copy the
underlying facts from the publication, but not the precise words used to present them. In Harper
& Row, for example, we explained that President Ford could not prevent others from copying bare
historical facts from his autobiography, see 471 U. S., at 556-557, but that he could prevent others

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 179
from copying his "subjective descriptions and portraits of public figures." Id., at 563. Where the
compilation author adds no written expression but rather lets the facts speak for themselves, the
expressive element is more elusive. The only conceivable expression is the manner in which the
compiler has selected and arranged the facts. Thus, if the selection and arrangement are original,
these elements of the work are eligible for copyright protection. See Patry, Copyright in Compilations
of Facts (or Why the "White Pages" Are Not Copyrightable), 12 Com. & Law 37, 64 (Dec. 1990)
(hereinafter Patry). No matter how original the format, however, the facts themselves do not become
original through association. See Patterson & Joyce 776.

This inevitably means that the copyright in a factual compilation is thin. Notwithstanding a valid
copyright, a subsequent compiler remains free to use the facts contained in another's publication to
aid in preparing a competing work, so long as the competing work does not feature the same selection
and arrangement. As one commentator explains it: "[N]o matter how much original authorship the
work displays, the facts and ideas it exposes are free for the taking . . . . [T]he very same facts and
ideas may be divorced from the context imposed by the author, and restated or reshuffled by second
comers, even if the author was the first to discover the facts or to propose the ideas." Ginsburg 1868.

It may seem unfair that much of the fruit of the compiler's labor may be used by others without
compensation. As JUSTICE BRENNAN has correctly observed, however, this is not "some
unforeseen byproduct of a statutory scheme." Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 589 (dissenting opinion). It
is, rather, "the essence of copyright," ibid., and a constitutional requirement. The primary objective of
copyright is not to reward the labor of authors, but "[t]o promote the Progress of Science and useful
Arts." Art. I,  8, cl. 8. Accord, Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U. S. 151, 156 (1975). To
this end, copyright assures authors the right to their original expression, but encourages others to
build freely upon the ideas and information conveyed by a work. Harper & Row, supra, at 556-557.
This principle, known as the idea/expression or fact/expression dichotomy, applies to all works of
authorship. As applied to a factual compilation, assuming the absence of original written expression,
only the compiler's selection and arrangement may be protected; the raw facts may be copied at will.
This result is neither unfair nor unfortunate. It is the means by which copyright advances the progress
of science and art.

This Court has long recognized that the fact/expression dichotomy limits severely the scope of
protection in fact-based works. More than a century ago, the Court observed: "The very object of
publishing a book on science or the useful arts is to communicate to the world the useful knowledge
which it contains. But this object would be frustrated if the knowledge could not be used without
incurring the guilt of piracy of the book." Baker v. Selden, 101 U. S. 99, 103 (1880). We reiterated this
point in Harper & Row:

"[N]o author may copyright facts or ideas. The copyright is limited to those aspects of the
work--termed `expression'--that display the stamp of the author's originality.

"[C]opyright does not prevent subsequent users from copying from a prior author's work those
constituent elements that are not original--for example . . . facts, or materials in the public
domain--as long as such use does not unfairly appropriate the author's original contributions." 471 U.
S., at 547-548 (citation omitted).

This, then, resolves the doctrinal tension: Copyright treats facts and factual compilations in a wholly
consistent manner. Facts, whether alone or as part of a compilation, are not original and therefore

180 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
may not be copyrighted. A factual compilation is eligible for copyright if it features an original
selection or arrangement of facts, but the copyright is limited to the particular selection or
arrangement. In no event may copyright extend to the facts themselves.

B

As we have explained, originality is a constitutionally mandated prerequisite for copyright protection.
The Court's decisions announcing this rule predate the Copyright Act of 1909, but ambiguous
language in the 1909 Act caused some lower courts temporarily to lose sight of this requirement.

The 1909 Act embodied the originality requirement, but not as clearly as it might have. See Nimmer
 2.01. The subject matter of copyright was set out in ㎣ 3 and 4 of the Act. Section 4 stated
that copyright was available to "all the writings of an author." 35 Stat. 1076. By using the words
"writings" and "author"--the same words used in Article I,  8, of the Constitution and defined by the
Court in The Trade-Mark Cases and Burrow-Giles--the statute necessarily incorporated the originality
requirement articulated in the Court's decisions. It did so implicitly, however, thereby leaving room
for error.

Section 3 was similarly ambiguous. It stated that the copyright in a work protected only "the
copyrightable component parts of the work." It thus stated an important copyright principle, but
failed to identify the specific characteristic--originality--that determined which component parts of
a work were copyrightable and which were not.

Most courts construed the 1909 Act correctly, notwithstanding the less-than-perfect statutory
language. They understood from this Court's decisions that there could be no copyright without
originality. See Patterson & Joyce 760-761. As explained in the Nimmer treatise: "The 1909 Act
neither defined originality, nor even expressly required that a work be `original' in order to command
protection. However, the courts uniformly inferred the requirement from the fact that copyright
protection may only be claimed by `authors'. . . . It was reasoned that since an author is `the . . . creator,
originator' it follows that a work is not the product of an author unless the work is original." Nimmer
 2.01 (footnotes omitted) (citing cases).

But some courts misunderstood the statute. See, e. g., Leon v. Pacific Telephone & Telegraph Co., 91 F. 2d
484 (CA9 1937); Jeweler's Circular Publishing Co. v. Keystone Publishing Co., 281 F. 83 (CA2 1922). These
courts ignored ㎣ 3 and 4, focusing their attention instead on  5 of the Act. Section 5, however, was
purely technical in nature: It provided that a person seeking to register a work should indicate on
the application the type of work, and it listed 14 categories under which the work might fall. One of
these categories was "[b]ooks, including composite and cyclopdic works, directories, gazetteers, and
other compilations."  5(a). Section 5 did not purport to say that all compilations were automatically
copyrightable. Indeed, it expressly disclaimed any such function, pointing out that "the subject-
matter of copyright [i]s defined in section four." Nevertheless, the fact that factual compilations were
mentioned specifically in  5 led some courts to infer erroneously that directories and the like were
copyrightable per se, "without any further or precise showing of original--personal--authorship."
Ginsburg 1895.

Making matters worse, these courts developed a new theory to justify the protection of factual
compilations. Known alternatively as "sweat of the brow" or "industrious collection," the underlying
notion was that copyright was a reward for the hard work that went into compiling facts. The classic
formulation of the doctrine appeared in Jeweler's Circular Publishing Co., 281 F., at 88:

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 181
"The right to copyright a book upon which one has expended labor in its preparation does not depend
upon whether the materials which he has collected consist or not of matters which are publici juris, or
whether such materials show literary skill or originality, either in thought or in language, or anything
more than industrious collection. The man who goes through the streets of a town and puts down the
names of each of the inhabitants, with their occupations and their street number, acquires material of
which he is the author" (emphasis added).

The "sweat of the brow" doctrine had numerous flaws, the most glaring being that it extended
copyright protection in a compilation beyond selection and arrangement--the compiler's original
contributions--to the facts themselves. Under the doctrine, the only defense to infringement was
independent creation. A subsequent compiler was "not entitled to take one word of information
previously published," but rather had to "independently wor[k] out the matter for himself, so as to
arrive at the same result from the same common sources of information." Id., at 88-89 (internal
quotation marks omitted). "Sweat of the brow" courts thereby eschewed the most fundamental axiom
of copyright law--that no one may copyright facts or ideas. See Miller v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 650
F. 2d, at 1372 (criticizing "sweat of the brow" courts because "ensur[ing] that later writers obtain the
facts independently . . . is precisely the scope of protection given . . . copyrighted matter, and the law
is clear that facts are not entitled to such protection").

Decisions of this Court applying the 1909 Act make clear that the statute did not permit the "sweat
of the brow" approach. The best example is International News Service v. Associated Press, 248 U. S.
215 (1918). In that decision, the Court stated unambiguously that the 1909 Act conferred copyright
protection only on those elements of a work that were original to the author. International News
Service had conceded taking news reported by Associated Press and publishing it in its own
newspapers. Recognizing that  5 of the Act specifically mentioned "`periodicals, including
newspapers,'"  5(b), the Court acknowledged that news articles were copyrightable. Id., at 234. It flatly
rejected, however, the notion that the copyright in an article extended to the factual information it
contained: "[T]he news element-- the information respecting current events contained in the literary
production--is not the creation of the writer, but is a report of matters that ordinarily are publici juris;
it is the history of the day." Ibid.

Without a doubt, the "sweat of the brow" doctrine flouted basic copyright principles. Throughout
history, copyright law has "recognize[d] a greater need to disseminate factual works than works of
fiction or fantasy." Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 563. Accord, Gorman, Fact or Fancy: The Implications
for Copyright, 29 J. Copyright Soc. 560, 563 (1982). But "sweat of the brow" courts took a contrary
view; they handed out proprietary interests in facts and declared that authors are absolutely precluded
from saving time and effort by relying upon the facts contained in prior works. In truth, "[i]t is just
such wasted effort that the proscription against the copyright of ideas and facts . . . [is] designed to
prevent." Rosemont Enterprises, Inc. v. Random House, Inc., 366 F. 2d 303, 310 (CA2 1966), cert. denied,
385 U. S. 1009 (1967). "Protection for the fruits of such research . . . may in certain circumstances be
available under a theory of unfair competition. But to accord copyright protection on this basis alone
distorts basic copyright principles in that it creates a monopoly in public domain materials without
the necessary justification of protecting and encouraging the creation of `writings' by `authors.'"
Nimmer  3.04, p. 3-23 (footnote omitted).

C

"Sweat of the brow" decisions did not escape the attention of the Copyright Office. When Congress

182 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
decided to over-haul the copyright statute and asked the Copyright Office to study existing problems,
see Mills Music, Inc. v. Snyder, 469 U. S. 153, 159 (1985), the Copyright Office promptly recommended
that Congress clear up the confusion in the lower courts as to the basic standards of copyrightability.
The Register of Copyrights explained in his first report to Congress that "originality" was a "basic
requisit[e]" of copyright under the 1909 Act, but that "the absence of any reference to [originality] in
the statute seems to have led to misconceptions as to what is copyrightable matter." Report of the
Register of Copyrights on the General Revision of the U. S. Copyright Law, 87th Cong., 1st Sess., p. 9
(H. Judiciary Comm. Print 1961). The Register suggested making the originality requirement explicit.
Ibid.

Congress took the Register's advice. In enacting the Copyright Act of 1976, Congress dropped
the reference to "all the writings of an author" and replaced it with the phrase "original works of
authorship." 17 U. S. C.  102(a). In making explicit the originality requirement, Congress announced
that it was merely clarifying existing law: "The two fundamental criteria of copyright protection
[are] originality and fixation in tangible form . . . . The phrase `original works of authorship,' which
is purposely left undefined, is intended to incorporate without change the standard of originality
established by the courts under the present [1909] copyright statute." H. R. Rep. No. 94-1476, p. 51 (1976)
(emphasis added) (hereinafter H. R. Rep.); S. Rep. No. 94-473, p. 50 (1975) (emphasis added)
(hereinafter S. Rep.). This sentiment was echoed by the Copyright Office: "Our intention here is
to maintain the established standards of originality. . . ." Supplementary Report of the Register of
Copyrights on the General Revision of U. S. Copyright Law, 89th Cong., 1st Sess., pt. 6, p. 3 (H.
Judiciary Comm. Print 1965) (emphasis added).

To ensure that the mistakes of the "sweat of the brow" courts would not be repeated, Congress
took additional measures. For example,  3 of the 1909 Act had stated that copyright protected only
the "copyrightable component parts" of a work, but had not identified originality as the basis for
distinguishing those component parts that were copyrightable from those that were not. The 1976
Act deleted this section and replaced it with  102(b), which identifies specifically those elements of a
work for which copyright is not available: "In no case does copyright protection for an original work
of authorship extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle,
or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in
such work." Section 102(b) is universally understood to prohibit any copyright in facts. Harper & Row,
supra, at 547, 556. Accord, Nimmer  2.03[E] (equating facts with "discoveries"). As with  102(a),
Congress emphasized that  102(b) did not change the law, but merely clarified it: "Section 102(b) in
no way enlarges or contracts the scope of copyright protection under the present law. Its purpose is
to restate . . . that the basic dichotomy between expression and idea remains unchanged." H. R. Rep.,
at 57; S. Rep., at 54.

Congress took another step to minimize confusion by deleting the specific mention of "directories
. . . and other compilations" in  5 of the 1909 Act. As mentioned, this section had led some courts
to conclude that directories were copyrightable per se and that every element of a directory was
protected. In its place, Congress enacted two new provisions. First, to make clear that compilations
were not copyrightable per se, Congress provided a definition of the term "compilation." Second,
to make clear that the copyright in a compilation did not extend to the facts themselves, Congress
enacted  103.

The definition of "compilation" is found in  101 of the 1976 Act. It defines a "compilation" in the
copyright sense as "a work formed by the collection and assembling of preexisting materials or of data

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 183
that are selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a way that the resulting work as a whole constitutes
an original work of authorship" (emphasis added).

The purpose of the statutory definition is to emphasize that collections of facts are not copyrightable
per se. It conveys this message through its tripartite structure, as emphasized above by the italics.
The statute identifies three distinct elements and requires each to be met for a work to qualify as
a copyrightable compilation: (1) the collection and assembly of pre-existing material, facts, or data;
(2) the selection, coordination, or arrangement of those materials; and (3) the creation, by virtue of
the particular selection, coordination, or arrangement, of an "original" work of authorship. "[T]his
tripartite conjunctive structure is self-evident, and should be assumed to `accurately express the
legislative purpose.'" Patry 51, quoting Mills Music, 469 U. S., at 164.

At first glance, the first requirement does not seem to tell us much. It merely describes what one
normally thinks of as a compilation--a collection of pre-existing material, facts, or data. What makes
it significant is that it is not the sole requirement. It is not enough for copyright purposes that an
author collects and assembles facts. To satisfy the statutory definition, the work must get over two
additional hurdles. In this way, the plain language indicates that not every collection of facts receives
copyright protection. Otherwise, there would be a period after "data."

The third requirement is also illuminating. It emphasizes that a compilation, like any other work,
is copyrightable only if it satisfies the originality requirement ("an original work of authorship").
Although  102 states plainly that the originality requirement applies to all works, the point was
emphasized with regard to compilations to ensure that courts would not repeat the mistake of the
"sweat of the brow" courts by concluding that fact-based works are treated differently and measured
by some other standard. As Congress explained it, the goal was to "make plain that the criteria of
copyrightable subject matter stated in section 102 apply with full force to works . . . containing
preexisting material." H. R. Rep., at 57; S. Rep., at 55.

The key to the statutory definition is the second requirement. It instructs courts that, in determining
whether a fact-based work is an original work of authorship, they should focus on the manner in
which the collected facts have been selected, coordinated, and arranged. This is a straightforward
application of the originality requirement. Facts are never original, so the compilation author can
claim originality, if at all, only in the way the facts are presented. To that end, the statute dictates that
the principal focus should be on whether the selection, coordination, and arrangement are sufficiently
original to merit protection.

Not every selection, coordination, or arrangement will pass muster. This is plain from the statute. It
states that, to merit protection, the facts must be selected, coordinated, or arranged "in such a way"
as to render the work as a whole original. This implies that some "ways" will trigger copyright, but
that others will not. See Patry 57, and n. 76. Otherwise, the phrase "in such a way" is meaningless and
Congress should have defined "compilation" simply as "a work formed by the collection and assembly
of preexisting materials or data that are selected, coordinated, or arranged." That Congress did not
do so is dispositive. In accordance with "the established principle that a court should give effect, if
possible, to every clause and word of a statute," Moskal v. United States, 498 U. S. 103, 109-110 (1990)
(internal quotation marks omitted), we conclude that the statute envisions that there will be some
fact-based works in which the selection, coordination, and arrangement are not sufficiently original
to trigger copyright protection.

184 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
As discussed earlier, however, the originality requirement is not particularly stringent. A compiler
may settle upon a selection or arrangement that others have used; novelty is not required. Originality
requires only that the author make the selection or arrangement independently (i. e., without copying
that selection or arrangement from another work), and that it display some minimal level of creativity.
Presumably, the vast majority of compilations will pass this test, but not all will. There remains a
narrow category of works in which the creative spark is utterly lacking or so trivial as to be virtually
nonexistent. See generally Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U. S. 239, 251 (1903) (referring
to "the narrowest and most obvious limits"). Such works are incapable of sustaining a valid copyright.
Nimmer  2.01[B].

Even if a work qualifies as a copyrightable compilation, it receives only limited protection. This is
the point of  103 of the Act. Section 103 explains that "[t]he subject matter of copyright . . . includes
compilations,"  103(a), but that copyright protects only the author's original contributions--not the
facts or information conveyed:

"The copyright in a compilation . . . extends only to the material contributed by the author of such
work, as distinguished from the preexisting material employed in the work, and does not imply any
exclusive right in the preexisting material."  103(b).

As  103 makes clear, copyright is not a tool by which a compilation author may keep others from
using the facts or data he or she has collected. "The most important point here is one that is commonly
misunderstood today: copyright . . . has no effect one way or the other on the copyright or public
domain status of the preexisting material." H. R. Rep., at 57; S. Rep., at 55. The 1909 Act did not
require, as "sweat of the brow" courts mistakenly assumed, that each subsequent compiler must start
from scratch and is precluded from relying on research undertaken by another. See, e. g., Jeweler's
Circular Publishing Co., 281 F., at 88-89. Rather, the facts contained in existing works may be freely
copied because copyright protects only the elements that owe their origin to the compiler--the
selection, coordination, and arrangement of facts.

In summary, the 1976 revisions to the Copyright Act leave no doubt that originality, not "sweat of
the brow," is the touchstone of copyright protection in directories and other fact-based works. Nor is
there any doubt that the same was true under the 1909 Act. The 1976 revisions were a direct response
to the Copyright Office's concern that many lower courts had misconstrued this basic principle, and
Congress emphasized repeatedly that the purpose of the revisions was to clarify, not change, existing
law. The revisions explain with painstaking clarity that copyright requires originality,  102(a); that
facts are never original,  102(b); that the copyright in a compilation does not extend to the facts it
contains,  103(b); and that a compilation is copyrightable only to the extent that it features an original
selection, coordination, or arrangement,  101.

The 1976 revisions have proven largely successful in steering courts in the right direction. A good
example is Miller v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 650 F. 2d, at 1369-1370: "A copyright in a directory
. . . is properly viewed as resting on the originality of the selection and arrangement of the factual
material, rather than on the industriousness of the efforts to develop the information. Copyright
protection does not extend to the facts themselves, and the mere use of information contained in
a directory without a substantial copying of the format does not constitute infringement" (citation
omitted). Additionally, the Second Circuit, which almost 70 years ago issued the classic formulation
of the "sweat of the brow" doctrine in Jeweler's Circular Publishing Co., has now fully repudiated the
reasoning of that decision. See, e. g., Financial Information, Inc. v. Moody's Investors Service, Inc., 808 F. 2d

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 185
204, 207 (CA2 1986), cert. denied, 484 U. S. 820 (1987); Financial Information, Inc. v. Moody's Investors
Service, Inc., 751 F. 2d 501, 510 (CA2 1984) (Newman, J., concurring); Hoehling v. Universal City Studios,
Inc., 618 F. 2d 972, 979 (CA2 1980). Even those scholars who believe that "industrious collection"
should be rewarded seem to recognize that this is beyond the scope of existing copyright law. See
Denicola 516 ("[T]he very vocabulary of copyright is ill suited to analyzing property rights in works
of nonfiction"); id., at 520-521, 525; Ginsburg 1867, 1870.

III

There is no doubt that Feist took from the white pages of Rural's directory a substantial amount of
factual information. At a minimum, Feist copied the names, towns, and telephone numbers of 1,309
of Rural's subscribers. Not all copying, however, is copyright infringement. To establish infringement,
two elements must be proven: (1) ownership of a valid copyright, and (2) copying of constituent
elements of the work that are original. See Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 548. The first element is not
at issue here; Feist appears to concede that Rural's directory, considered as a whole, is subject to a
valid copyright because it contains some foreword text, as well as original material in its yellow pages
advertisements. See Brief for Petitioner 18; Pet. for Cert. 9.

The question is whether Rural has proved the second element. In other words, did Feist, by taking
1,309 names, towns, and telephone numbers from Rural's white pages, copy anything that was
"original" to Rural? Certainly, the raw data does not satisfy the originality requirement. Rural may
have been the first to discover and report the names, towns, and telephone numbers of its subscribers,
but this data does not "`ow[e] its origin'" to Rural. Burrow-Giles, 111 U. S., at 58. Rather, these bits
of information are uncopyrightable facts; they existed before Rural reported them and would have
continued to exist if Rural had never published a telephone directory. The originality requirement
"rule[s] out protecting . . . names, addresses, and telephone numbers of which the plaintiff by no
stretch of the imagination could be called the author." Patterson & Joyce 776.

Rural essentially concedes the point by referring to the names, towns, and telephone numbers as
"preexisting material." Brief for Respondent 17. Section 103(b) states explicitly that the copyright in a
compilation does not extend to "the preexisting material employed in the work."

The question that remains is whether Rural selected, coordinated, or arranged these uncopyrightable
facts in an original way. As mentioned, originality is not a stringent standard; it does not require that
facts be presented in an innovative or surprising way. It is equally true, however, that the selection
and arrangement of facts cannot be so mechanical or routine as to require no creativity whatsoever.
The standard of originality is low, but it does exist. See Patterson & Joyce 760, n. 144 ("While this
requirement is sometimes characterized as modest, or a low threshold, it is not without effect")
(internal quotation marks omitted; citations omitted). As this Court has explained, the Constitution
mandates some minimal degree of creativity, see The Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U. S., at 94; and an author
who claims infringement must prove "the existence of . . . intellectual production, of thought, and
conception." Burrow-Giles, supra, at 59-60.

The selection, coordination, and arrangement of Rural's white pages do not satisfy the minimum
constitutional standards for copyright protection. As mentioned at the outset, Rural's white pages
are entirely typical. Persons desiring' telephone service in Rural's service area fill out an application
and Rural issues them a telephone number. In preparing its white pages, Rural simply takes the data

186 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
provided by its subscribers and lists it alphabetically by surname. The end product is a garden-variety
white pages directory, devoid of even the slightest trace of creativity.

Rural's selection of listings could not be more obvious: It publishes the most basic
information--name, town, and telephone number--about each person who applies to it for telephone
service. This is "selection" of a sort, but it lacks the modicum of creativity necessary to transform mere
selection into copyrightable expression. Rural expended sufficient effort to make the white pages
directory useful, but insufficient creativity to make it original.

We note in passing that the selection featured in Rural's white pages may also fail the originality
requirement for another reason. Feist points out that Rural did not truly "select" to publish the names
and telephone numbers of its subscribers; rather, it was required to do so by the Kansas Corporation
Commission as part of its monopoly franchise. See 737 F. Supp., at 612. Accordingly, one could
plausibly conclude that this selection was dictated by state law, not by Rural.

Nor can Rural claim originality in its coordination and arrangement of facts. The white pages do
nothing more than list Rural's subscribers in alphabetical order. This arrangement may, technically
speaking, owe its origin to Rural; no one disputes that Rural undertook the task of alphabetizing
the names itself. But there is nothing remotely creative about arranging names alphabetically in a
white pages directory. It is an age-old practice, firmly rooted in tradition and so commonplace that
it has come to be expected as a matter of course. See Brief for Information Industry Association et
al. as Amici Curiae 10 (alphabetical arrangement "is universally observed in directories published by
local exchange telephone companies"). It is not only unoriginal, it is practically inevitable. This time-
honored tradition does not possess the minimal creative spark required by the Copyright Act and the
Constitution.

We conclude that the names, towns, and telephone numbers copied by Feist were not original to
Rural and therefore were not protected by the copyright in Rural's combined white and yellow pages
directory. As a constitutional matter, copyright protects only those constituent elements of a work
that possess more than a de minimis quantum of creativity. Rural's white pages, limited to basic
subscriber information and arranged alphabetically, fall short of the mark. As a statutory matter,
17 U. S. C.  101 does not afford protection from copying to a collection of facts that are selected,
coordinated, and arranged in a way that utterly lacks originality. Given that some works must fail, we
cannot imagine a more likely candidate. Indeed, were we to hold that Rural's white pages pass muster,
it is hard to believe that any collection of facts could fail.

Because Rural's white pages lack the requisite originality, Feist's use of the listings cannot constitute
infringement. This decision should not be construed as demeaning Rural's efforts in compiling its
directory, but rather as making clear that copyright rewards originality, not effort. As this Court noted
more than a century ago, "`great praise may be due to the plaintiffs for their industry and enterprise
in publishing this paper, yet the law does not contemplate their being rewarded in this way.'" Baker v.
Selden, 101 U. S., at 105.

The judgment of the Court of Appeals is

Reversed.

JUSTICE BLACKMUN concurs in the judgment.

                      10. COPYRIGHTABLE SUBJECT MATTER AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF ORIGINALITY AND
                                                                                                                                       FIXATION 187
                       11. THE IDEA/EXPRESSION DICHOTOMY

   Learning Objectives: Unit 11

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the facts and legal holding of Baker v. Selden.
           Explain the idea/expression dichotomy.
           Recall the statutory components of the idea/expression dichotomy.
           Analyze fact patterns in terms of the idea/expression dichotomy.

In the previous class we discussed the idea that copyright is limited to material that possesses the
requisite "originality," and does not extend to facts. Rather, copyrightable subject matter is limited
to creative expression. We will explore another key limit on copyrightable subject matter: the idea/
expression dichotomy. Baker v. Selden, involves copyright over blank forms in a book describing an
accounting system and long predates our modern copyright act. (The most relevant provision of the
Copyright Act of 1831 is provided below.) However, it is frequently referred to as a foundational
authority for the distinction between expression, which can be copyrighted, and ideas, which cannot.
After reading Baker, you should look at the way that this "idea/expression dichotomy" has been
articulated in contemporary statutory law at 17 U.S.C.  102(b). As we discuss this dichotomy, we will
also talk about situations where there is only one or a few ways to express a particular idea.
Copyright Act of 1831

        Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America, in Congress
        assembled, That from and after the passing of this act, any person or persons, being a citizen or
        citizens of the 15 United States or resident therein, who shall be the author or authors of any book
        or books, map, chart, or musical composition, which may be now made or composed, and not
        printed and published, or shall hereafter be made or composed, or who shall invent, design, etch,
        engrave, work, or cause to be engraved, etched, or worked from his own design, any print or
        engraving, and the executors, administrators, or legal assignes of such person or persons, shall have
        the sole right and liberty of printing, reprinting, publishing, and vending such book or books, map,
        chart, musical composition, print, cut, or engraving, in whole or in part, for the term of twenty-
        eight years from the time of recording the title thereof, in the manner hereinafter directed. (The

188 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
full text of the act can be found at: https://www.copyright.gov/history/
Copyright_Enactments_1783-1973.pdf)

                                                                               11. THE IDEA/EXPRESSION DICHOTOMY 189
BAKER V. SELDEN (1879)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Baker, ask yourself the following questions:
           What underlying policies are at play in this opinion? How do those policies manifest themselves in
              the law?
           What is the primary legal issue in this case? How and why does the Court draw the line where it
              does?
           Based on this opinion, how would you determine whether something is or is not copyrightable?
           What challenges do you foresee with the application of the idea/expression dichotomy?

                                                         Baker v. Selden

                                                        101 U.S. 99 (1879)

MR. JUSTICE BRADLEY delivered the opinion of the court.

Charles Selden, the testator of the complainant in this case, in the year 1859 took the requisite
steps for obtaining the copyright of a book, entitled "Selden's Condensed Ledger, or Book-keeping
Simplified," the object of which was to exhibit and explain a peculiar system of book-keeping. In 1860
and 1861, he took the copyright of several other books, containing additions to and improvements
upon the said system. The bill of complaint was filed against the defendant, Baker, for an alleged
infringement of these copyrights. The latter, in his answer, denied that Selden was the author or
designer of the books, and denied the infringement charged, and contends on the argument that the
matter alleged to be infringed is not a lawful subject of copyright.

The parties went into proofs, and the various books of the complainant, as well as those sold and used
by the defendant, were exhibited before the examiner, and witnesses were examined on both sides. A
decree was rendered for the complainant, and the defendant appealed.

The book or series of books of which the complainant claims the copyright consists of an
introductory essay explaining the system of book-keeping referred to, to which are annexed certain
forms or blanks, consisting of ruled lines, and headings, illustrating the system and showing how it is
to be used and carried out in practice. This system effects the same results as book-keeping by double
entry; but, by a peculiar arrangement of columns and headings, presents the entire operation, of a
day, a week, or a month, on a single page, or on two pages facing each other, in an account-book.
The defendant uses a similar plan so far as results are concerned; but makes a different arrangement
of the columns, and uses different headings. If the complainant's testator had the exclusive right to

190 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
the use of the system explained in his book, it would be difficult to contend that the defendant does
not infringe it, notwithstanding the difference in his form of arrangement; but if it be assumed that
the system is open to public use, it seems to be equally difficult to contend that the books made and
sold by the defendant are a violation of the copyright of the complainant's book considered merely
as a book explanatory of the system. Where the truths of a science or the methods of an art are the
common property of the whole world, any author has the right to express the one, or explain and use
the other, in his own way. As an author, Selden explained the system in a particular way. It may be
conceded that Baker makes and uses account-books arranged on substantially the same system; but
the proof fails to show that he has violated the copyright of Selden's book, regarding the latter merely
as an explanatory work; or that he has infringed Selden's right in any way, unless the latter became
entitled to an exclusive right in the system.

The evidence of the complainant is principally directed to the object of showing that Baker uses
the same system as that which is explained and illustrated in Selden's books. It becomes important,
therefore, to determine whether, in obtaining the copyright of his books, he secured the exclusive
right to the use of the system or method of book-keeping which the said books are intended to
illustrate and explain. It is contended that he has secured such exclusive right, because no one can use
the system without using substantially the same ruled lines and headings which he has appended to
his books in illustration of it. In other words, it is contended that the ruled lines and headings, given
to illustrate the system, are a part of the book, and, as such, are secured by the copyright; and that no
one can make or use similar ruled lines and headings, or ruled lines and headings made and arranged
on substantially the same system, without violating the copyright. And this is really the question to
be decided in this case. Stated in another form, the question is, whether the exclusive property in a
system of book-keeping can be claimed, under the law of copyright, by means of a book in which that
system is explained? The complainant's bill, and the case made under it, are based on the hypothesis
that it can be.

It cannot be pretended, and indeed it is not seriously urged, that the ruled lines of the complainant's
account-book can be claimed under any special class of objects, other than books, named in the law
of copyright existing in 1859. The law then in force was that of 1831, and specified only books, maps,
charts, musical compositions, prints, and engravings. An account-book, consisting of ruled lines and
blank columns, cannot be called by any of these names unless by that of a book.

There is no doubt that a work on the subject of book-keeping, though only explanatory of well-
known systems, may be the subject of a copyright; but, then, it is claimed only as a book. Such a
book may be explanatory either of old systems, or of an entirely new system; and, considered as a
book, as the work of an author, conveying information on the subject of book-keeping, and containing
detailed explanations of the art, it may be a very valuable acquisition to the practical knowledge of
the community. But there is a clear distinction between the book, as such, and the art which it is
intended to illustrate. The mere statement of the proposition is so evident, that it requires hardly any
argument to support it. The same distinction may be predicated of every other art as well as that
of book-keeping. A treatise on the composition and use of medicines, be they old or new; on the
construction and use of ploughs, or watches, or churns; or on the mixture and application of colors
for painting or dyeing; or on the mode of drawing lines to produce the effect of perspective, -- would
be the subject of copyright; but no one would contend that the copyright of the treatise would give the
exclusive right to the art or manufacture described therein. The copyright of the book, if not pirated
from other works, would be valid without regard to the novelty, or want of novelty, of its subject-
matter. The novelty of the art or thing described or explained has nothing to do with the validity of the

                                                                                         11. THE IDEA/EXPRESSION DICHOTOMY 191
copyright. To give to the author of the book an exclusive property in the art described therein, when
no examination of its novelty has ever been officially made, would be a surprise and a fraud upon the
public. That is the province of letters-patent, not of copyright. The claim to an invention or discovery
of an art or manufacture must be subjected to the examination of the Patent Office before an exclusive
right therein can be obtained; and it can only be secured by a patent from the government.

The difference between the two things, letters-patent and copyright, may be illustrated by reference
to the subjects just enumerated. Take the case of medicines. Certain mixtures are found to be of
great value in the healing art. If the discoverer writes and publishes a book on the subject (as regular
physicians generally do), he gains no exclusive right to the manufacture and sale of the medicine; he
gives that to the public. If he desires to acquire such exclusive right, he must obtain a patent for the
mixture as a new art, manufacture, or composition of matter. He may copyright his book, if he pleases;
but that only secures to him the exclusive right of printing and publishing his book. So of all other
inventions or discoveries.

The copyright of a book on perspective, no matter how many drawings and illustrations it may
contain, gives no exclusive right to the modes of drawing described, though they may never have
been known or used before. By publishing the book, without getting a patent for the art, the latter
is given to the public. The fact that the art described in the book by illustrations of lines and figures
which are reproduced in practice in the application of the art, makes no difference. Those illustrations
are the mere language employed by the author to convey his ideas more clearly. Had he used words
of description instead of diagrams (which merely stand in the place of words), there could not be
the slightest doubt that others, applying the art to practical use, might lawfully draw the lines and
diagrams which were in the author's mind, and which he thus described by words in his book.

The copyright of a work on mathematical science cannot give to the author an exclusive right to the
methods of operation which he propounds, or to the diagrams which he employs to explain them, so
as to prevent an engineer from using them whenever occasion requires. The very object of publishing
a book on science or the useful arts is to communicate to the world the useful knowledge which it
contains. But this object would be frustrated if the knowledge could not be used without incurring
the guilt of piracy of the book. And where the art it teaches cannot be used without employing the
methods and diagrams used to illustrate the book, or such as are similar to them, such methods and
diagrams are to be considered as necessary incidents to the art, and given therewith to the public;
not given for the purpose of publication in other works explanatory of the art, but for the purpose of
practical application.

Of course, these observations are not intended to apply to ornamental designs, or pictorial
illustrations addressed to the taste. Of these it may be said, that their form is their essence, and their
object, the production of pleasure in their contemplation. This is their final end. They are as much the
product of genius and the result of composition, as are the lines of the poet or the historian's periods.
On the other hand, the teachings of science and the rules and methods of useful art have their final end
in application and use; and this application and use are what the public derive from the publication
of a book which teaches them. But as embodied and taught in a literary composition or book, their
essence consists only in their statement. This alone is what is secured by the copyright. The use by
another of the same methods of statement, whether in words or illustrations, in a book published for
teaching the art, would undoubtedly be an infringement of the copyright.

Recurring to the case before us, we observe that Charles Selden, by his books, explained and described

192 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
a peculiar system of book-keeping, and illustrated his method by means of ruled lines and blank
columns, with proper headings on a page, or on successive pages. Now, whilst no one has a right
to print or publish his book, or any material part thereof, as a book intended to convey instruction
in the art, any person may practise [sic] and use the art itself which he has described and illustrated
therein. The use of the art is a totally different thing from a publication of the book explaining it. The
copyright of a book on book-keeping cannot secure the exclusive right to make, sell, and use account-
books prepared upon the plan set forth in such book. Whether the art might or might not have been
patented, is a question which is not before us. It was not patented, and is open and free to the use of
the public. And, of course, in using the art, the ruled lines and headings of accounts must necessarily
be used as incident to it.

The plausibility of the claim put forward by the complainant in this case arises from a confusion
of ideas produced by the peculiar nature of the art described in the books which have been made
the subject of copyright. In describing the art, the illustrations and diagrams employed happen to
correspond more closely than usual with the actual work performed by the operator who uses the
art. Those illustrations and diagrams consist of ruled lines and headings of accounts; and it is similar
ruled lines and headings of accounts which, in the application of the art, the book-keeper makes with
his pen, or the stationer with his press; whilst in most other cases the diagrams and illustrations can
only be represented in concrete forms of wood, metal, stone, or some other physical embodiment. But
the principle is the same in all. The description of the art in a book, though entitled to the benefit
of copyright, lays no foundation for an exclusive claim to the art itself. The object of the one is
explanation; the object of the other is use. The former may be secured by copyright. The latter can
only be secured, if it can be secured at all, by letters-patent.

The remarks of Mr. Justice Thompson in the Circuit Court in Clayton v. Stone & Hall (2 Paine, 392),
in which copyright was claimed in a daily price-current, are apposite and instructive. He says: "In
determining the true construction to be given to the act of Congress, it is proper to look at the
Constitution of the United States, to aid us in ascertaining the nature of the property intended to be
protected. `Congress shall have power to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing
for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their writings and discoveries.' The
act in question was passed in execution of the power here given, and the object, therefore, was the
promotion of science; and it would certainly be a pretty extraordinary view of the sciences to consider
a daily or weekly publication of the state of the market as falling within any class of them. They are
of a more fixed, permanent, and durable character. The term `science' cannot, with any propriety, be
applied to a work of so fluctuating and fugitive a form as that of a newspaper or price-current, the
subject-matter of which is daily changing, and is of mere temporary use. Although great praise may
be due to the plaintiffs for their industry and enterprise in publishing this paper, yet the law does not
contemplate their being rewarded in this way: it must seek patronage and protection from its utility to
the public, and not as a work of science. The title of the act of Congress is, `for the encouragement of
learning,' and was not intended for the encouragement of mere industry, unconnected with learning
and the sciences... We are, accordingly, of opinion that the paper in question is not a book the
copyright to which can be secured under the act of Congress."

The case of Cobbett v. Woodward (Law Rep. 14 Eq. 407) was a claim to copyright in a catalogue of
furniture which the publisher had on sale in his establishment, illustrated with many drawings of
furniture and decorations. The defendants, being dealers in the same business, published a similar
book, and copied many of the plaintiff's drawings, though it was shown that they had for sale the
articles represented thereby. The court held that these drawings were not subjects of copyright. Lord

                                                                                         11. THE IDEA/EXPRESSION DICHOTOMY 193
Romilly, M.R., said: "This is a mere advertisement for the sale of particular articles which any one
might imitate, and any one might advertise for sale. If a man not being a vendor of any of the articles
in question were to publish a work for the purpose of informing the public of what was the most
convenient species of articles for household furniture, or the most graceful species of decorations
for articles of home furniture, what they ought to cost, and where they might be bought, and were
to illustrate his work with designs of each article he described, -- such a work as this could not be
pirated with impunity, and the attempt to do so would be stopped by the injunction of the Court of
Chancery; yet if it were done with no such object, but solely for the purpose of advertising particular
articles for sale, and promoting the private trade of the publisher by the sale of articles which any
other person might sell as well as the first advertiser, and if in fact it contained little more than an
illustrated inventory of the contents of a warehouse, I know of no law which, while it would not
prevent the second advertiser from selling the same articles, would prevent him from using the same
advertisement; provided he did not in such advertisement by any device suggest that he was selling
the works and designs of the first advertiser."

Another case, that of Page v. Wisden (20 L.T.N.S. 435), which came before Vice-Chancellor Malins in
1869, has some resemblance to the present. There a copyright was claimed in a cricket scoring-sheet,
and the Vice-Chancellor held that it was not a fit subject for copyright, partly because it was not new,
but also because "to say that a particular mode of ruling a book constituted an object for a copyright
is absurd."

These cases, if not precisely in point, come near to the matter in hand, and, in our view, corroborate
the general proposition which we have laid down.

In Drury v. Ewing (1 Bond, 540), which is much relied on by the complainant, a copyright was claimed
in a chart of patterns for cutting dresses and basques for ladies, and coats, jackets, &c., for boys. It
is obvious that such designs could only be printed and published for information, and not for use in
themselves. Their practical use could only be exemplified in cloth on the tailor's board and under his
shears; in other words, by the application of a mechanical operation to the cutting of cloth in certain
patterns and forms. Surely the exclusive right to this practical use was not reserved to the publisher
by his copyright of the chart. Without undertaking to say whether we should or should not concur in
the decision in that case, we think it cannot control the present.

The conclusion to which we have come is, that blank account-books are not the subject of copyright;
and that the mere copyright of Selden's book did not confer upon him the exclusive right to make
and use account-books, ruled and arranged as designated by him and described and illustrated in said
book.

The decree of the Circuit Court must be reversed, and the cause remanded with instructions to
dismiss the complainant's bill; and it is

So ordered.

194 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S.C. 102. SUBJECT MATTER OF COPYRIGHT: IN GENERAL

   17 U.S.C. 102. Subject matter of copyright: In general (1990)

   (a) Copyright protection subsists, in accordance with this title, in original works of authorship fixed in any
   tangible medium of expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be perceived,
   reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. Works of
   authorship include the following categories:
   (1) literary works;
   (2) musical works, including any accompanying words;
   (3) dramatic works, including any accompanying music;
   (4) pantomimes and choreographic works;
   (5) pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works;
   (6) motion pictures and other audiovisual works;
   (7) sound recordings; and
   (8) architectural works.
   (b) In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea, procedure,
   process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is
   described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.

                                                                                         11. THE IDEA/EXPRESSION DICHOTOMY 195
                   12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP
                                         OF COPYRIGHTS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 12

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the statutory components of authorship and ownership.
           Explain what a work-for-hire is and how to analyze whether a something is a work made
              for hire.
           Analyze issues of authorship and ownership in a given factual scenario.
           Recall the consequences of authorship and ownership.

Assuming that a work is subject to copyright, the next question is "who owns the copyright." The
simple answer--the individual who created the work--is intuitive but not always correct. Under 17
U.S.C.  201(a), it is true that the initial owner of a work is its author or authors. However, copyrights
may be, and are, frequently transferred to another, as permitted by  201(d). In addition, under the
"works made for hire" doctrine, codified at 17 U.S.C.  201(b), an employer may be deemed the
"author" of the work under certain circumstances. CCNV v. Reid involves these issues. Before reading
CCNV v. Reid, read 17 U.S.C.  201. You should also be sure to look at the definition of "work made
for hire" in 17 U.S.C.  101.

   17 U.S. Code 201. Ownership of copyright (1978)

   (a) Initial Ownership.-- Copyright in a work protected under this title vests initially in the author or
   authors of the work. The authors of a joint work are coowners of copyright in the work.
   (b) Works Made for Hire.--In the case of a work made for hire, the employer or other person for whom the
   work was prepared is considered the author for purposes of this title, and, unless the parties have expressly
   agreed otherwise in a written instrument signed by them, owns all of the rights comprised in the copyright

   17 U.S.C. 101. Definitions (2010)

   ...

196 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
A "work made for hire" is -
(1) a work prepared by an employee within the scope of his or her employment; or
(2) a work specially ordered or commissioned for use as a contribution to a collective work, as a part of a
motion picture or other audiovisual work, as a translation, as a supplementary work, as a compilation, as an
instructional text, as a test, as answer material for a test, or as an atlas, if the parties expressly agree in a
written instrument signed by them that the work shall be considered a work made for hire. For the purpose
of the foregoing sentence, a "supplementary work" is a work prepared for publication as a secondary
adjunct to a work by another author for the purpose of introducing, concluding, illustrating, explaining,
revising, commenting upon, or assisting in the use of the other work, such as forewords, afterwords,
pictorial illustrations, maps, charts, tables, editorial notes, musical arrangements, answer material for tests,
bibliographies, appendixes, and indexes, and an "instructional text" is a literary, pictorial, or graphic work
prepared for publication and with the purpose of use in systematic instructional activities.

                                                   12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 197
COMMUNITY FOR CREATIVE NON-VIOLENCE V. REID (1989)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read CCNV v. Reid, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the primary legal issue in this case? How and why does the court draw the line
              where it does?
           Based on this opinion, how would you determine who initially owns a copyright in a
              work?
           The term "work" is used multiple times in the statutes and opinions you've read. What
              do you think a "work" is?
           Would the outcome of this case be different if the subject matter was a movie rather than
              a statue?

                                   Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid
                                                       490 U.S. 730 (1989)

JUSTICE MARSHALL delivered the opinion of the Court.
In this case, an artist and the organization that hired him to produce a sculpture contest the ownership
of the copyright in that work. To resolve this dispute, we must construe the "work made for hire"
provisions of the Copyright Act of 1976 (Act or 1976 Act), 17 U. S. C. ㎣ 101 and 201(b), and in
particular, the provision in  101, which defines as a "work made for hire" a "work prepared by an
employee within the scope of his or her employment" (hereinafter  101(1)).
I
Petitioners are the Community for Creative Non-Violence (CCNV), a nonprofit unincorporated
association dedicated to eliminating homelessness in America, and Mitch Snyder, a member and
trustee of CCNV. In the fall of 1985, CCNV decided to participate in the annual Christmastime
Pageant of Peace in Washington, D. C., by sponsoring a display to dramatize the plight of the homeless.
As the District Court recounted:
"Snyder and fellow CCNV members conceived the idea for the nature of the display: a sculpture of
a modern Nativity scene in which, in lieu of the traditional Holy Family, the two adult figures and
the infant would appear as contemporary homeless people huddled on a streetside steam grate. The
family was to be black (most of the homeless in Washington being black); the figures were to be
life-sized, and the steam grate would be positioned atop a platform `pedestal,' or base, within which

198 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
special-effects equipment would be enclosed to emit simulated `steam' through the grid to swirl about
the figures. They also settled upon a title for the work -- `Third World America' -- and a legend for
the pedestal: `and still there is no room at the inn.'" 652 F. Supp. 1453, 1454 (DC 1987).

Snyder made inquiries to locate an artist to produce the sculpture. He was referred to respondent
James Earl Reid, a Baltimore, Maryland, sculptor. In the course of two telephone calls, Reid agreed
to sculpt the three human figures. CCNV agreed to make the steam grate and pedestal for the statue.
Reid proposed that the work be cast in bronze, at a total cost of approximately $100,000 and taking
six to eight months to complete. Snyder rejected that proposal because CCNV did not have sufficient
funds, and because the statue had to be completed by December 12 to be included in the pageant.
Reid then suggested, and Snyder agreed, that the sculpture would be made of a material known as
"Design Cast 62," a synthetic substance that could meet CCNV's monetary and time constraints, could
be tinted to resemble bronze, and could withstand the elements. The parties agreed that the project
would cost no more than $15,000, not including Reid's services, which he offered to donate. The
parties did not sign a written agreement. Neither party mentioned copyright.

After Reid received an advance of $3,000, he made several sketches of figures in various poses. At
Snyder's request, Reid sent CCNV a sketch of a proposed sculpture showing the family in a crechelike
setting: the mother seated, cradling a baby in her lap; the father standing behind her, bending over
her shoulder to touch the baby's foot. Reid testified that Snyder asked for the sketch to use in raising
funds for the sculpture. Snyder testified that it was also for his approval. Reid sought a black family to
serve as a model for the sculpture. Upon Snyder's suggestion, Reid visited a family living at CCNV's
Washington shelter but decided that only their newly born child was a suitable model. While Reid was
in Washington, Snyder took him to see homeless people living on the streets. Snyder pointed out that
they tended to recline on steam grates, rather than sit or stand, in order to warm their bodies. From
that time on, Reid's sketches contained only reclining figures.

Throughout November and the first two weeks of December 1985, Reid worked exclusively on the
statue, assisted at various times by a dozen different people who were paid with funds provided in
installments by CCNV. On a number of occasions, CCNV members visited Reid to check on his
progress and to coordinate CCNV's construction of the base. CCNV rejected Reid's proposal to use
suitcases or shopping bags to hold the family's personal belongings, insisting instead on a shopping
cart. Reid and CCNV members did not discuss copyright ownership on any of these visits.

On December 24, 1985, 12 days after the agreed-upon date, Reid delivered the completed statue to
Washington. There it was joined to the steam grate and pedestal prepared by CCNV and placed on
display near the site of the pageant. Snyder paid Reid the final installment of the $15,000. The statue
remained on display for a month. In late January 1986, CCNV members returned it to Reid's studio
in Baltimore for minor repairs. Several weeks later, Snyder began making plans to take the statue on a
tour of several cities to raise money for the homeless. Reid objected, contending that the Design Cast
62 material was not strong enough to withstand the ambitious itinerary. He urged CCNV to cast the
statue in bronze at a cost of $35,000, or to create a master mold at a cost of $5,000. Snyder declined
to spend more of CCNV's money on the project.

In March 1986, Snyder asked Reid to return the sculpture. Reid refused. He then filed a certificate
of copyright registration for "Third World America" in his name and announced plans to take the
sculpture on a more modest tour than the one CCNV had proposed. Snyder, acting in his capacity as
CCN''s trustee, immediately filed a competing certificate of copyright registration.

                                                      12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 199
  Snyder and CCNV then commenced this action against Reid and his photographer, Ronald Purtee,
  1 seeking return of the sculpture and a determination of copyright ownership. The District Court
  granted a preliminary injunction, ordering the sculpture's return. After a 2-day bench trial, the
  District Court declared that "Third World America" was a "work made for hire" under  101 of the
  Copyright Act and that Snyder, as trustee for CCNV, was the exclusive owner of the copyright in
  the sculpture. 652 F. Supp., at 1457. The court reasoned that Reid had been an "employee" of CCNV
  within the meaning of  101(1) because CCNV was the motivating force in the statue's production.
  Snyder and other CCNV members, the court explained, "conceived the idea of a contemporary
  Nativity scene to contrast with the national celebration of the season," and "directed enough of [Reid's]
  effort to assure that, in the end, he had produced what they, not he, wanted." Id., at 1456.

  The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reversed and remanded, holding that Reid
  owned the copyright because "Third World America" was not a work for hire. 270 U. S. App. D. C.
  26, 35, 846 F. 2d 1485, 1494 (1988). Adopting what it termed the "literal interpretation" of the Act as
  articulated by the Fifth Circuit in Easter Seal Society for Crippled Children & Adults of Louisiana, Inc. v.
  Playboy Enterprises, 815 F. 2d 323, 329 (1987), cert. denied, 485 U. S. 981 (1988), the court read  101
  as creating "a simple dichotomy in fact between employees and independent contractors." 270 U. S.
  App. D. C., at 33, 846 F. 2d, at 1492. Because, under agency law, Reid was an independent contractor,
  the court concluded that the work was not "prepared by an employee" under  101(1). Id., at 35,
  846 F. 2d, at 1494. Nor was the sculpture a "work made for hire" under the second subsection of 
  101 (hereinafter  101(2)): sculpture is not one of the nine categories of works enumerated in that
  subsection, and the parties had not agreed in writing that the sculpture would be a work for hire. Ibid.
  The court suggested that the sculpture nevertheless may have been jointly authored by CCNV and
  Reid, id., at 36, 846 F. 2d, at 1495, and remanded for a determination whether the sculpture is indeed
  a joint work under the Act, id., at 39-40, 846 F. 2d, at 1498-1499.

  We granted certiorari to resolve a conflict among the Courts of Appeals over the proper construction
  of the "work made for hire" provisions of the Act. 2 488 U. S. 940 (1988). We now affirm.

  II

  A

  The Copyright Act of 1976 provides that copyright ownership "vests initially in the author or authors
  of the work." 17 U. S. C.  201(a). As a general rule, the author is the party who actually creates the
  work, that is, the person who translates an idea into a fixed, tangible expression entitled to copyright
  protection.  102. The Act carves out an important exception, however, for "works made for hire." 3
  If the work is for hire, "the employer or other person for whom the work was prepared is considered
  the author" and owns the copyright, unless there is a written agreement to the contrary.  201(b).

1. Purtee was named as a defendant but never appeared or claimed any interest in the statue.

2. Compare Easter Seal Society for Crippled Children & Adults of Louisiana, Inc. v. Playboy Enterprises, 815 F. 2d 323 (CA5 1987),
   (agency law determines who is an employee under  101), cert. denied, 485 U. S. 981 (1988), with Brunswick Beacon, Inc. v.
   Schock-Hopchas Publishing Co., 810 F. 2d 410 (CA4 1987) (supervision and control standard determines who is an employee
   under  101); Evans Newton, Inc. v. Chicago Systems Software, 793 F. 2d 889 (CA7) (same), cert. denied, 479 U. S. 949 (1986);
   and Aldon Accessories Ltd. v. Spiegel, Inc., 738 F. 2d 548 (CA2) (same), cert. denied, 469 U. S. 982 (1984). See also Dumas v.
   Gommerman, 865 F. 2d 1093 (CA9 1989) (a multifactor formal, salaried employee test determines who is an employee under
    101).

3. We use the phrase "work for hire" interchangeably with the more cumbersome statutory phrase "work made for hire."

  200 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Classifying a work as "made for hire" determines not only the initial ownership of its copyright,
  but also the copyright's duration,  302(c), and the owners' renewal rights,  304(a), termination
  rights,  203(a), and right to import certain goods bearing the copyright,  601(b)(1). See 1 M.
  Nimmer & D. Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright  5.03 [A], pp. 5-10 (1988). The contours of the work
  for hire doctrine therefore carry profound significance for freelance creators -- including artists,
  writers, photographers, designers, composers, and computer programmers -- and for the publishing,
  advertising, music, and other industries which commission their works. 4

  Section 101 of the 1976 Act provides that a work is "for hire" under two sets of circumstances:

          "(1) a work prepared by an employee within the scope of his or her employment; or

          (2) a work specially ordered or commissioned for use as a contribution to a collective work, as a
          part of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, as a translation, as a supplementary work, as
          a compilation, as an instructional text, as a test, as answer material for a test, or as an atlas, if the
          parties expressly agree in a written instrument signed by them that the work shall be considered
          a work made for hire." 5

  Petitioners do not claim that the statue satisfies the terms of  101(2). Quite clearly, it does not.
  Sculpture does not fit within any of the nine categories of "specially ordered or commissioned" works
  enumerated in that subsection, and no written agreement between the parties establishes "Third
  World America" as a work for hire.

  The dispositive inquiry in this case therefore is whether "Third World America" is "a work prepared
  by an employee within the scope of his or her employment" under  101(1). The Act does not define
  these terms. In the absence of such guidance, four interpretations have emerged. The first holds that a
  work is prepared by an employee whenever the hiring party 6 retains the right to control the product.
  See Peregrine v. Lauren Corp., 601 F. Supp. 828, 829 (Colo. 1985); Clarkstown v. Reeder, 566 F. Supp. 137,
  142 (SDNY 1983). Petitioners take this view. Brief for Petitioners 15; Tr. of Oral Arg. 12. A second,
  and closely related, view is that a work is prepared by an employee under  101(1) when the hiring
  party has actually wielded control with respect to the creation of a particular work. This approach
  was formulated by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Aldon Accessories Ltd. v. Spiegel, Inc.,
  738 F. 2d 548, cert. denied, 469 U. S. 982 (1984), and adopted by the Fourth Circuit, Brunswick Beacon,
  Inc. v. Schock-Hopchas Publishing Co., 810 F. 2d 410 (1987), the Seventh Circuit, Evans Newton, Inc. v.
  Chicago Systems Software, 793 F. 2d 889, cert. denied, 479 U. S. 949 (1986), and, at times, by petitioners,
  Brief for Petitioners 17. A third view is that the term "employee" within  101(1) carries its common-
  law agency law meaning. This view was endorsed by the Fifth Circuit in Easter Seal Society for Crippled
  Children & Adults of Louisiana, Inc. v. Playboy Enterprises, 815 F. 2d 323 (1987), and by the Court of
  Appeals below. Finally, respondent and numerous amici curiae contend that the term "employee" only
  refers to "formal, salaried" employees. See, e. g., Brief for Respondent 23-24; Brief for Register of

4. As of 1955, approximately 40 percent of all copyright registrations were for works for hire, according to a Copyright
   Office study. See Varmer, Works Made for Hire and On Commission, in Studies Prepared for the Subcommittee on Patents,
   Trademarks, and Copyrights of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Study No. 13, 86th Cong., 2d Sess., 139, n. 49
   (Comm. Print 1960) (hereinafter Varmer, Works Made for Hire). The Copyright Office does not keep more recent statistics
   on the number of work for hire registrations.

5. Section 101 of the Act defines each of the nine categories of "specially ordered or commissioned" works.

6. By "hiring party," we mean to refer to the party who claims ownership of the copyright by virtue of the work for hire
   doctrine.

                                                         12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 201
Copyrights as Amicus Curiae 7. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit recently adopted this view.
See Dumas v. Gommerman, 865 F. 2d 1093 (1989).

The starting point for our interpretation of a statute is always its language. Consumer Product Safety
Comm'n v. GTE Sylvania, Inc., 447 U. S. 102, 108 (1980). The Act nowhere defines the terms "employee"
or "scope of employment." It is, however, well established that "[w]here Congress uses terms that
have accumulated settled meaning under . . . the common law, a court must infer, unless the statute
otherwise dictates, that Congress means to incorporate the established meaning of these terms." NLRB
v. Amax Coal Co., 453 U. S. 322, 329 (1981); see also Perrin v. United States, 444 U. S. 37, 42 (1979).
In the past, when Congress has used the term "employee" without defining it, we have concluded
that Congress intended to describe the conventional master-servant relationship as understood by
common-law agency doctrine. See, e. g., Kelley v. Southern Pacific Co., 419 U. S. 318, 322-323 (1974);
Baker v. Texas & Pacific R. Co., 359 U. S. 227, 228 (1959) (per curiam); Robinson v. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co.,
237 U. S. 84, 94 (1915). Nothing in the text of the work for hire provisions indicates that Congress
used the words "employee" and "employment" to describe anything other than "`the conventional
relation of employer and employe [sic].'" Kelley, supra, at 323, quoting Robinson, supra, at 94; cf. NLRB
v. Hearst Publications, Inc., 322 U. S. 111, 124-132 (1944) (rejecting agency law conception of employee
for purposes of the National Labor Relations Act where structure and context of statute indicated
broader definition). On the contrary, Congress' intent to incorporate the agency law definition is
suggested by  101(1)'s use of the term, "scope of employment," a widely used term of art in agency
law. See Restatement (Second) of Agency  228 (1958) (hereinafter Restatement).

In past cases of statutory interpretation, when we have concluded that Congress intended terms such
as "employee," "employer," and "scope of employment" to be understood in light of agency law, we
have relied on the general common law of agency, rather than on the law of any particular State, to
give meaning to these terms. See, e. g., Kelley, 419 U. S., at 323-324, and n. 5; id., at 332 (Stewart, J.,
concurring in judgment); Ward v. Atlantic Coast Line R. Co., 362 U. S. 396, 400 (1960); Baker, supra,
at 228. This practice reflects the fact that "federal statutes are generally intended to have uniform
nationwide application." Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield, ante, at 43. Establishment of a
federal rule of agency, rather than reliance on state agency law, is particularly appropriate here given
the Act's express objective of creating national, uniform copyright law by broadly pre-empting state
statutory and common-law copyright regulation. See 17 U. S. C.  301(a). We thus agree with the
Court of Appeals that the term "employee" should be understood in light of the general common law
of agency.

In contrast, neither test proposed by petitioners is consistent with the text of the Act. The exclusive
focus of the right to control the product test on the relationship between the hiring party and
the product clashes with the language of  101(1), which focuses on the relationship between the
hired and hiring parties. The right to control the product test also would distort the meaning of
the ensuing subsection,  101(2). Section 101 plainly creates two distinct ways in which a work can
be deemed for hire: one for works prepared by employees, the other for those specially ordered or
commissioned works which fall within one of the nine enumerated categories and are the subject of
a written agreement. The right to control the product test ignores this dichotomy by transforming
into a work for hire under  101(1) any "specially ordered or commissioned" work that is subject to
the supervision and control of the hiring party. Because a party who hires a "specially ordered or
commissioned" work by definition has a right to specify the characteristics of the product desired,
at the time the commission is accepted, and frequently until it is completed, the right to control
the product test would mean that many works that could satisfy  101(2) would already have been

202 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  deemed works for hire under  101(1). Petitioners' interpretation is particularly hard to square with
   101(2)'s enumeration of the nine specific categories of specially ordered or commissioned works
  eligible to be works for hire, e. g., "a contribution to a collective work," "a part of a motion picture,"
  and "answer material for a test." The unifying feature of these works is that they are usually prepared
  at the instance, direction, and risk of a publisher or producer. 7 By their very nature, therefore, these
  types of works would be works by an employee under petitioners' right to control the product test.

  The actual control test, articulated by the Second Circuit in Aldon Accessories, fares only marginally
  better when measured against the language and structure of  101. Under this test, independent
  contractors who are so controlled and supervised in the creation of a particular work are deemed
  "employees" under  101(1). Thus work for hire status under  101(1) depends on a hiring party's
  actual control of, rather than right to control, the product. Aldon Accessories, 738 F. 2d, at 552. Under
  the actual control test, a work for hire could arise under  101(2), but not under  101(1), where a party
  commissions, but does not actually control, a product which falls into one of the nine enumerated
  categories. Nonetheless, we agree with the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit that "[t]here is simply
  no way to milk the `actual control' test of Aldon Accessories from the language of the statute." Easter Seal
  Society, 815 F. 2d, at 334. Section 101 clearly delineates between works prepared by an employee and
  commissioned works. Sound though other distinctions might be as a matter of copyright policy, there
  is no statutory support for an additional dichotomy between commissioned works that are actually
  controlled and supervised by the hiring party and those that are not.

  We therefore conclude that the language and structure of  101 of the Act do not support either
  the right to control the product or the actual control approaches. 8 The structure of  101 indicates
  that a work for hire can arise through one of two mutually exclusive means, one for employees and
  one for independent contractors, and ordinary cannons of statutory interpretation indicate that the
  classification of a particular hired party should be made with reference to agency law.

  This reading of the undefined statutory terms finds considerable support in the Act's legislative
  history. Cf. Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U. S. 303, 315 (1980). The Act, which almost completely
  revised existing copyright law, was the product of two decades of negotiation by representatives of
  creators and copyright-using industries, supervised by the Copyright Office and, to a lesser extent, by
  Congress. See Mills Music, Inc. v. Snyder, 469 U. S. 153, 159 (1985); Litman, Copyright, Compromise,
  and Legislative History, 72 Cornell L. Rev. 857, 862 (1987). Despite the lengthy history of negotiation
  and compromise which ultimately produced the Act, two things remained constant. First, interested

7. See Supplementary Report of the Register of Copyrights on the General Revision of the U. S. Copyright Law: 1965 Revision
   Bill, 89th Cong., 1st Sess., Copyright Law Revision, pt. 6, pp. 66-67 (H. R. Judiciary Comm. Print 1965) (hereinafter
   Supplementary Report); Hardy, Copyright Law's Concept of Employment -- What Congress Really Intended, 35 J. Copr.
   Soc. USA 210, 244-245 (1988).

8. We also reject the suggestion of respondent and amici that the  101(1) term "employee" refers only to formal, salaried
   employees. While there is some support for such a definition in the legislative history, see Varmer, Works Made for Hire
   130; n. 11, infra, the language of  101(1) cannot support it. The Act does not say "formal" or "salaried" employee, but simply
   "employee." Moreover, respondent and those amici who endorse a formal, salaried employee test do not agree upon the
   content of this test. Compare, e. g., Brief for Respondent 37 (hired party who is on payroll is an employee within  101(1)
   with Tr. of Oral Arg. 31 (hired party who receives a salary or commissions regularly is an employee within  101(1)); and
   Brief for Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts, Inc., et al. as Amici Curiae 4 (hired party who receives a salary and is treated as
   an employee for Social Security and tax purposes is an employee within  101(1)). Even the one Court of Appeals to adopt
   what it termed a formal, salaried employee test in fact embraced an approach incorporating numerous factors drawn from
   the agency law definition of employee which we endorse. See Dumas, 865 F. 2d, at 1104.

                                                         12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 203
   parties and Congress at all times viewed works by employees and commissioned works by
   independent contractors as separate entities. Second, in using the term "employee," the parties and
   Congress meant to refer to a hired party in a conventional employment relationship. These factors
   militate in favor of the reading we have found appropriate.

   In 1955, when Congress decided to overhaul copyright law, the existing work for hire provision was 
   62 of the 1909 Copyright Act, 17 U. S. C.  26 (1976 ed.) (1909 Act). It provided that "the word `author'
   shall include an employer in the case of works made for hire." 9 Because the 1909 Act did not define
   "employer" or "works made for hire," the task of shaping these terms fell to the courts. They concluded
   that the work for hire doctrine codified in  62 referred only to works made by employees in the
   regular course of their employment. As for commissioned works, the courts generally presumed that
   the commissioned party had impliedly agreed to convey the copyright, along with the work itself, to
   the hiring party. See, e. g., Shapiro, Bernstein & Co. v. Jerry Vogel Music Co., 221 F. 2d 569, 570, rev'd, 223
   F. 2d 252 (CA2 1955); Yardley v. Houghton Mifflin Co., 108 F. 2d 28, 31 (CA2 1939), cert. denied, 309 U.
   S. 686 (1940). 10

   In 1961, the Copyright Office's first legislative proposal retained the distinction between works by
   employees and works by independent contractors. See Report of the Register of Copyrights on the
   General Revision of the U. S. Copyright Law, 87th Cong., 1st Sess., Copyright Law Revision 86-87 (H.
   R. Judiciary Comm. Print 1961). After numerous meetings with representatives of the affected parties,
   the Copyright Office issued a preliminary draft bill in 1963. Adopting the Register's recommendation,
   it defined "work made for hire" as "a work prepared by an employee within the scope of the duties
   of his employment, but not including a work made on special order or commission." Preliminary
   Draft for Revised U. S. Copyright Law and Discussions and Comments on the Draft, 88th Cong., 2d
   Sess., Copyright Law Revision, Part 3, p. 15, n. 11 (H. R. Judiciary Comm. Print 1964) (hereinafter
   Preliminary Draft).

   In response to objections by book publishers that the preliminary draft bill limited the work for
   hire doctrine to "employees," 11 the 1964 revision bill expanded the scope of the work for hire

 9. The concept of works made for hire first arose in controversies over copyright ownership involving works produced by
    persons whom all parties agreed were employees. See, e. g., Colliery Engineer Co. v. United Correspondence Schools Co., 94 F. 152
    (CC SDNY 1899); Little v. Gould, 15 F. Cas. 612 (No. 8,395) (CC NDNY 1852). This Court first took note of the work for
    hire doctrine in Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U. S. 239, 248 (1903), where we found that an employer owned
    the copyright to advertisements that had been created by an employee in the course of his employment. Bleistein did not,
    however, purport to define "employee."

10. See Varmer, Works Made for Hire 130; Fidlow, The "Works Made for Hire" Doctrine and the Employee/Independent
    Contractor Dichotomy: The Need for Congressional Clarification, 10 Hastings Comm. Ent. L. J. 591, 600-601 (1988).
    Indeed, the Varmer study, which was commissioned by Congress as part of the revision process, itself contained separate
    subsections labeled "Works Made for Hire" and "Works Made on Commission." It nowhere indicated that the two categories
    might overlap or that commissioned works could be made by an employee.

11. See, e. g., Preliminary Draft, at 259 (statement of Horace S. Manges, Joint Committee of the American Book Publishers
    Council and the American Textbook Publishers Institute) ("There would be a necessity of putting people on the payroll
    whom the employers wouldn't want to put on the payroll, and where the employees would prefer to work as independent
    contractors"); id., at 272 (statement of Saul N. Rittenberg, MGM) ("[T]he present draft has given more emphasis to formalism
    than necessary. If I commission a work from a man, ordering a work specially for my purposes, and I pay for it, what
    difference does it make whether I put him under an employment contract or establish an independent contractor
    relationship?"); id., at 260 (statement of John R. Peterson, American Bar Association) ("I don't think there is any valid
    philosophical or economic difference between the situation in which you have a man on a continuing basis of orders which
    justifies placing him on your payroll, and the situation in which you give him a particular order for a particular job").

    204 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   classification to reach, for the first time, commissioned works. The bill's language, proposed initially
   by representatives of the publishing industry, retained the definition of work for hire insofar as it
   referred to "employees," but added a separate clause covering commissioned works, without regard to
   the subject matter, "if the parties so agree in writing." S. 3008, H. R. 11947, H. R. 12354, 88th Cong.,
   2d Sess.,  54 (1964), reproduced in 1964 Revision Bill with Discussions and Comments, 89th Cong.,
   1st Sess., Copyright Law Revision, pt. 5, p. 31 (H. R. Judiciary Comm. Print 1965). Those representing
   authors objected that the added provision would allow publishers to use their superior bargaining
   position to force authors to sign work for hire agreements, thereby relinquishing all copyright rights
   as a condition of getting their books published. See Supplementary Report, at 67.

   In 1965, the competing interests reached a historic compromise, which was embodied in a joint
   memorandum submitted to Congress and the Copyright Office, 12 incorporated into the 1965
   revision bill, and ultimately enacted in the same form and nearly the same terms 11 years later, as
    101 of the 1976 Act. The compromise retained as subsection (1) the language referring to "a work
   prepared by an employee within the scope of his employment." However, in exchange for concessions
   from publishers on provisions relating to the termination of transfer rights, the authors consented to
   a second subsection which classified four categories of commissioned works as works for hire if the
   parties expressly so agreed in writing: works for use "as a contribution to a collective work, as a part
   of a motion picture, as a translation, or as supplementary work." S. 1006, H. R. 4347, H. R. 5680, H. R.
   6835, 89th Cong., 1st Sess.,  101 (1965). The interested parties selected these categories because they
   concluded that these commissioned works, although not prepared by employees and thus not covered
   by the first subsection, nevertheless should be treated as works for hire because they were ordinarily
   prepared "at the instance, direction, and risk of a publisher or producer." Supplementary Report, at
   67. The Supplementary Report emphasized that only the "four special cases specifically mentioned"
   could qualify as works made for hire; "[o]ther works made on special order or commission would not
   come within the definition." Id., at 67-68.

   In 1966, the House Committee on the Judiciary endorsed this compromise in the first legislative
   Report on the revision bills. See H. R. Rep. No. 2237, 89th Cong., 2d Sess., 114, 116 (1966). Retaining
   the distinction between works by employees and commissioned works, the House Committee focused
   instead on "how to draw a statutory line between those works written on special order or commission
   that should be considered as works made for hire, and those that should not." Id., at 115. The House
   Committee added four other enumerated categories of commissioned works that could be treated as
   works for hire: compilations, instructional texts, tests, and atlases. Id., at 116. With the single addition
   of "answer material for a test," the 1976 Act, as enacted, contained the same definition of works made
   for hire as did the 1966 revision bill, and had the same structure and nearly the same terms as the
   1966 bill. 13 Indeed, much of the language of the 1976 House and Senate Reports was borrowed from

12. The parties to the joint memorandum included representatives of the major competing interests involved in the copyright
    revision process: publishers and authors, composers, and lyricists. See Copyright Law Revision: Hearings on H. R. 4347,
    5680, 6831, 6835 before Subcommittee No. 3 of the House Committee on the Judiciary, 89th Cong., 1st Sess., pt. 1, p. 134
    (1965).

13. An attempt to add "photographic or other portrait[s]," S. Rep. No. 94-473, p. 4 (1975), to the list of commissioned works
    eligible for work for hire status failed after the Register of Copyrights objected: "The addition of portraits to the list of
    commissioned works that can be made into `works made for hire' by agreement of the parties is difficult to justify. Artists
    and photographers are among the most vulnerable and poorly protected of all the beneficiaries of the copyright law, and it
    seems clear that, like serious composers and choreographers, they were not intended to be treated as `employees' under the
    carefully negotiated definition in section 101." Second Supplementary Report of the Register of Copyrights on the General
    Revision of the U. S. Copyright Law: 1975 Revision Bill, Chapter XI, pp. 12-13.

                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 205
   the Reports accompanying the earlier drafts. See, e. g., H. R. Rep. No. 94-1476, p. 121 (1976); S. Rep.
   No. 94-473, p. 105 (1975).

   Thus, the legislative history of the Act is significant for several reasons. First, the enactment of the
   1965 compromise with only minor modifications demonstrates that Congress intended to provide
   two mutually exclusive ways for works to acquire work for hire status: one for employees and the
   other for independent contractors. Second, the legislative history underscores the clear import of the
   statutory language: only enumerated categories of commissioned works may be accorded work for
   hire status. The hiring party's right to control the product simply is not determinative. See Note, The
   Creative Commissioner: Commissioned Works Under the Copyright Act of 1976, 62 N. Y. U. L. Rev.
   373, 388 (1987). Indeed, importing a test based on a hiring party's right to control, or actual control
   of, a product would unravel the "`carefully worked out compromise aimed at balancing legitimate
   interests on both sides.'" H. R. Rep. No. 2237, supra, at 114, quoting Supplemental Report, at 66. 14

   We do not find convincing petitioners' contrary interpretation of the history of the Act. They contend
   that Congress, in enacting the Act, meant to incorporate a line of cases decided under the 1909 Act
   holding that an employment relationship exists sufficient to give the hiring party copyright ownership
   whenever that party has the right to control or supervise the artist's work. See, e. g., Siegel v. National
   Periodical Publications, Inc., 508 F. 2d 909, 914 (CA2 1974); Picture Music, Inc. v. Bourne, Inc., 457 F.
   2d 1213, 1216 (CA2), cert. denied, 409 U. S. 997 (1972); Scherr v. Universal Match Corp., 417 F. 2d
   497, 500 (CA2 1969), cert. denied, 397 U. S. 936 (1970); Brattleboro Publishing Co. v. Winmill Publishing
   Corp., 369 F. 2d 565, 567-568 (CA2 1966). In support of this position, petitioners note: "Nowhere
   in the 1976 Act or in the Act's legislative history does Congress state that it intended to jettison the
   control standard or otherwise to reject the pre-Act judicial approach to identifying a work for hire
   employment relationship." Brief for Petitioners 20, citing Aldon Accessories, 738 F. 2d, at 552.

   We are unpersuaded. Ordinarily, "Congress' silence is just that -- silence." Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock,
   480 U. S. 678, 686 (1987). Petitioners' reliance on legislative silence is particularly misplaced here
   because the text and structure of  101 counsel otherwise. See Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U. S. 171,
   178 (1987); Harrison v. PPG Industries, Inc., 446 U. S. 578, 592 (1980). 15 Furthermore, the structure of
   the work for hire provisions was fully developed in 1965, and the text was agreed upon in essentially
   final form by 1966. At that time, however, the courts had applied the work for hire doctrine under
   the 1909 Act exclusively to traditional employees. Indeed, it was not until after the 1965 compromise
   was forged and adopted by Congress 16 that a federal court for the first time applied the work for
   hire doctrine to commissioned works. See, e. g., Brattleboro Publishing Co., supra, at 567-568. Congress
   certainly could not have "jettisoned" a line of cases that had not yet been decided.

   Finally, petitioners' construction of the work for hire provisions would impede Congress' paramount
   goal in revising the 1976 Act of enhancing predictability and certainty of copyright ownership. See

14. Strict adherence to the language and structure of the Act is particularly appropriate where, as here, a statute is the result of
    a series of carefully crafted compromises. See Rodriguez v. Compass Shipping Co., 451 U. S. 596, 617 (1981); United States v.
    Sisson, 399 U. S. 267, 291, 298 (1970).

15. In framing other provisions of the Act, Congress indicated when it intended to incorporate existing case law. See, e. g., H. R.
    Rep. No. 94-1476, p. 121 (1976) ("There is . . . no need for a specific statutory provision concerning the rights and duties of
    the coowners [sic] of a work; court-made law on this point is left undisturbed"); S. Rep. No. 94-473, supra, at 104 (same).

16. Over the course of the copyright revision process, Congress frequently endorsed a negotiated compromise which years later
    in 1976 it formally enacted with only minor revisions. See Mills Music, Inc. v. Snyder, 469 U. S. 153, 160-161 (1985).

    206 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   H. R. Rep. No. 94-1476, supra, at 129. In a "copyright marketplace," the parties negotiate with an
   expectation that one of them will own the copyright in the completed work. Dumas, 865 F. 2d, at
   1104-1105, n. 18. With that expectation, the parties at the outset can settle on relevant contractual
   terms, such as the price for the work and the ownership of reproduction rights.

   To the extent that petitioners endorse an actual control test, 17 CCNV's construction of the work for
   hire provisions prevents such planning. Because that test turns on whether the hiring party has closely
   monitored the production process, the parties would not know until late in the process, if not until the
   work is completed, whether a work will ultimately fall within  101(1). Under petitioners' approach,
   therefore, parties would have to predict in advance whether the hiring party will sufficiently control
   a given work to make it the author. "If they guess incorrectly, their reliance on `work for hire' or an
   assignment may give them a copyright interest that they did not bargain for." Easter Seal Society, 815 F.
   2d, at 333; accord, Dumas, supra, at 1103. This understanding of the work for hire provisions clearly
   thwarts Congress' goal of ensuring predictability through advance planning. Moreover, petitioners'
   interpretation "leaves the door open for hiring parties, who have failed to get a full assignment
   of copyright rights from independent contractors falling outside the subdivision (2) guidelines, to
   unilaterally obtain work-made-for-hire rights years after the work has been completed as long as
   they directed or supervised the work, a standard that is hard not to meet when one is a hiring
   party." Hamilton, Commissioned Works as Works Made for Hire Under the 1976 Copyright Act:
   Misinterpretation and Injustice, 135 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1281, 1304 (1987).

   In sum, we must reject petitioners' argument. Transforming a commissioned work into a work by
   an employee on the basis of the hiring party's right to control, or actual control of, the work is
   inconsistent with the language, structure, and legislative history of the work for hire provisions. To
   determine whether a work is for hire under the Act, a court first should ascertain, using principles of
   general common law of agency, whether the work was prepared by an employee or an independent
   contractor. After making this determination, the court can apply the appropriate subsection of  101.

   B

   We turn, finally, to an application of  101 to Reid's production of "Third World America." In
   determining whether a hired party is an employee under the general common law of agency, we
   consider the hiring party's right to control the manner and means by which the product is
   accomplished. 18 Among the other factors relevant to this inquiry are the skill required;19 the source of
   the instrumentalities and tools;20 the location of the work; 21 the duration of the relationship between

17. Petitioners concede that, as a practical matter, it is often difficult to demonstrate the existence of a right to control without
    evidence of the actual exercise of that right. See Murray v. Gelderman, 566 F. 2d 1307, 1310-1311 (CA5 1978).

18. See, e. g., Hilton Int'l Co. v. NLRB, 690 F. 2d 318, 320 (CA2 1982); NLRB v. Maine Caterers, Inc., 654 F. 2d 131, 133 (CA1 1981),
    cert denied, 455 U. S. 940 (1982); Restatement  220(1).

19. See, e. g., Bartels v. Birmingham, 332 U. S. 126, 132 (1947); Hilton Int'l Co., supra, at 320; NLRB v. A. Duie Pyle, Inc., 606 F. 2d
    379, 382 (CA3 1979); Restatement  220(2)(d).

20. See, e. g., NLRB v. United Ins. Co. of America, 390 U. S. 254, 258 (1968); United States v. Silk, 331 U. S. 704, 717, 718 (1947);
    Dumas, 865 F. 2d, at 1105; Restatement  220(2)(e).

21. See, e. g., United Ins. Co., supra, at 258; Dumas, supra, at 1105; Darden v. Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co., 796 F. 2d 701, 705 (CA4
    1986); Restatement  220(2)(e).

                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 207
   the parties;22 whether the hiring party has the right to assign additional projects to the hired party;23
   the extent of the hired party's discretion over when and how long to work;24 the method of payment;25
   the hired party's role in hiring and paying assistants;26 whether the work is part of the regular business
   of the hiring party;27 whether the hiring party is in business;28 the provision of employee benefits;29
   and the tax treatment of the hired party.30 See Restatement  220(2) (setting forth a nonexhaustive list
   of factors relevant to determining whether a hired party is an employee).31 No one of these factors is
   determinative. See Ward, 362 U. S., at 400; Hilton Int'l Co. v. NLRB, 690 F. 2d 318, 321 (CA2 1982).

   Examining the circumstances of this case in light of these factors, we agree with the Court of Appeals
   that Reid was not an employee of CCNV but an independent contractor. 270 U. S. App. D. C., at
   35, n. 11, 846 F. 2d, at 1494, n. 11. True, CCNV members directed enough of Reid's work to ensure
   that he produced a sculpture that met their specifications. 652 F. Supp., at 1456. But the extent of
   control the hiring party exercises over the details of the product is not dispositive. Indeed, all the
   other circumstances weigh heavily against finding an employment relationship. Reid is a sculptor, a
   skilled occupation. Reid supplied his own tools. He worked in his own studio in Baltimore, making
   daily supervision of his activities from Washington practicably impossible. Reid was retained for less
   than two months, a relatively short period of time. During and after this time, CCNV had no right
   to assign additional projects to Reid. Apart from the deadline for completing the sculpture, Reid had
   absolute freedom to decide when and how long to work. CCNV paid Reid $15,000, a sum dependent
   on "completion of a specific job, a method by which independent contractors are often compensated."
   Holt v. Winpisinger, 258 U. S. App. D. C. 343, 351, 811 F. 2d 1532, 1540 (1987). Reid had total discretion
   in hiring and paying assistants. "Creating sculptures was hardly `regular business' for CCNV." 270 U.
   S. App. D. C., at 35, n. 11, 846 F. 2d, at 1494, n. 11. Indeed, CCNV is not a business at all. Finally,
   CCNV did not pay payroll or Social Security taxes, provide any employee benefits, or contribute to
   unemployment insurance or workers' compensation funds.

   Because Reid was an independent contractor, whether "Third World America" is a work for hire
   depends on whether it satisfies the terms of  101(2). This petitioners concede it cannot do. Thus,
   CCNV is not the author of "Third World America" by virtue of the work for hire provisions of the
   Act. However, as the Court of Appeals made clear, CCNV nevertheless may be a joint author of the

22. See, e. g., United Ins. Co., supra, at 259; Bartels, supra, at 132; Restatement  220(2)(f).

23. See, e. g., Dumas, supra, at 1105.

24. See, e. g., United Ins. Co., supra, at 258; Short v. Central States, Southeast & Southwest Areas Pension Fund, 729 F. 2d 567, 574 (CA8
    1984).

25. See, e. g., Dumas, supra, at 1105; Darden, supra, at 705; Holt v. Winpisinger, 258 U. S. App. D. C. 343, 351, 811 F. 2d 1532, 1540
    (1987); Restatement  220(2)(g).

26. See, e. g., Bartels, supra, at 132; Silk, supra, at 719; Darden, supra, at 705; Short, supra, at 574.

27. See, e. g., United Ins. Co., supra, at 259; Silk, supra, at 718; Dumas, supra, at 1105; Hilton Int'l Co., supra, at 321; Restatement 
    220(2)(h).

28. See, e. g., Restatement  220(2)(j).

29. See, e. g., United Ins. Co., supra, at 259; Dumas, supra, at 1105; Short, supra, at 574

30. See, e. g., Dumas, supra, at 1105.

31. In determining whether a hired party is an employee under the general common law of agency, we have traditionally looked
    for guidance to the Restatement of Agency. See, e. g., Kelley v. Southern Pacific Co., 419 U. S. 318, 323-324, and n. 5 (1974);
    id., at 332 (Stewart, J., concurring in judgment); Ward v. Atlantic Coast Line R. Co., 362 U. S. 396, 400 (1960); Baker v. Texas &
    Pacific R. Co., 359 U. S. 227, 228 (1959).

    208 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   sculpture if, on remand, the District Court determines that CCNV and Reid prepared the work "with
   the intention that their contributions be merged into inseparable or interdependent parts of a unitary
   whole." 17 U. S. C.  101. 32 In that case, CCNV and Reid would be co-owners of the copyright in the
   work. See  201(a).
   For the aforestated reasons, we affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals for the District of
   Columbia Circuit.
   It is so ordered.

32. Neither CCNV nor Reid sought review of the Court of Appeals' remand order. We therefore have no occasion to pass
    judgment on the applicability of the Act's joint authorship provisions to this case.
                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 209
AALMUHAMMED V. LEE (9TH CIR. 2000)

                           Aalmuhammed v. Lee et. al.
                           202 F.3d 1227 (9th Cir. 2000)1

KLEINFELD, Circuit Judge:

This is a copyright case involving a claim of coauthorship of the movie Malcolm X. We reject the "joint
work" claim but remand for further proceedings on a quantum meruit claim.

I. FACTS

In 1991, Warner Brothers contracted with Spike Lee and his production companies to make the
movie Malcolm X, to be based on the book, The Autobiography of Malcolm X. Lee co-wrote the
screenplay, directed, and co-produced the movie, which starred Denzel Washington as Malcolm X.
Washington asked Jefri Aalmuhammed to assist him in his preparation for the starring role because
Aalmuhammed knew a great deal about Malcolm X and Islam. Aalmuhammed, a devout Muslim,
was particularly knowledgeable about the life of Malcolm X, having previously written, directed, and
produced a documentary film about Malcolm X.

Aalmuhammed joined Washington on the movie set. The movie was filmed in the New York
metropolitan area and Egypt. Aalmuhammed presented evidence that his involvement in making the
movie was very extensive. He reviewed the shooting script for Spike Lee and Denzel Washington
and suggested extensive script revisions. Some of his script revisions were included in the released
version of the film; others were filmed but not included in the released version. Most of the revisions
Aalmuhammed made were to ensure the religious and historical accuracy and authenticity of scenes
depicting Malcolm X's religious conversion and pilgrimage to Mecca.

Aalmuhammed submitted evidence that he directed Denzel Washington and other actors while on
the set, created at least two entire scenes with new characters, translated Arabic into English for
subtitles, supplied his own voice for voice-overs, selected the proper prayers and religious practices
for the characters, and edited parts of the movie during post production. Washington testified in his
deposition that Aalmuhammed's contribution to the movie was "great" because he "helped to rewrite,
to make more authentic." Once production ended, Aalmuhammed met with numerous Islamic
organizations to persuade them that the movie was an accurate depiction of Malcolm X's life.

1. The panel unanimously finds this case suitable for decision without oral argument. See Fed. R.App. P. 34(a)(2). This dispute
   was originally submitted and argued on May 5, 1998 as 97-55403. However, on October 29, 1998, that appeal was dismissed
   for want of jurisdiction. The District Court had entered a judgment that stated "The Court may amend or amplify this order
   with a more specific statement of the grounds for its decision." National Distrib. Agency v. Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co., 117
   F.3d 432 (9th Cir.1997), held that the identical language prevented review because "the court left open the possibility that
   the court might change its ruling," so no final judgment was entered. On December 10, 1998, the District Court amended
   its order by removing that one sentence, thus making its order final. The parties then appealed the District Court's decision
   again. On April 19, 1999, this court granted appellant's motion to submit the case without oral argument, to take judicial
   notice of the briefs and excerpts filed in 97-55403, and to allow filing of letter briefs supplementing the earlier briefs.

  210 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Aalmuhammed never had a written contract with Warner Brothers, Lee, or Lee's production
  companies, but he expected Lee to compensate him for his work. He did not intend to work and
  bear his expenses in New York and Egypt gratuitously. Aalmuhammed ultimately received a check
  for $25,000 from Lee, which he cashed, and a check for $100,000 from Washington, which he did not
  cash.

  During the summer before Malcolm X `s November 1992 release, Aalmuhammed asked for a writing
  credit as a co-writer of the film, but was turned down. When the film was released, it credited
  Aalmuhammed only as an "Islamic Technical Consultant," far down the list. In November 1995,
  Aalmuhammed applied for a copyright with the U.S. Copyright Office, claiming he was a co-creator,
  co-writer, and co-director of the movie. The Copyright Office issued him a "Certificate of
  Registration," but advised him in a letter that his "claims conflict with previous registrations" of the
  film.

  On November 17, 1995, Aalmuhammed filed a complaint against Spike Lee, his production
  companies, and Warner Brothers, (collectively "Lee"), as well as Largo International, N.V., and Largo
  Entertainment, Inc. (collectively "Largo"), and Victor Company of Japan and JVC Entertainment,
  Inc. (collectively "Victor"). The suit sought declaratory relief and an accounting under the Copyright
  Act. In addition, the complaint alleged breach of implied contract, quantum meruit, and unjust
  enrichment, and federal (Lanham Act) and state unfair competition claims. The district court
  dismissed some of the claims under Rule 12(b)(6) and the rest on summary judgment.

  II. ANALYSIS

  A. Copyright claim

  Aalmuhammed claimed that the movie Malcolm X was a "joint work" of which he was an author,
  thus making him a co-owner of the copyright.2 He sought a declaratory judgment to that effect, and
  an accounting for profits. He is not claiming copyright merely in what he wrote or contributed, but
  rather in the whole work, as a co-author of a "joint work."3 The district court granted defendants
  summary judgment against Mr. Aalmuhammed's copyright claims. We review de novo.4

  1

  Defendants argue that Aalmuhammed's claim that he is one of the authors of a joint work is barred
  by the applicable statute of limitations. A claim of authorship of a joint work must be brought within
  three years of when it accrues.5 Because creation rather than infringement *1231 is the gravamen of
  an authorship claim, the claim accrues on account of creation, not subsequent infringement, and is
  barred three years from "plain and express repudiation" of authorship.6

  2

2. 17 U.S.C. ㎣ 101, 201(a).
3. Cf. Thomson v. Larson, 147 F.3d 195, 206 (2nd Cir.1998).
4. See Covey v. Hollydale Mobilehome Estates, 116 F.3d 830, 834 (9th Cir.1997), amended by, 125 F.3d 1281 (1997).
5. See 17 U.S.C.  507(b); Zuill v. Shanahan, 80 F.3d 1366, 1371 (9th Cir.1996), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 1090, 117 S.Ct. 763, 136

   L.Ed.2d 710 (1997).
6. Zuill, 80 F.3d at 1371.

                                                         12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 211
   The movie credits plainly and expressly repudiated authorship, by listing Aalmuhammed far below
   the more prominent names, as an "Islamic technical consultant." That repudiation, though, was
   less than three years before the lawsuit was filed. The record leaves open a genuine issue of fact
   as to whether authorship was repudiated before that. Aalmuhammed testified in his deposition
   that he discussed with an executive producer at Warner Brothers his claim to credit as one of the
   screenwriters more than three years before he filed suit. Defendants argue that this discussion was
   an express repudiation that bars the claim. It was not. Aalmuhammed testified that the producer told
   him "there is nothing I can do for you," but "[h]e said we would discuss it further at some point." A
   trier of fact could construe that communication as leaving the question of authorship open for further
   discussion. That leaves a genuine issue of fact as to whether the claim is barred by limitations, so we
   must determine whether there is a genuine issue of fact as to whether Aalmuhammed was an author
   of a "joint work."

   3

   4

   Aalmuhammed argues that he established a genuine issue of fact as to whether he was an author of a
   "joint work," Malcolm X. The Copyright Act does not define "author," but it does define "joint work":

            A "joint work" is a work prepared by two or more authors with the intention that their
            contributions be merged into inseparable or interdependent parts of a unitary whole.7

   "When interpreting a statute, we look first to the language."8 The statutory language establishes that
   for a work to be a "joint work" there must be (1) a copyrightable work, (2) two or more "authors,"
   and (3) the authors must intend their contributions be merged into inseparable or interdependent
   parts of a unitary whole. A "joint work" in this circuit "requires each author to make an independently
   copyrightable contribution" to the disputed work.9 Malcolm X is a copyrightable work, and it is
   undisputed that the movie was intended by everyone involved with it to be a unitary whole. It
   is also undisputed that Aalmuhammed made substantial and valuable contributions to the movie,
   including technical help, such as speaking Arabic to the persons in charge of the mosque in Egypt,
   scholarly and creative help, such as teaching the actors how to pray properly as Muslims, and script
   changes to add verisimilitude to the religious aspects of the movie. Speaking Arabic to persons in
   charge of the mosque, however, does not result in a copyrightable contribution to the motion picture.
   Coaching of actors, to be copyrightable, must be turned into an expression in a form subject to
   copyright.10 The same may be said for many of Aalmuhammed's other activities. Aalmuhammed has,
   however, submitted evidence that he rewrote several specific passages of dialogue that appeared in
   Malcolm X, and that he wrote scenes relating to Malcolm X's Hajj pilgrimage that were enacted in
   the movie. If Aalmuhammed's evidence is accepted, as it must be on summary judgment, these items
   would have been independently copyrightable. Aalmuhammed, therefore, has presented a genuine
   issue of fact as to whether he made a copyrightable contribution. All persons involved intended that
   Aalmuhammed's contributions would be merged into interdependent parts of the movie as a unitary

 7. 17 U.S.C.  101.

 8. Richardson v. United States, 526 U.S. 813, 119 S.Ct. 1707, 1710, 143 L.Ed.2d 985 (1999).

 9. Ashton-Tate Corp. v. Ross, 916 F.2d 516, 521 (9th Cir.1990).

10. See Ashton-Tate Corp. v. Ross, 916 F.2d 516, 521 (9th Cir.1990).

    212 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   whole. Aalmuhammed maintains that he has shown a genuine issue of fact for each element of a "joint
   work."

   5

   But there is another element to a "joint work." A "joint work" includes "two or more authors."11
   Aalmuhammed established that he contributed substantially to the film, but not that he was one of its
   "authors." We hold that authorship is required under the statutory definition of a joint work, and that
   authorship is not the same thing as making a valuable and copyrightable contribution. We recognize
   that a contributor of an expression may be deemed to be the "author" of that expression for purposes
   of determining whether it is independently copyrightable. The issue we deal with is a different and
   larger one: is the contributor an author of the joint work within the meaning of 17 U.S.C.  101.

   By statutory definition, a "joint work" requires "two or more authors."12 The word "author" is taken
   from the traditional activity of one person sitting at a desk with a pen and writing something for
   publication. It is relatively easy to apply the word "author" to a novel. It is also easy to apply the
   word to two people who work together in a fairly traditional pen-and-ink way, like, perhaps, Gilbert
   and Sullivan. In the song, "I Am the Very Model of a Modern Major General," Gilbert's words and
   Sullivan's tune are inseparable, and anyone who has heard the song knows that it owes its existence to
   both men, Sir William Gilbert and Sir Arthur Sullivan, as its creative originator. But as the number of
   contributors grows and the work itself becomes less the product of one or two individuals who create
   it without much help, the word is harder to apply.

   Who, in the absence of contract, can be considered an author of a movie? The word is traditionally
   used to mean the originator or the person who causes something to come into being, or even
   the first cause, as when Chaucer refers to the "Author of Nature." For a movie, that might be the
   producer who raises the money. Eisenstein thought the author of a movie was the editor. The "auteur"
   theory suggests that it might be the director, at least if the director is able to impose his artistic
   judgments on the film. Traditionally, by analogy to books, the author was regarded as the person who
   writes the screenplay, but often a movie reflects the work of many screenwriters. Grenier suggests
   that the person with creative control tends to be the person in whose name the money is raised,
   perhaps a star, perhaps the director, perhaps the producer, with control gravitating to the star as
   the financial investment in scenes already shot grows.13 Where the visual aspect of the movie is
   especially important, the chief cinematographer might be regarded as the author. And for, say, a
   Disney animated movie like "The Jungle Book," it might perhaps be the animators and the composers
   of the music.

   The Supreme Court dealt with the problem of defining "author" in new media in Burrow-Giles
   Lithographic Co. v. Sarony.14The question there was, who is the author of a photograph: the person
   who sets it up and snaps the shutter, or the person who makes the lithograph from it. Oscar Wilde,
   the person whose picture was at issue, doubtless offered some creative advice as well. The Court
   decided that the photographer was the author, quoting various English authorities: "the person who
   has superintended the arrangement, who has actually formed the picture by putting the persons in

11. 17 U.S.C.  101.

12. 17 U.S.C.  101.

13. See Richard Grenier, Capturing the Culture, 206-07 (1991).

14. Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53, 61, 4 S.Ct. 279, 28 L.Ed. 349 (1884).

                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 213
   position, and arranging the place where the people are to be--the man who is the effective cause of
   that"; " `author' involves originating, making, producing, as the inventive or master mind, the thing
   which is to be protected"; "the man who really represents, creates, or gives effect to the idea, fancy,
   or imagination."15 The Court said that an "author," in the sense that the Founding Fathers used the
   term in the Constitution,16 was " `he to whom anything owes its origin; originator; maker; one who
   completes a work of science or literature.' "17

   Answering a different question, what is a copyrightable "work," as opposed to who is the "author,"
   the Supreme Court held in Feist Publications that "some minimal level of creativity" or "originality"
   suffices.18 But that measure of a "work" would be too broad and indeterminate to be useful if applied
   to determine who are "authors" of a movie. So many people might qualify as an "author" if the
   question were limited to whether they made a substantial creative contribution that that test would
   not distinguish one from another. Everyone from the producer and director to casting director,
   costumer, hairstylist, and "best boy" gets listed in the movie credits because all of their creative
   contributions really do matter. It is striking in Malcolm X how much the person who controlled the
   hue of the lighting contributed, yet no one would use the word "author" to denote that individual's
   relationship to the movie. A creative contribution does not suffice to establish authorship of the
   movie.

   Burrow-Giles, in defining "author," requires more than a minimal creative or original contribution to
   the work.19 Burrow-Giles is still good law, and was recently reaffirmed in Feist Publications.20Feist
   Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., Inc., 499 U.S. 340, 346, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d
   358 (1991). Burrow-Giles and Feist Publications answer two distinct questions; who is an author, and
   what is a copyrightable work21.Burrow-Giles defines author as the person to whom the work owes
   its origin and who superintended the whole work, the "master mind.22"In a movie this definition,
   in the absence of a contract to the contrary, would generally limit authorship to someone at the
   top of the screen credits, sometimes the producer, sometimes the director, possibly the star, or the
   screenwriter--someone who has artistic control. After all, in Burrow-Giles the lithographer made a
   substantial copyrightable creative contribution, and so did the person who posed, Oscar Wilde, but
   the Court held that the photographer was the author.23

   The Second and Seventh Circuits have likewise concluded that contribution of independently
   copyrightable material to a work intended to be an inseparable whole will not suffice to establish
   authorship of a joint work24.Although the Second and Seventh Circuits do not base their decisions

15. Id. at 61, 4 S.Ct. 279 (quoting Nottage v. Jackson, 11 Q.B.D. 627 (1883)).

16. U.S. Const. Art. 1,  8, cl. 8.

17. Burrow-Giles, 111 U.S. at 58, 4 S.Ct. 279 (quoting Worcester).

18. Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., Inc., 499 U.S. 340, 345, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d 358 (1991).

19. Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53, 58, 4 S.Ct. 279, 28 L.Ed. 349 (1883).

20. 20

21. See Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53, 4 S.Ct. 279, 28 L.Ed. 349 (1884); Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural
    Telephone Service Co., Inc., 499 U.S. 340, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d 358 (1991).

22. Burrow-Giles, 111 U.S. at 61, 4 S.Ct. 279 (quoting Nottage v. Jackson, 11 Q.B.D. 627 (1883)).

23. Id. at 61, 4 S.Ct. 27

24. Thomson v. Larson, 147 F.3d 195, (2nd Cir.1998); Erickson v. Trinity Theatre, Inc., 13 F.3d 1061 (7th Cir.1994); Childress v.
    Taylor, 945 F.2d 500 (2d Cir.1991).

    214 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   on the word "authors" in the statute, *1234 the practical results they reach are consistent with ours.
   These circuits have held that a person claiming to be an author of a joint work must prove that both
   parties intended each other to be joint authors.25 In determining whether the parties have the intent
   to be joint authors, the Second Circuit looks at who has decision making authority, how the parties
   bill themselves, and other evidence.26

   In Thomson v. Larson, an off-Broadway playwright had created a modern version of La Boheme,
   and had been adamant throughout its creation on being the sole author27.He hired a drama professor
   for "dramaturgical assistance and research," agreeing to credit her as "dramaturg" but not author, but
   saying nothing about "joint work" or copyright.28 The playwright tragically died immediately after the
   final dress rehearsal, just before his play became the tremendous Broadway hit, Rent29.The dramaturg
   then sued his estate for a declaratory judgment that she was an author of Rent as a "joint work," and
   for an accounting30.The Second Circuit noted that the dramaturg had no decision making authority,
   had neither sought nor was billed as a co-author, and that the defendant entered into contracts as the
   sole author.31 On this reasoning, the Second Circuit held that there was no intent to be joint authors
   by the putative parties and therefore it was not a joint work.32

   6

   Considering Burrow-Giles, the recent cases on joint works33 (especially the thoughtful opinion in
   Thomson v. Larson34 ), and the Gilbert and Sullivan example, several factors suggest themselves as
   among the criteria for joint authorship, in the absence of contract. First, an author "superintend[s]"35
   the work by exercising control.36 This will likely be a person "who has actually formed the picture
   by putting the persons in position, and arranging the place where the people are to be-the man who
   is the effective cause of that,"37 or "the inventive or master mind" who "creates, or gives effect to the
   idea."38 Second, putative coauthors make objective manifestations of a shared intent to be coauthors,
   as by denoting the authorship of The Pirates of Penzance as "Gilbert and Sullivan."39 We say objective
   manifestations because, were the mutual intent to be determined by subjective intent, it could become
   an instrument of fraud, were one coauthor to hide from the other an intention to take sole credit for

25. Thomson, 147 F.3d at 202-05.
26. Id.
27. Id. at 197.
28. Id.
29. Id. at 198.
30. Id.
31. Id. at 202-04.
32. Id. at 202-24.
33. See Thomson v. Larson, 147 F.3d 195, (2nd Cir.1998); Erickson v. Trinity Theatre, Inc., 13 F.3d 1061 (7th Cir.1994);

    Childress v. Taylor, 945 F.2d 500 (2nd Cir.1991).
34. Thomson v. Larson, 147 F.3d 195 (2nd Cir.1998).
35. Burrow-Giles v. Sarony, 111 U.S. at 61, 4 S.Ct. 279 (quoting Nottage v. Jackson, 11 Q.B. div. 627 (1883)).
36. Thomson, 147 F.3d at 202.
37. Burrow-Giles v. Sarony, 111 U.S. at 61, 4 S.Ct. 279 (quoting Nottage v. Jackson, 11 Q.B. Div. 627 (1883)).
38. Id.
39. Cf. Thomson v. Larson, 147 F.3d 195, 202 (2nd Cir.1998).

                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 215
   the work. Third, the audience appeal of the work turns on both contributions and "the share of each
   in its success cannot be appraised."40 Control in many cases will be the most important factor.

   The best objective manifestation of a shared intent, of course, is a contract saying that the parties
   intend to be or not to be co-authors. In the absence of a contract, the inquiry must of necessity focus
   on the facts. The factors articulated in this decision and the Second and Seventh Circuit decisions
   cannot be reduced to a rigid formula, because the creative relationships to which they apply vary too
   much. Different people do creative work together in different ways, and even among the same people
   working together the relationship may change over time as the work proceeds.

   Aalmuhammed did not at any time have superintendence of the work.41 Warner Brothers and Spike
   Lee controlled it. Aalmuhammed was not the person "who has actually formed the picture by putting
   the persons in position, and arranging the place...."42 Spike Lee was, so far as we can tell from the
   record. Aalmuhammed, like Larson's dramaturg, could make extremely helpful recommendations, but
   Spike Lee was not bound to accept any of them, and the work would not benefit in the slightest unless
   Spike Lee chose to accept them. Aalmuhammed lacked control over the work, and absence of control
   is strong evidence of the absence of co-authorship.

   Also, neither Aalmuhammed, nor Spike Lee, nor Warner Brothers, made any objective manifestations
   of an intent to be coauthors. Warner Brothers required Spike Lee to sign a "work for hire" agreement,
   so that even Lee would not be a co-author and co-owner with Warner Brothers. It would be illogical
   to conclude that Warner Brothers, while not wanting to permit Lee to own the copyright, intended
   to share ownership with individuals like Aalmuhammed who worked under Lee's control, especially
   ones who at the time had made known no claim to the role of co-author. No one, including
   Aalmuhammed, made any indication to anyone prior to litigation that Aalmuhammed was intended
   to be a co-author and co-owner.

   Aalmuhammed offered no evidence that he was the "inventive or master mind" of the movie. He was
   the author of another less widely known documentary about Malcolm X, but was not the master of
   this one. What Aalmuhammed's evidence showed, and all it showed, was that, subject to Spike Lee's
   authority to accept them, he made very valuable contributions to the movie. That is not enough for
   co-authorship of a joint work.

   The Constitution establishes the social policy that our construction of the statutory term "authors"
   carries out. The Founding Fathers gave Congress the power to give authors copyrights in order "[t]o
   promote the progress of Science and useful arts."43 Progress would be retarded rather than promoted,
   if an author could not consult with others and adopt their useful suggestions without sacrificing sole
   ownership of the work. Too open a definition of author would compel authors to insulate themselves
   and maintain ignorance of the contributions others might make. Spike Lee could not consult a
   scholarly Muslim to make a movie about a religious conversion to Islam, and the arts would be the
   poorer for that.

40. Edward B. Marks Music Corp. v. Jerry Vogel Music Co., Inc., 140 F.2d 266, 267 (2nd Cir.1944) (Hand, J.) modified by, 140
    F.2d 268 (1944).

41. See Burrow-Giles v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53, 61, 4 S.Ct. 279, 28 L.Ed. 349 (1883).

42. Id.

43. U.S. Const. Art. 1,  8, cl. 8.

    216 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   The broader construction that Aalmuhammed proposes would extend joint authorship to many
   "overreaching contributors,"44 like the dramaturg in Thomson, and deny sole authors "exclusive
   authorship status simply because another person render[ed] some form of assistance."45 Claimjumping
   by research assistants, editors, and former spouses, lovers and friends would endanger authors who
   talked with people about what they were doing, if creative copyrightable contribution were all that
   authorship required.

   7

   Aalmuhammed also argues that issuance of a copyright registration certificate to him establishes a
   prima facie case for ownership. A prima facie case could not in any event prevent summary judgment
   in the presence of all the evidence rebutting his claim of ownership. "The presumptive validity of
   the certificate may be rebutted and defeated on summary judgment."46 The Copyright Office stated
   in its response to Aalmuhammed's application for copyright (during the pendency of this litigation)
   that his claims "conflict with previous registration claims," and therefore the Copyright Office had
   "several questions" for him. One of the questions dealt with the "intent" of "other authors," i.e., Warner
   Brothers. The evidence discussed above establishes without genuine issue that the answers to these
   questions were that Warner Brothers did not intend to share ownership with Aalmuhammed.

   Because the record before the district court established no genuine issue of fact as to Aalmuhammed's
   co-authorship of Malcolm X as a joint work, the district court correctly granted summary judgment
   dismissing his claims for declaratory judgment and an accounting resting on co-authorship.

   B. Quantum meruit

   8

   Aalmuhammed alleged in his complaint that defendants accepted his services, knowing that they were
   not being provided gratuitously, yet paid him neither the fair value of his services nor even his full
   expenses. He wrote script material, particularly for the important Islamic religious scenes, arranged
   with the Egyptians in charge of the mosque for the movie to be shot inside (Aalmuhammed is a
   Muslim and was the only Arabic-speaking person in the production crew), taught the actors how to
   pray as Muslims and directed the prayer scenes, and talked to Islamic authorities after the movie was
   made to assure their support when it was exhibited. These services were very important. The movie
   would be a dark tale of hate, but for the redemptive, uplifting Islamic religious scenes.

   All the services were performed in New York and in Egypt (where the Hajj scenes were shot).
   Aalmuhammed's fifth, sixth and seventh claims articulated this claim variously as quasicontract,
   quantum meruit, and unjust enrichment. These claims are different from Aalmuhammed's claim
   to authorship of a joint work. Even though he was not an author, it is undisputed that he made
   a substantial contribution to the film. It may be that the producer or director, seeing that
   Aalmuhammed was performing valuable and substantial services and expending substantial amounts
   for travel and lodging, in the apparent expectation of reimbursement, had a duty to sign him up as an
   employee or independent contractor, obtain his acknowledgment that he was working gratuitously

44. Thomson, 147 F.3d at 200 (internal quotations omitted).
45. Id. at 202 (citing Childress v. Taylor, 945 F.2d 500, 504 (1991)).
46. S.O.S., Inc. v. Payday, Inc., 886 F.2d 1081, 1086 (9th Cir.1989).

                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 217
   or perhaps for Denzel Washington, or eject him from the set.47 We need not decide that, because the
   question on review is limited to which state's statute of limitations applies.

   The defendants moved to dismiss these claims for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6), on the
   ground that the claims were barred by California's two year statute of limitations. Aalmuhammed
   argued that New York's six year statute of limitations applied. The district court granted the motion
   to dismiss, applying California's shorter statute.

   The parties agree that the district court correctly used law of the forum, California, as the source of
   its rule for choice of law. The applicable rule required, in this case, that "the court must apply the law
   of the state whose interest would be more impaired if its law were not applied."48

   Defendants argue that only California had an interest in the application of its statute of limitations,
   not New York. Their theory is that the defendant corporations have their principal places of business
   in California, Aalmuhammed resided in neither state (he lives in Florida, though he spent the months
   of shooting time in New York and Egypt), and Aalmuhammed filed his lawsuit in California.

   The defense argument is unpersuasive. The question is which state's interest would suffer more by
   the application of the other's law.49 The strength of the interest is also a factor, however.50 California's
   interest in protecting its residents from stale claims arising from work done outside the state is a
   weak one: "[t]he residence of the parties is not the determining factor in a choice of law analysis."51
   New York's interest in governing the remedies available to parties working in New York is far more
   significant.52 New York's connection with Aalmuhammed's claim is considerably more substantial,
   immediate and concrete than California's. We conclude that New York would suffer more damage to
   its interest if California law were applied than would California if New York law were applied.

   Because New York has the stronger interest and would suffer more damage than California if its
   law were not applied, New York's six year statute of limitations governs. The claims were brought
   within six years of when they accrued. We therefore vacate the dismissal of Aalmuhammed's implied
   contract, quantum meruit, and unjust enrichment claims and remand them for further proceedings.

   C. Unfair competition

   9

   Aalmuhammed claimed that defendants passed off his scriptwriting, directing and other work as

47. See 2 George E. Palmer, Law of Restitution  10.11, at 463 (1978) ( "When the plaintiff voluntarily submits an idea to the
    defendant which the defendant uses to his economic advantage, without any express agreement to pay the plaintiff for such
    use, ... the plaintiff will be able [in some circumstances] to recover the reasonable value of the use of the idea in a contract
    action.").

48. Waggoner v. Snow, Becker, Kroll, Klaris & Krauss, 991 F.2d 1501, 1507 (9th Cir.1993) (citing Ledesma v. Jack Stewart
    Produce, Inc., 816 F.2d 482, 484 (9th Cir.1987)).

49. Waggoner v. Snow, Becker, Kroll, Klaris & Krauss, 991 F.2d 1501, 1507 (9th Cir.1993) (citing Ledesma v. Jack Stewart
    Produce, Inc., 816 F.2d 482, 484 (9th Cir.1987)).

50. Id.
51. Id.
52. See Rosenthal v. Fonda, 862 F.2d 1398, 1403 (9th Cir.1988).

    218 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   that of other persons, in violation of the Lanham Act53 and the California statute prohibiting unfair
   competition.54 The dismissal was under Rule 12(b)(6), for failure to state a claim upon which relief can
   be granted, so we review de novo,55 on the basis of allegations in the complaint.56

   10

   We have held that, at least in some circumstances, failure to give appropriate credit for a film is
   "reverse palming off" actionable under the Lanham Act.57 And we have held that "actions pursuant
   to California Business and Professions Code  17200 are substantially congruent to claims made
   under the Lanham Act."58 Defendants argue that not enough of Aalmuhammed's proposed script was
   used verbatim to amount to a violation. But this argument goes to the evidence, not the complaint,
   so it cannot sustain the 12(b)(6) dismissal. The complaint alleged that Aalmuhammed "substantially
   rewrote and expanded the dialogue for various entire and otherwise alleged extensive and substantial
   use of his work in the final movie. We need not determine whether Aalmuhammed established a
   genuine issue of fact regarding unfair competition, because the claim never got as far as summary
   judgment in the district court. We reverse the dismissal of these two claims.

   D. Conduct abroad

   11

   The district court dismissed Aalmuhammed's claims against the Largo defendants under Rule 12(b)(6)
   for failure to state a claim. The dismissal was based on our decision in Subafilms, that acts of
   copyright infringement that occur wholly outside of the United States are not actionable under the
   U.S. Copyright Act.59

   The complaint does not say whether the Largo defendants' conduct occurred outside the United
   States. Defendants argue that it does, by referring to them as "the film's foreign distributors." But it
   also says that their principal place of business is in California. These allegations leave room for proof
   that the conduct that the Largo defendants engaged in took place within California, even though it
   had consequences abroad. We cannot tell from the complaint whether foreign distributors do their
   work in foreign countries, or do it by fax, phone, and email from California. We therefore reverse the
   dismissal based on extraterritoriality of the claims against the Largo defendants.

   AFFIRMED in part, REVERSED and REMANDED in part. Each party to bear its own costs.

53. 15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1117, 1125.
54. Cal. Bus. & Prof.Code  17203.
55. See Cohen v. Stratosphere Corp., 115 F.3d 695, 700 (9th Cir.1997).
56. See Campanelli v. Bockrath, 100 F.3d 1476, 1479 (9th Cir.1996).
57. Smith v. Montoro, 648 F.2d 602, 607 (9th Cir.1981); See also Lamothe v. Atlantic Recording Corp., 847 F.2d 1403, 1406-07

    (9th Cir.1988).
58. Cleary v. News Corp., 30 F.3d 1255, 1262-63 (9th Cir.1994).
59. See Subafilms, Ltd. v. MGM-Pathe Communications, 24 F.3d 1088, 1095-96 (9th Cir.1994) (en banc)

                                                           12. TERMS & FORMALITIES AND OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHTS 219
                          13. INTRODUCTION TO COPYRIGHT
                                          INFRINGEMENT

   Learning Objectives: Unit 13

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the statutory basis of copyright infringement.
           Recall the elements of copyright infringement.
           Explain the ways that copying can be established.
           Explain the way that improper appropriation is analyzed.
           Analyze copyright infringement when there is nonliteral copying.

To this point, we have studied questions relating to the existence and ownership of copyright. Now,
we will turn to the right itself--in particular, the legal rights that it conveys to a copyright owner.
The basic set of rights is set out in 17 U.S.C.  106. We will primarily study the first right, the
exclusive right to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords. Analyzing copyright
infringement is, at heart, a difficult question--and is made more so by the proliferation of human-
created works of creative expression, each of which is both a copyrighted work in itself and subject
to copyrights in other works. The complexity of these interrelationships is, in short, staggering.
Mostly, though, copyright infringement disputes tend to focus on economically significant activities.
Although coming from a time that predates much of the proliferation of copyrighted works, Nichols
v. Universal Pictures is frequently referred to for its description of an analytical framework to use for
dealing with a common problem that arises in claims of copyright infringement: what to do about
nonliteral copying? Nonliteral copying is copying that does not simply reproduce the work verbatim,
such as on a photocopier, but instead copies only elements or pieces of the protected work. Nichols
addresses two fundamental questions: (1) Can such conduct be considered copyright infringement,
and (2) if so, at what point does nonliteral copying from a work cease to be copyright infringement?

   17 U.S.C. 106. Exclusive rights in copyrighted works (2002)

   Subject to sections 107 through 122, the owner of copyright under this title has the exclusive rights to do
   and to authorize any of the following:
   1) to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;

220 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
2) to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work;
3) to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public by sale or other transfer of
ownership, or by rental, lease, or lending;
4) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and motion pictures
and other audiovisual works, to perform the copyrighted work publicly;
5) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and pictorial, graphic,
or sculptural works, including the individual images of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, to
display the copyrighted work publicly; and
6) in the case of sound recordings, to perform the copyrighted work publicly by means of a digital audio
transmission.

                                                                   13. INTRODUCTION TO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT 221
NICHOLS V. UNIVERSAL PICTURES (2ND CIR. 1930)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Nichols v. Universal Pictures, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the primary legal issue in this case? What is the court's reasoning in resolving that issue?
           What underlying policies are at issue in this opinion? How do they manifest in the analytical
              framework adopted by Judge Hand?
           Based on this opinion, articulate a legal framework for analyzing a violation of the right of
              reproduction in the abstract.
           Using your knowledge of copyright infringement so far, how would you analyze infringement of
              Ronnie Mack's He's So Fine (sung by the Chiffons) by George Harrison's My Sweet Lord? (You can
              find numerous examples of the comparison online.)

                                                Nichols v. Universal Pictures

                                                  45 F.2d 119 (2nd Cir. 1930)

L. HAND, Circuit Judge.

The plaintiff is the author of a play, "Abie's Irish Rose," which it may be assumed was properly
copyrighted under section five, subdivision (d), of the Copyright Act, 17 USCA  5(d). The defendant
produced publicly a motion picture play, "The Cohens and The Kellys," which the plaintiff alleges was
taken from it. As we think the defendant's play too unlike the plaintiff's to be an infringement, we
may assume, arguendo, that in some details the defendant used the plaintiff's play, as will subsequently
appear, though we do not so decide. It therefore becomes necessary to give an outline of the two plays.

"Abie's Irish Rose" presents a Jewish family living in prosperous circumstances in New York. The
father, a widower, is in business as a merchant, in which his son and only child helps him. The boy
has philandered with young women, who to his father's great disgust have always been Gentiles, for
he is obsessed with a passion that his daughter-in-law shall be an orthodox Jewess. When the play
opens the son, who has been courting a young Irish Catholic girl, has already married her secretly
before a Protestant minister, and is concerned to soften the blow for his father, by securing a favorable
impression of his bride, while concealing her faith and race. To accomplish this he introduces her to
his father at his home as a Jewess, and lets it appear that he is interested in her, though he conceals
the marriage. The girl somewhat reluctantly falls in with the plan; the father takes the bait, becomes
infatuated with the girl, concludes that they must marry, and assumes that of course they will, if he so
decides. He calls in a rabbi, and prepares for the wedding according to the Jewish rite.

222 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Meanwhile the girl's father, also a widower, who lives in California, and is as intense in his own
religious antagonism as the Jew, has been called to New York, supposing that his daughter is to marry
an Irishman and a Catholic. Accompanied by a priest, he arrives at the house at the moment when
the marriage is being celebrated, but too late to prevent it, and the two fathers, each infuriated by
the proposed union of his child to a heretic, fall into unseemly and grotesque antics. The priest and
the rabbi become friendly, exchange trite sentiments about religion, and agree that the match is good.
Apparently out of abundant caution, the priest celebrates the marriage for a third time, while the girl's
father is inveigled away. The second act closes with each father, still outraged, seeking to find some
way by which the union, thus trebly insured, may be dissolved.

The last act takes place about a year later, the young couple having meanwhile been abjured by each
father, and left to their own resources. They have had twins, a boy and a girl, but their fathers know
no more than that a child has been born. At Christmas each, led by his craving to see his grandchild,
goes separately to the young folks' home, where they encounter each other, each laden with gifts, one
for a boy, the other for a girl. After some slapstick comedy, depending upon the insistence of each that
he is right about the sex of the grandchild, they become reconciled when they learn the truth, and that
each child is to bear the given name of a grandparent. The curtain falls as the fathers are exchanging
amenities, and the Jew giving evidence of an abatement in the strictness of his orthodoxy.

"The Cohens and The Kellys" presents two families, Jewish and Irish, living side by side in the poorer
quarters of New York in a state of perpetual enmity. The wives in both cases are still living, and share
in the mutual animosity, as do two small sons, and even the respective dogs. The Jews have a daughter,
the Irish a son; the Jewish father is in the clothing business; the Irishman is a policeman. The children
are in love with each other, and secretly marry, apparently after the play opens. The Jew, being in great
financial straits, learns from a lawyer that he has fallen heir to a large fortune from a great-aunt, and
moves into a great house, fitted luxuriously. Here he and his family live in vulgar ostentation, and here
the Irish boy seeks out his Jewish bride, and is chased away by the angry father. The Jew then abuses
the Irishman over the telephone, and both become hysterically excited. The extremity of his feelings
makes the Jew sick, so that he must go to Florida for a rest, just before which the daughter discloses
her marriage to her mother.

On his return the Jew finds that his daughter has borne a child; at first he suspects the lawyer, but
eventually learns the truth and is overcome with anger at such a low alliance. Meanwhile, the Irish
family who have been forbidden to see the grandchild, go to the Jew's house, and after a violent scene
between the two fathers in which the Jew disowns his daughter, who decides to go back with her
husband, the Irishman takes her back with her baby to his own poor lodgings. The lawyer, who had
hoped to marry the Jew's daughter, seeing his plan foiled, tells the Jew that his fortune really belongs
to the Irishman, who was also related to the dead woman, but offers to conceal his knowledge, if the
Jew will share the loot. This the Jew repudiates, and, leaving the astonished lawyer, walks through the
rain to his enemy's house to surrender the property. He arrives in great dejection, tells the truth, and
abjectly turns to leave. A reconciliation ensues, the Irishman agreeing to share with him equally. The
Jew shows some interest in his grandchild, though this is at most a minor motive in the reconciliation,
and the curtain falls while the two are in their cups, the Jew insisting that in the firm name for the
business, which they are to carry on jointly, his name shall stand first.

It is of course essential to any protection of literary property, whether at common-law or under
the statute, that the right cannot be limited literally to the text, else a plagiarist would escape by
immaterial variations. That has never been the law, but, as soon as literal appropriation ceases to be

                                                                      13. INTRODUCTION TO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT 223
the test, the whole matter is necessarily at large, so that, as was recently well said by a distinguished
judge, the decisions cannot help much in a new case. Fendler v. Morosco, 253 N. Y. 281, 292, 171 N. E.
56. When plays are concerned, the plagiarist may excise a separate scene [Daly v. Webster, 56 F. 483 (C.
C. A. 2); Chappell v. Fields, 210 F. 864 (C. C. A. 2); Chatterton v. Cave, L. R. 3 App. Cas. 483]; or he may
appropriate part of the dialogue (Warne v. Seebohm, L. R. 39 Ch. D. 73). Then the question is whether
the part so taken is "substantial," and therefore not a "fair use" of the copyrighted work; it is the same
question as arises in the case of any other copyrighted work. Marks v. Feist, 290 F. 959 (C. C. A. 2);
Emerson v. Davies, Fed. Cas. No. 4436, 3 Story, 768, 795-797. But when the plagiarist does not take
out a block in situ, but an abstract of the whole, decision is more troublesome. Upon any work, and
especially upon a play, a great number of patterns of increasing generality will fit equally well, as more
and more of the incident is left out. The last may perhaps be no more than the most general statement
of what the play is about, and at times might consist only of its title; but there is a point in this series of
abstractions where they are no longer protected, since otherwise the playwright could prevent the use
of his "ideas," to which, apart from their expression, his property is never extended. Holmes v. Hurst,
174 U. S. 82, 86, 19 S. Ct. 606, 43 L. Ed. 904; Guthrie v. Curlett, 36 F.2d 694 (C. C. A. 2). Nobody
has ever been able to fix that boundary, and nobody ever can. In some cases the question has been
treated as though it were analogous to lifting a portion out of the copyrighted work (Rees v. Melville,
MacGillivray's Copyright Cases [1911-1916], 168); but the analogy is not a good one, because, though
the skeleton is a part of the body, it pervades and supports the whole. In such cases we are rather
concerned with the line between expression and what is expressed. As respects plays, the controversy
chiefly centers upon the characters and sequence of incident, these being the substance.

We did not in Dymow v. Bolton, 11 F. (2d) 690, hold that a plagiarist was never liable for stealing a plot;
that would have been flatly against our rulings in Dam v. Kirk La Shelle Co., 175 F. 902, 41 L. R. A. (N.
S.) 1002, 20 Ann. Cas. 1173, and Stodart v. Mutual Film Co., 249 F. 513, affirming my decision in (D.
C.) 249 F. 507; neither of which we meant to overrule. We found the plot of the second play was too
different to infringe, because the most detailed pattern, common to both, eliminated so much from
each that its content went into the public domain; and for this reason we said, "this mere subsection
of a plot was not susceptible of copyright." But we do not doubt that two plays may correspond in
plot closely enough for infringement. How far that correspondence must go is another matter. Nor
need we hold that the same may not be true as to the characters, quite independently of the "plot"
proper, though, as far as we know, such a case has never arisen. If Twelfth Night were copyrighted,
it is quite possible that a second comer might so closely imitate Sir Toby Belch or Malvolio as to
infringe, but it would not be enough that for one of his characters he cast a riotous knight who kept
wassail to the discomfort of the household, or a vain and foppish steward who became amorous of his
mistress. These would be no more than Shakespeare's "ideas" in the play, as little capable of monopoly
as Einstein's Doctrine of Relativity, or Darwin's theory of the Origin of Species. It follows that the less
developed the characters, the less they can be copyrighted; that is the penalty an author must bear for
marking them too indistinctly.

In the two plays at bar we think both as to incident and character, the defendant took no more --
assuming that it took anything at all -- than the law allowed. The stories are quite different. One is of
a religious zealot who insists upon his child's marrying no one outside his faith; opposed by another
who is in this respect just like him, and is his foil. Their difference in race is merely an obbligato
to the main theme, religion. They sink their differences through grandparental pride and affection.
In the other, zealotry is wholly absent; religion does not even appear. It is true that the parents are
hostile to each other in part because they differ in race; but the marriage of their son to a Jew does

224 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
not apparently offend the Irish family at all, and it exacerbates the existing animosity of the Jew,
principally because he has become rich, when he learns it. They are reconciled through the honesty
of the Jew and the generosity of the Irishman; the grandchild has nothing whatever to do with it. The
only matter common to the two is a quarrel between a Jewish and an Irish father, the marriage of their
children, the birth of grandchildren and a reconciliation.

If the defendant took so much from the plaintiff, it may well have been because her amazing success
seemed to prove that this was a subject of enduring popularity. Even so, granting that the plaintiff's
play was wholly original, and assuming that novelty is not essential to a copyright, there is no
monopoly in such a background. Though the plaintiff discovered the vein, she could not keep it to
herself; so defined, the theme was too generalized an abstraction from what she wrote. It was only a
part of her "ideas."

Nor does she fare better as to her characters. It is indeed scarcely credible that she should not
have been aware of those stock figures, the low comedy Jew and Irishman. The defendant has not
taken from her more than their prototypes have contained for many decades. If so, obviously so to
generalize her copyright, would allow her to cover what was not original with her. But we need not
hold this as matter of fact, much as we might be justified. Even though we take it that she devised her
figures out of her brain de novo, still the defendant was within its rights.

There are but four characters common to both plays, the lovers and the fathers. The lovers are so
faintly indicated as to be no more than stage properties. They are loving and fertile; that is really all
that can be said of them, and anyone else is quite within his rights if he puts loving and fertile lovers
in a play of his own, wherever he gets the cue. The plaintiff's Jew is quite unlike the defendant's. His
obsession is his religion, on which depends such racial animosity as he has. He is affectionate, warm
and patriarchal. None of these fit the defendant's Jew, who shows affection for his daughter only once,
and who has none but the most superficial interest in his grandchild. He is tricky, ostentatious and
vulgar, only by misfortune redeemed into honesty. Both are grotesque, extravagant and quarrelsome;
both are fond of display; but these common qualities make up only a small part of their simple
pictures, no more than any one might lift if he chose. The Irish fathers are even more unlike; the
plaintiff's a mere symbol for religious fanaticism and patriarchal pride, scarcely a character at all.
Neither quality appears in the defendant's, for while he goes to get his grandchild, it is rather out of
a truculent determination not to be forbidden, than from pride in his progeny. For the rest he is only
a grotesque hobbledehoy, used for low comedy of the most conventional sort, which any one might
borrow, if he chanced not to know the exemplar.

The defendant argues that the case is controlled by my decision in Fisher v. Dillingham (D. C.) 298
F. 145. Neither my brothers nor I wish to throw doubt upon the doctrine of that case, but it is not
applicable here. We assume that the plaintiff's play is altogether original, even to an extent that in fact
it is hard to believe. We assume further that, so far as it has been anticipated by earlier plays of which
she knew nothing, that fact is immaterial. Still, as we have already said, her copyright did not cover
everything that might be drawn from her play; its content went to some extent into the public domain.
We have to decide how much, and while we are as aware as any one that the line, whereever [sic] it is
drawn, will seem arbitrary, that is no excuse for not drawing it; it is a question such as courts must
answer in nearly all cases. Whatever may be the difficulties a priori, we have no question on which
side of the line this case falls. A comedy based upon conflicts between Irish and Jews, into which the
marriage of their children enters, is no more susceptible of copyright than the outline of Romeo and
Juliet.

                                                                      13. INTRODUCTION TO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT 225
The plaintiff has prepared an elaborate analysis of the two plays, showing a "quadrangle" of the
common characters, in which each is represented by the emotions which he discovers. She presents
the resulting parallelism as proof of infringement, but the adjectives employed are so general as to
be quite useless. Take for example the attribute of "love" ascribed to both Jews. The plaintiff has
depicted her father as deeply attached to his son, who is his hope and joy; not so, the defendant, whose
father's conduct is throughout not actuated by any affection for his daughter, and who is merely
once overcome for the moment by her distress when he has violently dismissed her lover. "Anger"
covers emotions aroused by quite different occasions in each case; so do "anxiety," "despondency" and
"disgust." It is unnecessary to go through the catalogue for emotions are too much colored by their
causes to be a test when used so broadly. This is not the proper approach to a solution; it must be more
ingenuous, more like that of a spectator, who would rely upon the complex of his impressions of each
character.
We cannot approve the length of the record, which was due chiefly to the use of expert witnesses.
Argument is argument whether in the box or at the bar, and its proper place is the last. The testimony
of an expert upon such issues, especially his cross-examination, greatly extends the trial and
contributes nothing which cannot be better heard after the evidence is all submitted. It ought not to
be allowed at all; and while its admission is not a ground for reversal, it cumbers the case and tends to
confusion, for the more the court is led into the intricacies of dramatic craftsmanship, the less likely it
is to stand upon the firmer, if more nave, ground of its considered impressions upon its own perusal.
We hope that in this class of cases such evidence may in the future be entirely excluded, and the case
confined to the actual issues; that is, whether the copyrighted work was original, and whether the
defendant copied it, so far as the supposed infringement is identical.
The defendant, "the prevailing party," was entitled to a reasonable attorney's fee (section 40 of the
Copyright Act [17 USCA  40]).
Decree affirmed.

226 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                  14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT
                                                OWNER

   Learning Objectives: Unit 14

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the statutory rights of the copyright owner.
           Explain the meaning of "display the copyrighted work publicly" and "perform the copyrighted
              work publicly".
           Analyze whether a hypothetical scenario infringes on the additional statutory rights of a copyright
              owner
           Explain the concept of derivative works.

Although the primary right of the copyright holder is the exclusive right to reproduce the work,
there are other activities that do not require fixation in a tangible medium that can also constitute
copyright infringement. For example, depending on the type of work, the copyright owner may have
the exclusive right to perform or display the work publicly. Copyright owners also have the right to
prepare derivative works and, in some situations, creators may possess additional "moral" rights in
the work.
As you read this section's statutes, ask yourself the following questions:

      When you watch a YouTube video, are you "performing" that work for purposes of  106?
      If I play Roy Orbison's Oh, Pretty Woman on my phone in class 9, will I be engaging in a public

         performance?
      If I were to show a movie to the entire population of the law school, but allow only one person

         at a time to watch it, would I be engaged in a public performance?
The final right of  106 that we will discuss is the right to prepare derivative works. This right is
somewhat an odd right given that the first right, the right to reproduce the copyrighted work, extends
to nonliteral copying. Doesn't a derivative work, by its very nature, involve a fairly substantial degree
of nonliteral copying? Pickett v. Prince may shed some light on the reasons for a separate right to
prepare derivative works--and on the limits of such a right.
In addition to the set of rights provided in  106, there are an additional set of rights in  106A
that apply to a limited subset of copyrightable works. These are referred to as "moral rights," and

                                                                   14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT OWNER 227
are more easily understood under natural rights and personhood theories than in purely economic
terms. Because these rights are mostly limited to a specific class of works, we do not address them in
this class. However, you may want to read through  106A (note that it is not 106(a)!) to familiarize
yourself with these rights.

   17 U.S. Code101. Definitions (2010)

   ...
   A "derivative work" is a work based upon one or more preexisting works such as a translation, musical
   arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture, version, sound recording, art reproduction,
   abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which a work may be recast, transformed, or adapted. A
   work consisting of editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications which as a whole,
   represent an original work of authorship, is a "derivative work".

   17 U.S. Code103. Subject matter of copyright: Compilations and derivative works
   (1976)

   (a) The subject matter of copyright as specified by section 102 includes compilations and derivative works,
   but protection for a work employing preexisting material in which copyright subsists does not extend to
   any part of the work in which such material has been used unlawfully.
   (b) The copyright in a compilation or derivative work extends only to the material contributed by the
   author of such work, as distinguished from the preexisting material employed in the work, and does not
   imply any exclusive right in the preexisting material. The copyright in such work is independent of, and
   does not affect or enlarge the scope, duration, ownership, or subsistence of, any copyright protection in the
   preexisting material.

   17 U.S. Code  106A. Rights of certain authors to attribution and integrity(1990)

   (a) Rights of Attribution and Integrity.--Subject to section 107 and independent of the exclusive rights
   provided in section 106, the author of a work of visual art--

        1. shall have the right--

                     (A) to claim authorship of that work, and

               (B) to prevent the use of his or her name as the author of anywork
               of visual art which he or she did not create;

            2. shall have the right to prevent the use of his or her name as the author of the work of visual art in
            the event of a distortion, mutilation, or other modification of the work which would be prejudicial
            to his or her honor or reputation; and

228 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
3. subject to the limitations set forth in section 113(d), shall have the right--
         (A) to prevent any intentional distortion, mutilation, or other modification of that work
         which would be prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation, and any intentional distortion,
         mutilation, or modification of that work is a violation of that right, and
         (B) to prevent any destruction of a work of recognized stature, and any intentional or grossly
         negligent destruction of that work is a violation of that right...

                                                       14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT OWNER 229
PICKETT V. PRINCE (7TH CIR. 2000)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Pickett v. Prince, as yourself the following questions:

           What is the primary legal issue in this case? What is the court's reasoning in resolving that issue?
           What underlying policies are at issue in this opinion? How do they manifest in the analytical

              framework adopted by Judge Posner?
           Based on this opinion, what is a derivative work?
           Based on this opinion, is George Harrison's My Sweet Lord a derivative work? If so, what are the

              consequences?

                                                         Pickett v. Prince

                                                 207 F.3d 402 (7th Cir. 2000)

POSNER, Chief Judge.

The appeal by Ferdinand Pickett, plaintiff in the district court, presents us with an issue concerning
copyright in derivative works, while the cross-appeal, by the defendant, presents a procedural issue.
The defendant, identified only as "Prince" in the caption of the various pleadings, is a well-known
popular singer whose name at birth was Prince Rogers Nelson, but who for many years performed
under the name Prince (which is what we'll call him) and since 1992 has referred to himself by
an unpronounceable symbol reproduced as Figure 1 at the end of this opinion. [figures for this
case have been removed] (See generally "The Independent, Unofficial and Uncensored Magazine
Exploring the Artist Formerly Known as Prince," .) The symbol (which rather strikingly resembles
the Egyptian hieroglyph ankh, see Richard H. Wilkinson, Symbol & Magic in Egyptian Art 159, 169
(fig.128) (1994), but the parties make nothing of this, so neither shall we) is his trademark but it is also
a copyrighted work of visual art that licensees of Prince have embodied in various forms, including
jewelry, clothing, and musical instruments. Although Prince did not register a copyright of the symbol
until 1997, the plaintiff concedes that Prince obtained a valid copyright in 1992, registration not
being a precondition to copyright protection, 17 U.S.C.  408(a), though it is a precondition to a
suit for copyright infringement.  411(a); Raquel v. Education Mgmt. Corp., 196 F.3d 171, 176 (3d
Cir. 1999). Actually the original copyright was not obtained by him, but he is the assignee, and the
assignment expressly granted him the right to sue for infringements of copyright that occur before
the assignment.

In 1993 the plaintiff made a guitar (Figure 2) [figures for this case have been removed] in the shape
of the Prince symbol; he concedes that it is a derivative work within the meaning of 17 U.S.C. 

230 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
101 ("a work based upon one or more preexisting works, such as a translation, musical arrangement,
dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture version, sound recording, art reproduction,
abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which a work may be recast, transformed, or adapted.
A work consisting of editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications which,
as a whole, represent an original work of authorship, is a `derivative work'"). The plaintiff claims
(truthfully, we assume for purposes of the appeal) to have shown the guitar to Prince. Shortly
afterwards Prince appeared in public playing a guitar quite similar to the plaintiff's (Figure 3) [figures
for this case have been removed].

The plaintiff brought this suit for copyright infringement in 1994, but it languished for years in
the district court. In January 1997 Prince counterclaimed for infringement of the copyright on his
symbol, arguing (because he had not yet registered his copyright--indeed it hadn't even been assigned
to him yet) that in 1992 Warner Brothers had registered a copyright of the symbol in connection with
a record of Prince's music. Prince was mistaken; the copyright was of the music, not of the symbol,
although the symbol appeared on the album cover. In any event Prince had no standing to enforce
someone else's copyright--so that, if only Warner Brothers held a copyright on the Prince symbol,
Prince would have no defense against Pickett's suit for infringement (or at least would not have the
defense that he successfully asserted in the district court), as well as no basis for a counterclaim. In
July 1997, however, on the Monday following the third anniversary of Pickett's suit (which fell on a
Saturday), Prince filed an amended counterclaim for infringement, claiming that it was his own, not
Warner Brothers', copyright that Pickett's guitar infringed; for between January and July Prince had
obtained the copyright by assignment and had registered it. The district court (Judge Shadur) held
that the amended counterclaim, which superseded the original one, did not relate back to the original
counterclaim because it did not arise out of the same copyright, and so it was barred by the three-
year statute of limitations for claims of copyright infringement. 17 U.S.C.  507(b). Later the suit was
transferred to Judge Pallmeyer, who on Prince's motion for summary judgment dismissed Pickett's
claim on the ground that he had no right to make a derivative work based on the Prince symbol
without Prince's consent, which was never sought or granted. 52 F.Supp.2d 893 (N.D.Ill. 1999).

Pickett claims the right to copyright a work derivative from another person's copyright without that
person's permission and then to sue that person for infringement by the person's own derivative
work. Pickett's guitar was a derivative work of the copyrighted Prince symbol, and so was Prince's
guitar. Since Prince had (or so we must assume) access to Pickett's guitar, and since the two guitars,
being derivatives of the same underlying work, are, naturally, very similar in appearance, Pickett
has--if he is correct that one can copyright a derivative work when the original work is copyrighted
by someone else who hasn't authorized the maker of the derivative work to copyright it--a prima
facie case of infringement. Wildlife Express Corp. v. Carol Wright Sales, Inc., 18 F.3d 502, 508 (7th
Cir.1994); Procter & Gamble Co. v. Colgate-Palmolive Co., 199 F.3d 74, 77 (2d Cir.1999) (per curiam);
Castle Rock Entertainment, Inc. v. Carol Publishing Group, Inc., 150 F.3d 132, 137 (2d Cir.1998); Twin
Peaks Productions, Inc. v. Publications International, Ltd., 996 F.2d 1366, 1372 (2d Cir.1993); see also 2
Paul Goldstein, Copyright: Principles, Law and Practice  7.2.1, p. 8 (1989) ("the fact that the defendant
had access to the plaintiff's work and that the defendant's work is similar to the plaintiff's can form
the basis for an inference that the defendant copied her work from the plaintiff's work"). Pickett must,
he concedes, show that his derivative work has enough originality to entitle him to a copyright, and
also that the copyright is limited to the features that the derivative work adds to the original. But he
insists that with these limitations his copyright is valid.

We doubt that he could show the requisite incremental originality, Lee v. A.R.T. Co., 125 F.3d 580 (7th

                                                                   14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT OWNER 231
Cir.1997); Gracen v. Bradford Exchange, 698 F.2d 300, 304-05 (7th Cir.1983), slight as it need be. Feist
Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 345, 362-63, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d
358 (1991); CDN Inc. v. Kapes, 197 F.3d 1256, 1259-61 (9th Cir.1999); Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. v. Jostens,
Inc., 155 F.3d 140, 143-44 (2d Cir. 1998); 1 Melville B. Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright
 3.03, p. 3-10 (1999); see generally 1 Goldstein, supra,  2.2.1, pp. 62-65. In Lee v. A.R.T. Co., supra,
125 F.3d at 582, we noted a conflict in the authorities over whether any originality is required for a
derivative work. We had explained in Gracen v. Bradford Exchange, supra, 698 F.2d at 304, and we'll
note later in this opinion as well, that such a requirement is essential in order to head off situations
in which it is impossible to adjudicate a dispute between owners of two derivative works because the
works are identical both to the original and to each other. The Ninth Circuit, the only court cited
in Lee as disagreeing with us, had, in fact, swung around to our view shortly before our decision
came down. Entertainment Research Group, Inc. v. Genesis Creative Group, Inc., 122 F.3d 1211, 1220 (9th
Cir.1997).

Although Pickett's guitar isn't identical to the Prince symbol, the difference in appearance may well be
due to nothing more than the functional difference between a two-dimensional symbol and a guitar
in the shape of that symbol. In that event even Prince could not have copyrighted the guitar version
of the symbol. 17 U.S.C.  101; American Dental Ass'n v. Delta Dental Plans Ass'n, 126 F.3d 977, 980 (7th
Cir.1997); Entertainment Research Group, Inc. v. Genesis Creative Group, Inc., supra, 122 F.3d at 1221-24;
cf. Mitel, Inc. v. Iqtel, Inc., 124 F.3d 1366, 1374-75 (10th Cir.1997); Williams v. Crichton, 84 F.3d 581,
587-88 (2d Cir. 1996). A guitar won't work without strings, frets, etc. arranged in a pattern dictated
by musical considerations, and to the extent that the pattern is what it is because otherwise the guitar
won't sound right, it is not copyrightable as a work of visual art. Maybe, though, the juxtaposition
of the symbol and the guitar is enough to confer on the ensemble sufficient originality as a work of
visual art to entitle the designer to copyright it. See North Coast Industries v. Jason Maxwell, Inc., 972
F.2d 1031 (9th Cir.1992); Rogers v. Koons, 960 F.2d 301, 307 (2d Cir.1992). Many works of art rely for
their effect on the juxtaposition of familiar elements ordinarily held separate (like a mustache painted
on a photograph of the Mona Lisa); indeed, all works of art are ultimately combinations of familiar,
uncopyrightable items.

We need not pursue the issue of originality of derivative works. The Copyright Act grants the owner
of a copyright the exclusive right to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work. 17
U.S.C.  106(2); Lee v. A.R.T. Co., supra, 125 F.3d at 581; Gracen v. Bradford Exchange, supra, 698 F.2d
at 302; Atari, Inc. v. North American Philips Consumer Electronics Corp., 672 F.2d 607, 618 n. 12 (7th
Cir.1982); Micro Star v. Formgen Inc., 154 F.3d 1107, 1110 (9th Cir.1998). So Pickett could not make
a derivative work based on the Prince symbol without Prince's authorization even if Pickett's guitar
had a smidgeon of originality. This is a sensible result. A derivative work is, by definition, bound to
be very similar to the original. Concentrating the right to make derivative works in the owner of
the original work prevents what might otherwise be an endless series of infringement suits posing
insoluble difficulties of proof. Consider two translations into English of a book originally published in
French. The two translations are bound to be very similar and it will be difficult to establish whether
they are very similar because one is a copy of the other or because both are copies of the same foreign-
language original. Whether Prince's guitar is a copy of his copyrighted symbol or a copy of Pickett's
guitar is likewise not a question that the methods of litigation can readily answer with confidence. If
anyone can make derivative works based on the Prince symbol, we could have hundreds of Picketts,
each charging infringement by the others.

Pickett relies for his implausible theory primarily on section 103(a) of the Copyright Act, which

232 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
provides that while copyright can be obtained in derivative works, "protection for a work employing
preexisting material in which copyright subsists does not extend to any part of the work in which such
material has been used unlawfully." Pickett reads this as authorizing a person other than the owner
of the original work to make a derivative work, merely forbidding him to infringe the original. It is
very difficult to see how a derivative work not made by the owner of the original work could fail to
infringe it, given the definition of derivative works. (There is no infringement by the owner of the
copyright of the original work, since, as note, section 106(2) entitles him to make derivative works
based on his copyrighted work. Cortner v. Israel, 732 F.2d 267, 271 (2d Cir.1984).) Picket doesn't deny
this; having warded off (he thinks) Prince's counterclaim for copyright infringement, he is unafraid
to acknowledge that he is an infringer and to content himself with arguing that his copyright extends
only to the original elements of the infringing work. But we do not read section 103(a) as qualifying
the exclusive right of the owner of the copyright of the original work to make derivative works based
on that work, the right conferred by section 106(2). Section 103(a) means only, at least so far as bears
on this case, that the right to make a derivative work does not authorize the maker to incorporate into
it material that infringes someone else's copyright. Cortner v. Israel, supra, 732 F.2d at 272; 1 Nimmer
& Nimmer, supra,  3.06, pp. 3-34.23 to 3-34.27; cf. Harris Custom Builders, Inc. v. Hoffmeyer, 92 F.3d
517, 519 (7th Cir.1996). So if Pickett owned a copyright of, say, a picture of Prince, and Prince used
that picture in his own guitar without Pickett's consent, Pickett would have a claim of infringement.
But the only copyright that Pickett claims Prince infringed is a copyright that Pickett had no right to
obtain, namely a copyright on a derivative work based on Prince's copyrighted symbol.

Pickett relied in the district court on a dictum in Eden Toys, Inc. v. Florelee Undergarment Co., 697 F.2d
27, 34 n. 6 (2d Cir.1982), that a stranger can make a derivative work without the permission of the
owner of the copyright of the original work if the original work does not "pervade" the derivative
work. The suggestion, if taken seriously (which it has not been), would inject enormous uncertainty
into the law of copyright and undermine the exclusive right that section 106(2) gives the owner
of the copyright on the original work. It also rests on a confusion between the determination of
whether a work is derivative and the determination of who has the right to make the derivative work.
Defined too broadly, "derivative work" would confer enormous power on the owners of copyrights on
preexisting works. The Bernstein-Sondheim musical West Side Story, for example, is based loosely on
Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, which in turn is based loosely on Ovid's Pyramus and Thisbe, so that if
"derivative work" were defined broadly enough (and copyright were perpetual) West Side Story would
infringe Pyramus and Thisbe unless authorized by Ovid's heirs. We can thus imagine the notion of
pervasiveness being used to distinguish a work fairly described as derivative from works only loosely
connected with some ancestral work claimed to be their original. Cf. Micro Star v. Formgen Inc., supra,
154 F.3d at 1110. In that sense Prince's symbol clearly "pervades" both guitars. If it did not, the guitars
might not be derivative works, but they would not be derivative works that anyone was free to make
without obtaining Prince's permission.

It is apparent from what we have said so far not only that Pickett could not copyright his guitar, but
that his guitar infringes Prince's copyright. (Pickett's further argument, that Prince's copyright has
evaporated if, as Judge Shadur ruled, the counterclaim to enforce it is time-barred and so Prince's
symbol fell into the public domain and became fair game for makers of derivative works, is
ridiculous.) The remaining question, whether the counterclaim was properly dismissed on the basis
of the statute of limitations, is the subject of Prince's cross-appeal. Oddly, there is not the slightest
doubt that the amended counterclaim was filed before the statute of limitations expired, and this
regardless of whether it related back to the original, Fed.R.Civ.P. 15(c)(2), as probably it did not, since

                                                                   14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT OWNER 233
it was based on a different copyright. Cf. 6A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane,
Federal Practice and Procedure  1497, pp. 70-74 (1990). Although the amended counterclaim was filed
on the last possible day before expiration, namely the Monday after the Saturday that was the third
anniversary of the filing of Pickett's suit, see Fed. R. Civ.P. 6(a), the adage that a miss is as good as a
mile applies in reverse here: a suit is timely whether filed the day after the claim accrues or the very
last day before the suit would be time-barred.

So why was the counterclaim dismissed as untimely? The three-year period of limitations began
running on July 5, 1994, and the judge ruled that the counterclaim was untimely because it had not
been filed until July 7, 1997. Apparently no one, including the judge, noticed that July 5, 1997, was a
Saturday. Prince's lawyer finally woke up, and a couple of weeks after Judge Shadur had ruled filed a
motion for reconsideration which the judge denied on the ground that a motion for reconsideration
is not an appropriate vehicle for injecting a new legal theory into a case.

We think that in so ruling the judge abused his discretion. Unlike the case in which a judgment is
sought to be vacated, to which the principle enunciated by the judge does apply, e.g., Caisse Nationale de
Credit Agricole v. CBI Industries, Inc., 90 F.3d 1264, 1269-70 (7th Cir. 1996); Keene Corp. v. International
Fidelity Ins. Co., 736 F.2d 388, 393 (7th Cir. 1984), although its application to a computational error
having nothing to do with legal "theory" may be doubted, see Russell v. Delco Remy Division, 51 F.3d
746, 749 (7th Cir.1995), a motion to reconsider a ruling is constrained only by the doctrine of the law
of the case. And that doctrine is highly flexible, especially when a judge is being asked to reconsider
his own ruling. Avitia v. Metropolitan Club of Chicago, Inc., 49 F.3d 1219, 1227 (7th Cir.1995); Prisco v.
A & D Carting Corp., 168 F.3d 593, 607 (2d Cir.1999). Judge Shadur's ruling that the counterclaim was
untimely was interlocutory, and thus not a final judgment. In fact, it was not a judgment at all. It was
issued in December of 1997, and the final decision by the district court didn't come until June 18 of
last year. The ruling was also the plainest of plain errors, requiring only a glance at the calendar to
discover. The judge was led into the plain error by the party seeking to correct it, but that is often the
case. Had Prince's lawyer discovered the error a few weeks earlier and brought it to Judge Shadur's
attention before the judge ruled, undoubtedly the judge would have held that the counterclaim was
timely.

Although we can understand Judge Shadur's annoyance at being led into plain error, a judge's refusal
to correct a plain error that he had committed weeks before is not justified by the doctrine of the
law of the case, or anything else we can think of. Creek v. Village of Westhaven, 144 F.3d 441, 446 (7th
Cir.1998); Evans v. City of Chicago, 873 F.2d 1007, 1013-14 (7th Cir. 1989); United States v. Zanghi,
189 F.3d 71, 79-80 (1st Cir.1999). Were we to uphold the denial of reconsideration and dismissal of
the counterclaim, we would be penalizing Prince's lawyer for having asked Judge Shadur to correct
his own mistake rather than reserving the issue for an appeal, and we would thus be discouraging
efforts by litigants to purge errors before the case comes to us (perhaps it won't come to us if the
errors are purged). For if Prince had for the first time on appeal argued that Judge Shadur had erred
in dismissing the counterclaim as untimely, and if Pickett had responded that Prince had waived the
issue by failing to raise it in the district court, Prince would have appealed to the doctrine of plain
error to absolve him from the consequences of the waiver. And limited though that doctrine is in civil
cases, see, e.g., Deppe v. Tripp, 863 F.2d 1356, 1360-61 (7th Cir.1988); Smith v. Kmart Corp., 177 F.3d 19,
28 (1st Cir.1999), we would have invoked it and reversed the dismissal of the counterclaim. The result
should not be different merely because, though apprised of the error, Judge Shadur refused to correct
it.

234 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
It is conceivable though not argued that Prince's failure to discover that July 5, 1997, was a Saturday
(or to realize the significance of the fact) was harmful to Pickett; but such an argument would get
nowhere, for it was as irresponsible for Pickett's lawyer to argue the untimeliness of a counterclaim
that he should have known was timely as it was for Prince's lawyer to fail to refute the argument. As no
effort was made to show that Pickett was harmed by Prince's mistake (and it was, to repeat, Pickett's
mistake as well), let alone so gravely harmed as to warrant the dismissal of the counterclaim rather
than just an order that Prince reimburse Pickett for any expense occasioned by the mistake, we cannot
think of any reason at all why Judge Shadur should have refused to rescind his erroneous dismissal of
the counterclaim.
The judgment is affirmed insofar as it dismisses Pickett's suit but vacated insofar as it dismisses the
counterclaim, and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded.

                                                                   14. ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COPYRIGHT OWNER 235
                       15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT
                         ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE

   Learning Objectives: Unit 15

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall major statutory limits on copyright enforcement.
           Explain the concept of fair use with reference to statutory and case authority.
           Recall the definitions of parody and satire.
           Analyze fair use in the context of a factual scenario.

Although it is not the only statutory limit on copyright enforcement, fair use is widely viewed as the
primary safety valve on copyright infringement. In part this is due to the flexibility of the fair use
analysis itself.
In this class we will learn about statutory limits on copyright enforcement and discuss the concept
of fair use in some depth. You should begin by reading 17 U.S.C.  107 and any relevant statutory
definitions. Next, read Campbell v. Acuff Rose. This case is a tale of two songs: the original version of
Oh, Pretty Woman by Roy Orbison and the rap of Pretty Woman by 2LiveCrew. The lyrics are at the end
of the majority opinion.

   17 U.S.C. 107. Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair use (1992)

   Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work, including
   such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section, for
   purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom
   use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.
   In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to be
   considered shall include

            (1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is
            for nonprofit educational purposes;
            (2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
            (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole;

236 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
         and
         (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.
The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon
consideration of all the above factors.

                            15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 237
  CAMPBELL V. ACUFF-ROSE MUSIC, INC. 510 U.S. 569 (1994)

     READING WITH PURPOSE

      As you read Campbell v. Acuff Rose, ask yourself the following questions:
              What is the primary legal issue in this case? What is the Court's reasoning in resolving that issue?
              What underlying policies are at issue in this opinion? How do they manifest themselves in the
                 analytical framework applied by the Court?
              Based on this opinion, what is a parody work?
              Based on this opinion, what is the analytical framework for assessing an assertion of fair use?
              Based on this opinion, is a book about the evils of corporate America entitled "How the Gap Stole
                 Christmas" written in Seuss-like rhyming with elements from the Dr. Seuss work (such as
                 "Whoville") fair use?

                                              Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc.
                                                          510 U.S. 569 (1994)

  JUSTICE SOUTER delivered the opinion of the Court.
  We are called upon to decide whether 2 Live Crew's commercial parody of Roy Orbison's song, "Oh,
  Pretty Woman," may be a fair use within the meaning of the Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U. S. C.  107
  (1988 ed. and Supp. IV). Although the District Court granted summary judgment for 2 Live Crew, the
  Court of Appeals reversed, holding the defense of fair use barred by the song's commercial character
  and excessive borrowing. Because we hold that a parody's commercial character is only one element
  to be weighed in a fair use enquiry, and that insufficient consideration was given to the nature of
  parody in weighing the degree of copying, we reverse and remand.
  I
  In 1964, Roy Orbison and William Dees wrote a rock ballad called "Oh, Pretty Woman" and assigned
  their rights in it to respondent Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. See Appendix A, infra, at 594. Acuff-Rose
  registered the song for copyright protection.
  Petitioners Luther R. Campbell, Christopher Wongwon, Mark Ross, and David Hobbs are collectively
  known as 2 Live Crew, a popular rap music group.1 In 1989, Campbell wrote a song entitled "Pretty

1. Rap has been defined as a "style of black American popular music consisting of improvised rhymes performed to a rhythmic
   accompaniment." The Norton/Grove Concise Encyclopedia of Music 613 (1988). 2 Live Crew plays "[b]ass music," a regional,
   hip-hop style of rap from the Liberty City area of Miami, Florida. Brief for Petitioners 34.
  238 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Woman," which he later described in an affidavit as intended, "through comical lyrics, to satirize the
  original work. . . ." App. to Pet. for Cert. 80a. On July 5, 1989, 2 Live Crew's manager informed Acuff-
  Rose that 2 Live Crew had written a parody of "Oh, Pretty Woman," that they would afford all credit
  for ownership and authorship of the original song to Acuff-Rose, Dees, and Orbison, and that they
  were willing to pay a fee for the use they wished to make of it. Enclosed with the letter were a copy
  of the lyrics and a recording of 2 Live Crew's song. See Appendix B, infra, at 595. Acuff-Rose's agent
  refused permission, stating that "I am aware of the success enjoyed by `The 2 Live Crews', but I must
  inform you that we cannot permit the use of a parody of `Oh, Pretty Woman.'" App. to Pet. for Cert.
  85a. Nonetheless, in June or July 1989,2 2 Live Crew released records, cassette tapes, and compact
  discs of "Pretty Woman" in a collection of songs entitled "As Clean As They Wanna Be." The albums
  and compact discs identify the authors of "Pretty Woman" as Orbison and Dees and its publisher as
  Acuff-Rose.

  Almost a year later, after nearly a quarter of a million copies of the recording had been sold, Acuff-
  Rose sued 2 Live Crew and its record company, Luke Skyywalker Records, for copyright
  infringement. The District Court granted summary judgment for 2 Live Crew,3 reasoning that the
  commercial purpose of 2 Live Crew's song was no bar to fair use; that 2 Live Crew's version was a
  parody, which "quickly degenerates into a play on words, substituting predictable lyrics with shocking
  ones" to show "how bland and banal the Orbison song" is; that 2 Live Crew had taken no more
  than was necessary to "conjure up" the original in order to parody it; and that it was "extremely
  unlikely that 2 Live Crew's song could adversely affect the market for the original." 754 F. Supp. 1150,
  1154-1155, 1157-1158 (MD Tenn. 1991). The District Court weighed these factors and held that 2
  Live Crew's song made fair use of Orbison's original. Id., at 1158-1159.

  The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed and remanded. 972 F. 2d 1429, 1439 (1992).
  Although it assumed for the purpose of its opinion that 2 Live Crew's song was a parody of the
  Orbison original, the Court of Appeals thought the District Court had put too little emphasis on the
  fact that "every commercial use . . . is presumptively . . . unfair," Sony Corp. of America v. Universal
  City Studios, Inc., 464 U. S. 417, 451 (1984), and it held that "the admittedly commercial nature" of the
  parody "requires the conclusion" that the first of four factors relevant under the statute weighs against
  a finding of fair use. 972 F. 2d, at 1435, 1437. Next, the Court of Appeals determined that, by "taking
  the heart of the original and making it the heart of a new work," 2 Live Crew had, qualitatively, taken
  too much. Id., at 1438. Finally, after noting that the effect on the potential market for the original
  (and the market for derivative works) is "undoubtedly the single most important element of fair use,"
  Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U. S. 539, 566 (1985), the Court of Appeals
  faulted the District Court for "refus[ing] to indulge the presumption" that "harm for purposes of the
  fair use analysis has been established by the presumption attaching to commercial uses." 972 F. 2d,
  at 1438-1439. In sum, the court concluded that its "blatantly commercial purpose . . . prevents this
  parody from being a fair use." Id., at 1439.

2. The parties argue about the timing. 2 Live Crew contends that the album was released on July 15, and the District Court so
   held. 754 F. Supp. 1150, 1152 (MD Tenn. 1991). The Court of Appeals states that Campbell's affidavit puts the release date
   in June, and chooses that date. 972 F. 2d 1429, 1432 (CA6 1992). We find the timing of the request irrelevant for purposes of
   this enquiry. See n. 18, infra, discussing good faith.

3. 2 Live Crew's motion to dismiss was converted to a motion for summary judgment. Acuff-Rose defended against the motion,
   but filed no cross-motion.

                                  15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 239
  We granted certiorari, 507 U. S. 1003 (1993), to determine whether 2 Live Crew's commercial parody
  could be a fair use.

  II

  It is uncontested here that 2 Live Crew's song would be an infringement of Acuff-Rose's rights in "Oh,
  Pretty Woman," under the Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U. S. C.  106 (1988 ed. and Supp. IV), but for a
  finding of fair use through parody.4

  From the infancy of copyright protection, some opportunity for fair use of copyrighted materials
  has been thought necessary to fulfill copyright's very purpose, "[t]o promote the Progress of Science
  and useful Arts. . . ." U. S. Const., Art. I,  8, cl. 8.5 For as JUSTICE STORY explained, "[i]n truth, in
  literature, in science and in art, there are, and can be, few, if any, things, which in an abstract sense,
  are strictly new and original throughout. Every book in literature, science and art, borrows, and must
  necessarily borrow, and use much which was well known and used before." Emerson v. Davies, 8 F.Cas.
  615, 619 (No. 4,436) (CCD Mass. 1845). Similarly, Lord Ellenborough expressed the inherent tension
  in the need simultaneously to protect copyrighted material and to allow others to build upon it when
  he wrote, "while I shall think myself bound to secure every man in the enjoyment of his copy-right,
  one must not put manacles upon science." Carey v. Kearsley, 4 Esp. 168, 170, 170 Eng. Rep. 679, 681
  (K. B. 1803). In copyright cases brought under the Statute of Anne of 1710,6 English courts held that
  in some instances "fair abridgements" would not infringe an author's rights, see W. Patry, The Fair
  Use Privilege in Copyright Law 6-17 (1985) (hereinafter Patry); Leval, Toward a Fair Use Standard,
  103 Harv. L. Rev. 1105 (1990) (hereinafter Leval), and although the First Congress enacted our initial
  copyright statute, Act of May 31, 1790, 1 Stat. 124, without any explicit reference to "fair use," as it
  later came to be known,7 the doctrine was recognized by the American courts nonetheless.

  In Folsom v. Marsh, 9 F. Cas. 342 (No. 4,901) (CCD Mass. 1841), Justice Story distilled the essence of

4. Section 106 provides in part:

   "Subject to sections 107 through 120, the owner of copyright under this title has the exclusive rights to do and to authorize
   any of the following:

   "(1) to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;
   "(2) to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work;
   "(3) to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by
   rental, lease, or lending . . . ."

   A derivative work is defined as one "based upon one or more preexisting works, such as a translation, musical arrangement,
   dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture version, sound recording, art reproduction, abridgment, condensation, or
   any other form in which a work may be recast, transformed, or adapted. A work consisting of editorial revisions,
   annotations, elaborations, or other modifications which, as a whole, represent an original work of authorship, is a `derivative
   work.'" 17 U. S. C.  101. 2 Live Crew concedes that it is not entitled to a compulsory license under  115 because its
   arrangement changes "the basic melody or fundamental character" of the original.  115(a)(2).

5. The exclusion of facts and ideas from copyright protection serves that goal as well. See  102(b) ("In no case does copyright
   protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept,
   principle, or discovery . . ."); Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U. S. 340, 359 (1991) ("[F]acts contained in
   existing works may be freely copied"); Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U. S. 539, 547 (1985) (copyright
   owner's rights exclude facts and ideas, and fair use).

6. An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, 8 Anne, ch. 19.

7. Patry 27, citing Lawrence v. Dana, 15 F. Cas. 26, 60 (No. 8,136) (CCD Mass. 1869)

  240 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  law and methodology from the earlier cases: "look to the nature and objects of the selections made,
  the quantity and value of the materials used, and the degree in which the use may prejudice the sale,
  or diminish the profits, or supersede the objects, of the original work." Id., at 348. Thus expressed, fair
  use remained exclusively judge-made doctrine until the passage of the 1976 Copyright Act, in which
  Justice Story's summary is discernible: 8

           107. Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair use

          Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work,
          including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified
          by that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including
          multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.
          In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to
          be considered shall include--

          (1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature
          or is for non-profit educational purposes;

          (2) the nature of the copyrighted work;

          (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a
          whole; and

          (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.

          The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is
          made upon consideration of all the above factors." 17 U. S. C.  107 (1988 ed. and Supp. IV).

  Congress meant  107 "to restate the present judicial doctrine of fair use, not to change, narrow,
  or enlarge it in any way" and intended that courts continue the common-law tradition of fair use
  adjudication. H. R. Rep. No. 94-1476, p. 66 (1976) (hereinafter House Report); S. Rep. No. 94-473,
  p. 62 (1975) (hereinafter Senate Report). The fair use doctrine thus "permits [and requires] courts to
  avoid rigid application of the copyright statute when, on occasion, it would stifle the very creativity
  which that law is designed to foster." Stewart v. Abend, 495 U. S. 207, 236 (1990) (internal quotation
  marks and citation omitted).

  The task is not to be simplified with bright-line rules, for the statute, like the doctrine it recognizes,
  calls for case-by-case analysis. Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 560; Sony, 464 U. S., at 448, and n. 31;
  House Report, pp. 65-66; Senate Report, p. 62. The text employs the terms "including" and "such as"
  in the preamble paragraph to indicate the "illustrative and not limitative" function of the examples
  given,  101; see Harper & Row, supra, at 561, which thus provide only general guidance about the
  sorts of copying that courts and Congress most commonly had found to be fair uses.9 Nor may the
  four statutory factors be treated in isolation, one from another. All are to be explored, and the results
  weighed together, in light of the purposes of copyright. See Leval 1110-1111; Patry & Perlmutter, Fair

8. Leval 1105. For a historical account of the development of the fair use doctrine, see Patry 1-64.
9. See Senate Report, p. 62 ("[W]hether a use referred to in the first sentence of section 107 is a fair use in a particular case will

   depend upon the application of the determinative factors").

                                  15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 241
   Use Misconstrued: Profit, Presumptions, and Parody, 11 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L. J. 667, 685-687 (1993)
   (hereinafter Patry & Perlmutter).10

   A

   The first factor in a fair use enquiry is "the purpose and character of the use, including whether
   such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes."  107(1). This factor
   draws on Justice Story's formulation, "the nature and objects of the selections made." Folsom v. Marsh,
   supra, at 348. The enquiry here may be guided by the examples given in the preamble to  107,
   looking to whether the use is for criticism, or comment, or news reporting, and the like, see  107.
   The central purpose of this investigation is to see, in Justice Story's words, whether the new work
   merely "supersede[s] the objects" of the original creation, Folsom v. Marsh, supra, at 348; accord, Harper
   & Row, supra, at 562 ("supplanting" the original), or instead adds something new, with a further
   purpose or different character, altering the first with new expression, meaning, or message; it asks,
   in other words, whether and to what extent the new work is "transformative." Leval 1111. Although
   such transformative use is not absolutely necessary for a finding of fair use, Sony, supra, at 455, n.
   40,11 the goal of copyright, to promote science and the arts, is generally furthered by the creation of
   transformative works. Such works thus lie at the heart of the fair use doctrine's guarantee of breathing
   space within the confines of copyright, see, e. g., Sony, supra, at 478-480 (Blackmun, J., dissenting),
   and the more transformative the new work, the less will be the significance of other factors, like
   commercialism, that may weigh against a finding of fair use.

   This Court has only once before even considered whether parody may be fair use, and that time issued
   no opinion because of the Court's equal division. Benny v. Loew's Inc., 239 F. 2d 532 (CA9 1956), aff'd
   sub nom. Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Loew's Inc., 356 U. S. 43 (1958). Suffice it to say now
   that parody has an obvious claim to transformative value, as Acuff-Rose itself does not deny. Like less
   ostensibly humorous forms of criticism, it can provide social benefit, by shedding light on an earlier
   work, and, in the process, creating a new one. We thus line up with the courts that have held that
   parody, like other comment or criticism, may claim fair use under  107. See, e. g., Fisher v. Dees, 794
   F. 2d 432 (CA9 1986) ("When Sonny Sniffs Glue," a parody of "When Sunny Gets Blue," is fair use);
   Elsmere Music, Inc. v. National Broadcasting Co., 482 F. Supp. 741 (SDNY), aff'd, 623 F. 2d 252 (CA2
   1980) ("I Love Sodom," a "Saturday Night Live" television parody of "I Love New York," is fair use); see
   also House Report, p. 65; Senate Report, p. 61 ("[U]se in a parody of some of the content of the work
   parodied" may be fair use).

10. Because the fair use enquiry often requires close questions of judgment as to the extent of permissible borrowing in cases
    involving parodies (or other critical works), courts may also wish to bear in mind that the goals of the copyright law, "to
    stimulate the creation and publication of edifying matter," Leval 1134, are not always best served by automatically granting
    injunctive relief when parodists are found to have gone beyond the bounds of fair use. See 17 U. S. C.  502(a) (court "may . . .
    grant . . . injunctions on such terms as it may deem reasonable to prevent or restrain infringement") (emphasis added); Leval
    1132 (while in the "vast majority of cases, [an injunctive] remedy is justified because most infringements are simple piracy,"
    such cases are "worlds apart from many of those raising reasonable contentions of fair use" where "there may be a strong
    public interest in the publication of the secondary work [and] the copyright owner's interest may be adequately protected
    by an award of damages for whatever infringement is found"); Abend v. MCA, Inc., 863 F. 2d 1465, 1479 (CA9 1988) (finding
    "special circumstances" that would cause "great injustice" to defendants and "public injury" were injunction to issue), aff'd
    sub nom. Stewart v. Abend, 495 U. S. 207 (1990).

11. The obvious statutory exception to this focus on transformative uses is the straight reproduction of multiple copies for
    classroom distribution.

    242 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   The germ of parody lies in the definition of the Greek parodeia, quoted in Judge Nelson's Court
   of Appeals dissent, as "a song sung alongside another." 972 F. 2d, at 1440, quoting 7 Encyclopedia
   Britannica 768 (15th ed. 1975). Modern dictionaries accordingly describe a parody as a "literary or
   artistic work that imitates the characteristic style of an author or a work for comic effect or ridicule,"12
   or as a "composition in prose or verse in which the characteristic turns of thought and phrase in an
   author or class of authors are imitated in such a way as to make them appear ridiculous."13 For the
   purposes of copyright law, the nub of the definitions, and the heart of any parodist's claim to quote
   from existing material, is the use of some elements of a prior author's composition to create a new one
   that, at least in part, comments on that author's works. See, e. g., Fisher v. Dees, supra, at 437; MCA, Inc.
   v. Wilson, 677 F. 2d 180, 185 (CA2 1981). If, on the contrary, the commentary has no critical bearing
   on the substance or style of the original composition, which the alleged infringer merely uses to get
   attention or to avoid the drudgery in working up something fresh, the claim to fairness in borrowing
   from another's work diminishes accordingly (if it does not vanish), and other factors, like the extent
   of its commerciality, loom larger.14 Parody needs to mimic an original to make its point, and so has
   some claim to use the creation of its victim's (or collective victims') imagination, whereas satire can
   stand on its own two feet and so requires justification for the very act of borrowing. 15 See ibid.;
   Bisceglia, Parody and Copyright Protection: Turning the Balancing Act Into a Juggling Act, in ASCAP,
   Copyright Law Symposium, No. 34, p. 25 (1987).

   The fact that parody can claim legitimacy for some appropriation does not, of course, tell either
   parodist or judge much about where to draw the line. Like a book review quoting the copyrighted
   material criticized, parody may or may not be fair use, and petitioners' suggestion that any parodic use
   is presumptively fair has no more justification in law or fact than the equally hopeful claim that any
   use for news reporting should be presumed fair, see Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 561. The Act has no
   hint of an evidentiary preference for parodists over their victims, and no workable presumption for
   parody could take account of the fact that parody often shades into satire when society is lampooned
   through its creative artifacts, or that a work may contain both parodic and nonparodic elements.
   Accordingly, parody, like any other use, has to work its way through the relevant factors, and be
   judged case by case, in light of the ends of the copyright law.

   Here, the District Court held, and the Court of Appeals assumed, that 2 Live Crew's "Pretty Woman"
   contains parody, commenting on and criticizing the original work, whatever it may have to say about
   society at large. As the District Court remarked, the words of 2 Live Crew's song copy the original's
   first line, but then "quickly degenerat[e] into a play on words, substituting predictable lyrics with
   shocking ones . . . [that] derisively demonstrat[e] how bland and banal the Orbison song seems to

12. American Heritage Dictionary 1317 (3d ed. 1992)

13. 11 Oxford English Dictionary 247 (2d ed. 1989).

14. A parody that more loosely targets an original than the parody presented here may still be sufficiently aimed at an original
    work to come within our analysis of parody. If a parody whose wide dissemination in the market runs the risk of serving as a
    substitute for the original or licensed derivatives (see infra, at 590- 594, discussing factor four), it is more incumbent on one
    claiming fair use to establish the extent of transformation and the parody's critical relationship to the original. By contrast,
    when there is little or no risk of market substitution, whether because of the large extent of transformation of the earlier
    work, the new work's minimal distribution in the market, the small extent to which it borrows from an original, or other
    factors, taking parodic aim at an original is a less critical factor in the analysis, and looser forms of parody may be found to
    be fair use, as may satire with lesser justification for the borrowing than would otherwise be required.

15. Satire has been defined as a work "in which prevalent follies or vices are assailed with ridicule," 14 Oxford English
    Dictionary, supra, at 500, or are "attacked through irony, derision, or wit," American Heritage Dictionary, supra, at 1604.

                                    15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 243
   them." 754 F. Supp., at 1155 (footnote omitted). Judge Nelson, dissenting below, came to the same
   conclusion, that the 2 Live Crew song "was clearly intended to ridicule the white-bread original" and
   "reminds us that sexual congress with nameless streetwalkers is not necessarily the stuff of romance
   and is not necessarily without its consequences. The singers (there are several) have the same thing on
   their minds as did the lonely man with the nasal voice, but here there is no hint of wine and roses."
   972 F. 2d, at 1442. Although the majority below had difficulty discerning any criticism of the original
   in 2 Live Crew's song, it assumed for purposes of its opinion that there was some. Id., at 1435-1436,
   and n. 8.

   We have less difficulty in finding that critical element in 2 Live Crew's song than the Court of Appeals
   did, although having found it we will not take the further step of evaluating its quality. The threshold
   question when fair use is raised in defense of parody is whether a parodic character may reasonably be
   perceived.16Whether, going beyond that, parody is in good taste or bad does not and should not matter
   to fair use. As Justice Holmes explained, "[i]t would be a dangerous undertaking for persons trained
   only to the law to constitute themselves final judges of the worth of [a work], outside of the narrowest
   and most obvious limits. At the one extreme some works of genius would be sure to miss appreciation.
   Their very novelty would make them repulsive until the public had learned the new language in which
   their author spoke." Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U. S. 239, 251 (1903) (circus posters
   have copyright protection); cf. Yankee Publishing Inc. v. News America Publishing, Inc., 809 F. Supp. 267,
   280 (SDNY 1992) (Leval, J.) ("First Amendment protections do not apply only to those who speak
   clearly, whose jokes are funny, and whose parodies succeed") (trademark case).

   While we might not assign a high rank to the parodic element here, we think it fair to say that 2
   Live Crew's song reasonably could be perceived as commenting on the original or criticizing it, to
   some degree. 2 Live Crew juxtaposes the romantic musings of a man whose fantasy comes true, with
   degrading taunts, a bawdy demand for sex, and a sigh of relief from paternal responsibility. The later
   words can be taken as a comment on the naivet of the original of an earlier day, as a rejection of
   its sentiment that ignores the ugliness of street life and the debasement that it signifies. It is this
   joinder of reference and ridicule that marks off the author's choice of parody from the other types
   of comment and criticism that traditionally have had a claim to fair use protection as transformative
   works.17

   The Court of Appeals, however, immediately cut short the enquiry into 2 Live Crew's fair use claim
   by confining its treatment of the first factor essentially to one relevant fact, the commercial nature
   of the use. The court then inflated the significance of this fact by applying a presumption ostensibly
   culled from Sony, that "every commercial use of copy-righted material is presumptively . . . unfair. . . ."
   Sony, 464 U. S., at 451. In giving virtually dispositive weight to the commercial nature of the parody,
   the Court of Appeals erred.

   The language of the statute makes clear that the commercial or nonprofit educational purpose of a

16. The only further judgment, indeed, that a court may pass on a work goes to an assessment of whether the parodic element is
    slight or great, and the copying small or extensive in relation to the parodic element, for a work with slight parodic element
    and extensive copying will be more likely to merely "supersede the objects" of the original. See infra, at 586-594, discussing
    factors three and four.

17. We note in passing that 2 Live Crew need not label their whole album, or even this song, a parody in order to claim fair
    use protection, nor should 2 Live Crew be penalized for this being its first parodic essay. Parody serves its goals whether
    labeled or not, and there is no reason to require parody to state the obvious (or even the reasonably perceived). See Patry &
    Perlmutter 716-717.

    244 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   work is only one element of the first factor enquiry into its purpose and character. Section 107(1)
   uses the term "including" to begin the dependent clause referring to commercial use, and the main
   clause speaks of a broader investigation into "purpose and character." As we explained in Harper &
   Row, Congress resisted attempts to narrow the ambit of this traditional enquiry by adopting categories
   of presumptively fair use, and it urged courts to preserve the breadth of their traditionally ample view
   of the universe of relevant evidence. 471 U. S., at 561; House Report, p. 66. Accordingly, the mere
   fact that a use is educational and not for profit does not insulate it from a finding of infringement,
   any more than the commercial character of a use bars a finding of fairness. If, indeed, commerciality
   carried presumptive force against a finding of fairness, the presumption would swallow nearly all of
   the illustrative uses listed in the preamble paragraph of  107, including news reporting, comment,
   criticism, teaching, scholarship, and research, since these activities "are generally conducted for profit
   in this country." Harper & Row, supra, at 592 (Brennan, J., dissenting). Congress could not have
   intended such a rule, which certainly is not inferable from the common-law cases, arising as they did
   from the world of letters in which Samuel Johnson could pronounce that "[n]o man but a blockhead
   ever wrote, except for money." 3 Boswell's Life of Johnson 19 (G. Hill ed. 1934).

   Sony itself called for no hard evidentiary presumption. There, we emphasized the need for a "sensitive
   balancing of interests," 464 U. S., at 455, n. 40, noted that Congress had "eschewed a rigid, bright-
   line approach to fair use," id., at 449, n. 31, and stated that the commercial or nonprofit educational
   character of a work is "not conclusive," id., at 448-449, but rather a fact to be "weighed along with
   other[s] in fair use decisions," id., at 449, n. 32 (quoting House Report, p. 66). The Court of Appeals's
   elevation of one sentence from Sony to a per se rule thus runs as much counter to Sony itself as to the
   long common-law tradition of fair use adjudication. Rather, as we explained in Harper & Row, Sony
   stands for the proposition that the "fact that a publication was commercial as opposed to nonprofit
   is a separate factor that tends to weigh against a finding of fair use." 471 U. S., at 562. But that is all,
   and the fact that even the force of that tendency will vary with the context is a further reason against
   elevating commerciality to hard presumptive significance. The use, for example, of a copyrighted
   work to advertise a product, even in a parody, will be entitled to less indulgence under the first factor
   of the fair use enquiry than the sale of a parody for its own sake, let alone one performed a single
   time by students in school. See generally Patry & Perlmutter 679-680; Fisher v. Dees, 794 F. 2d, at 437;
   Maxtone-Graham v. Burtchaell, 803 F. 2d 1253, 1262 (CA2 1986); Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc.,
   977 F. 2d 1510, 1522 (CA9 1992).18

   B

   The second statutory factor, "the nature of the copy-righted work,"  107(2), draws on Justice Story's
   expression, the "value of the materials used." Folsom v. Marsh, 9 F. Cas., at 348. This factor calls for
   recognition that some works are closer to the core of intended copyright protection than others, with
   the consequence that fair use is more difficult to establish when the former works are copied. See, e.
   g., Stewart v. Abend, 495 U. S., at 237-238 (contrasting fictional short story with factual works); Harper

18. Finally, regardless of the weight one might place on the alleged infringer's state of mind, compare Harper & Row, 471 U. S.,
    at 562 (fair use presupposes good faith and fair dealing) (quotation marks omitted), with Folsom v. Marsh, 9 F. Cas. 342, 349
    (No. 4,901) (CCD Mass. 1841) (good faith does not bar a finding of infringement); Leval 1126-1127 (good faith irrelevant
    to fair use analysis), we reject Acuff-Rose's argument that 2 Live Crew's request for permission to use the original should
    be weighed against a finding of fair use. Even if good faith were central to fair use, 2 Live Crew's actions do not necessarily
    suggest that they believed their version was not fair use; the offer may simply have been made in a good-faith effort to avoid
    this litigation. If the use is otherwise fair, then no permission need be sought or granted. Thus, being denied permission to
    use a work does not weigh against a finding of fair use. See Fisher v. Dees, 794 F. 2d 432, 437 (CA9 1986).

                                    15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 245
& Row, 471 U. S., at 563-564 (contrasting soon-to-be-published memoir with published speech);
Sony, 464 U. S., at 455, n. 40 (contrasting motion pictures with news broadcasts); Feist, 499 U. S., at
348-351 (contrasting creative works with bare factual compilations); 3 M. Nimmer & D. Nimmer,
Nimmer on Copyright  13.05[A][2] (1993) (hereinafter Nimmer); Leval 1116. We agree with both the
District Court and the Court of Appeals that the Orbison original's creative expression for public
dissemination falls within the core of the copyright's protective purposes. 754 F. Supp., at 1155-1156;
972 F. 2d, at 1437. This fact, however, is not much help in this case, or ever likely to help much
in separating the fair use sheep from the infringing goats in a parody case, since parodies almost
invariably copy publicly known, expressive works.

C

The third factor asks whether "the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
copyrighted work as a whole,"  107(3) (or, in Justice Story's words, "the quantity and value of the
materials used," Folsom v. Marsh, supra, at 348) are reasonable in relation to the purpose of the copying.
Here, attention turns to the persuasiveness of a parodist's justification for the particular copying done,
and the enquiry will harken back to the first of the statutory factors, for, as in prior cases, we recognize
that the extent of permissible copying varies with the purpose and character of the use. See Sony,
supra, at 449-450 (reproduction of entire work "does not have its ordinary effect of militating against
a finding of fair use" as to home videotaping of television programs); Harper & Row, supra, at 564
("[E]ven substantial quotations might qualify as fair use in a review of a published work or a news
account of a speech" but not in a scoop of a soon-to-be-published memoir). The facts bearing on this
factor will also tend to address the fourth, by revealing the degree to which the parody may serve as a
market substitute for the original or potentially licensed derivatives. See Leval 1123.

The District Court considered the song's parodic purpose in finding that 2 Live Crew had not helped
themselves overmuch. 754 F. Supp., at 1156-1157. The Court of Appeals disagreed, stating that
"[w]hile it may not be inappropriate to find that no more was taken than necessary, the copying was
qualitatively substantial . . . . We conclude that taking the heart of the original and making it the heart
of a new work was to purloin a substantial portion of the essence of the original." 972 F. 2d, at 1438.

The Court of Appeals is of course correct that this factor calls for thought not only about the quantity
of the materials used, but about their quality and importance, too. In Harper & Row, for example,
the Nation had taken only some 300 words out of President Ford's memoirs, but we signaled the
significance of the quotations in finding them to amount to "the heart of the book," the part most
likely to be newsworthy and important in licensing serialization. 471 U. S., at 564-566, 568 (internal
quotation marks omitted). We also agree with the Court of Appeals that whether "a substantial portion
of the infringing work was copied verbatim" from the copyrighted work is a relevant question, see
id., at 565, for it may reveal a dearth of transformative character or purpose under the first factor,
or a greater likelihood of market harm under the fourth; a work composed primarily of an original,
particularly its heart, with little added or changed, is more likely to be a merely superseding use,
fulfilling demand for the original.

Where we part company with the court below is in applying these guides to parody, and in particular
to parody in the song before us. Parody presents a difficult case. Parody's humor, or in any event
its comment, necessarily springs from recognizable allusion to its object through distorted imitation.
Its art lies in the tension between a known original and its parodic twin. When parody takes aim at
a particular original work, the parody must be able to "conjure up" at least enough of that original

246 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   to make the object of its critical wit recognizable. See, e. g., Elsmere Music, 623 F. 2d, at 253, n. 1;
   Fisher v. Dees, 794 F. 2d, at 438-439. What makes for this recognition is quotation of the original's
   most distinctive or memorable features, which the parodist can be sure the audience will know. Once
   enough has been taken to assure identification, how much more is reasonable will depend, say, on the
   extent to which the song's overriding purpose and character is to parody the original or, in contrast,
   the likelihood that the parody may serve as a market substitute for the original. But using some
   characteristic features cannot be avoided.

   We think the Court of Appeals was insufficiently appreciative of parody's need for the recognizable
   sight or sound when it ruled 2 Live Crew's use unreasonable as a matter of law. It is true, of course,
   that 2 Live Crew copied the characteristic opening bass riff (or musical phrase) of the original, and
   true that the words of the first line copy the Orbison lyrics. But if quotation of the opening riff and the
   first line may be said to go to the "heart" of the original, the heart is also what most readily conjures
   up the song for parody, and it is the heart at which parody takes aim. Copying does not become
   excessive in relation to parodic purpose merely because the portion taken was the original's heart. If
   2 Live Crew had copied a significantly less memorable part of the original, it is difficult to see how its
   parodic character would have come through. See Fisher v. Dees, supra, at 439.

   This is not, of course, to say that anyone who calls himself a parodist can skim the cream and get
   away scot free. In parody, as in news reporting, see Harper & Row, supra, context is everything, and
   the question of fairness asks what else the parodist did besides go to the heart of the original. It is
   significant that 2 Live Crew not only copied the first line of the original, but thereafter departed
   markedly from the Orbison lyrics for its own ends. 2 Live Crew not only copied the bass riff and
   repeated it,19 but also produced otherwise distinctive sounds, interposing "scraper" noise, over-laying
   the music with solos in different keys, and altering the drum beat. See 754 F. Supp., at 1155. This is not
   a case, then, where "a substantial portion" of the parody itself is composed of a "verbatim" copying of
   the original. It is not, that is, a case where the parody is so insubstantial, as compared to the copying,
   that the third factor must be resolved as a matter of law against the parodists.

   Suffice it to say here that, as to the lyrics, we think the Court of Appeals correctly suggested that "no
   more was taken than necessary," 972 F. 2d, at 1438, but just for that reason, we fail to see how the
   copying can be excessive in relation to its parodic purpose, even if the portion taken is the original's
   "heart." As to the music, we express no opinion whether repetition of the bass riff is excessive copying,
   and we remand to permit evaluation of the amount taken, in light of the song's parodic purpose and
   character, its transformative elements, and considerations of the potential for market substitution
   sketched more fully below.

   D

   The fourth fair use factor is "the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the
   copyrighted work."  107(4). It requires courts to consider not only the extent of market harm caused
   by the particular actions of the alleged infringer, but also "whether unrestricted and widespread
   conduct of the sort engaged in by the defendant . . . would result in a substantially adverse impact on
   the potential market" for the original. Nimmer  13.05[A][4], p. 13-102.61 (footnote omitted); accord,
   Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 569; Senate Report, p. 65; Folsom v. Marsh, 9 F. Cas., at 349. The enquiry

19. This may serve to heighten the comic effect of the parody, as one witness stated, App. 32a, Affidavit of Oscar Brand; see also
    Elsmere Music, Inc. v. National Broadcasting Co., 482 F. Supp. 741, 747 (SDNY 1980) (repetition of "I Love Sodom"), or serve to
    dazzle with the original's music, as Acuff-Rose now contends.

                                    15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 247
   "must take account not only of harm to the original but also of harm to the market for derivative
   works." Harper & Row, supra, at 568.

   Since fair use is an affirmative defense,20 its proponent would have difficulty carrying the burden of
   demonstrating fair use without favorable evidence about relevant markets.21 In moving for summary
   judgment, 2 Live Crew left themselves at just such a disadvantage when they failed to address the
   effect on the market for rap derivatives, and confined themselves to uncontroverted submissions that
   there was no likely effect on the market for the original. They did not, however, thereby subject
   themselves to the evidentiary presumption applied by the Court of Appeals. In assessing the likelihood
   of significant market harm, the Court of Appeals quoted from language in Sony that "`[i]f the intended
   use is for commercial gain, that likelihood may be presumed. But if it is for a noncommercial purpose,
   the likelihood must be demonstrated.'" 972 F. 2d, at 1438, quoting Sony, 464 U. S., at 451. The court
   reasoned that because "the use of the copyrighted work is wholly commercial . . . we presume that a
   likelihood of future harm to Acuff-Rose exists." 972 F. 2d, at 1438. In so doing, the court resolved the
   fourth factor against 2 Live Crew, just as it had the first, by applying a presumption about the effect of
   commercial use, a presumption which as applied here we hold to be error.

   No "presumption" or inference of market harm that might find support in Sony is applicable to a
   case involving something beyond mere duplication for commercial purposes. Sony's discussion of a
   presumption contrasts a context of verbatim copying of the original in its entirety for commercial
   purposes, with the noncommercial context of Sony itself (home copying of television programming).
   In the former circumstances, what Sony said simply makes common sense: when a commercial use
   amounts to mere duplication of the entirety of an original, it clearly "supersede[s] the objects," Folsom
   v. Marsh, supra, at 348, of the original and serves as a market replacement for it, making it likely that
   cognizable market harm to the original will occur. Sony, supra, at 451. But when, on the contrary,
   the second use is transformative, market substitution is at least less certain, and market harm may
   not be so readily inferred. Indeed, as to parody pure and simple, it is more likely that the new work
   will not affect the market for the original in a way cognizable under this factor, that is, by acting as a
   substitute for it ("supersed[ing] [its] objects"). See Leval 1125; Patry & Perlmutter 692, 697-698. This
   is so because the parody and the original usually serve different market functions. Bisceglia, ASCAP,
   Copyright Law Symposium, No. 34, at 23.

   We do not, of course, suggest that a parody may not harm the market at all, but when a lethal parody,
   like a scathing theater review, kills demand for the original, it does not produce a harm cognizable
   under the Copyright Act. Because "parody may quite legitimately aim at garroting the original,
   destroying it commercially as well as artistically," B. Kaplan, An Unhurried View of Copyright 69
   (1967), the role of the courts is to distinguish between "[b]iting criticism [that merely] suppresses
   demand [and] copyright infringement[, which] usurps it." Fisher v. Dees, 794 F. 2d, at 438.

   This distinction between potentially remediable displacement and unremediable disparagement is
   reflected in the rule that there is no protectible derivative market for criticism. The market for

20. Harper & Row, 471 U. S., at 561; H. R. Rep. No. 102-836, p. 3, n. 3 (1992).

21. Even favorable evidence, without more, is no guarantee of fairness. Judge Leval gives the example of the film producer's
    appropriation of a composer's previously unknown song that turns the song into a commercial success; the boon to the song
    does not make the film's simple copying fair. Leval 1124, n. 84. This factor, no less than the other three, may be addressed
    only through a "sensitive balancing of interests." Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U. S. 417, 455, n. 40
    (1984). Market harm is a matter of degree, and the importance of this factor will vary, not only with the amount of harm, but
    also with the relative strength of the showing on the other factors.

    248 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   potential derivative uses includes only those that creators of original works would in general develop
   or license others to develop. Yet the unlikelihood that creators of imaginative works will license
   critical reviews or lampoons of their own productions removes such uses from the very notion of a
   potential licensing market. "People ask . . . for criticism, but they only want praise." S. Maugham, Of
   Human Bondage 241 (Penguin ed. 1992). Thus, to the extent that the opinion below may be read to
   have considered harm to the market for parodies of "Oh, Pretty Woman," see 972 F. 2d, at 1439, the
   court erred. Accord, Fisher v. Dees, supra, at 437; Leval 1125; Patry & Perlmutter 688-691.22

   In explaining why the law recognizes no derivative market for critical works, including parody, we
   have, of course, been speaking of the later work as if it had nothing but a critical aspect (i. e., "parody
   pure and simple," supra, at 591).23 But the later work may have a more complex character, with effects
   not only in the arena of criticism but also in protectible markets for derivative works, too. In that
   sort of case, the law looks beyond the criticism to the other elements of the work, as it does here. 2
   Live Crew's song comprises not only parody but also rap music, and the derivative market for rap
   music is a proper focus of enquiry, see Harper & Row, supra, at 568; Nimmer  13.05[B]. Evidence of
   substantial harm to it would weigh against a finding of fair use,24 because the licensing of derivatives
   is an important economic incentive to the creation of originals. See 17 U. S. C.  106(2) (copyright
   owner has rights to derivative works). Of course, the only harm to derivatives that need concern us,
   as discussed above, is the harm of market substitution. The fact that a parody may impair the market
   for derivative uses by the very effectiveness of its critical commentary is no more relevant under
   copyright than the like threat to the original market.

   Although 2 Live Crew submitted uncontroverted affidavits on the question of market harm to the
   original, neither they, nor Acuff-Rose, introduced evidence or affidavits addressing the likely effect of
   2 Live Crew's parodic rap song on the market for a nonparody, rap version of "Oh, Pretty Woman."
   And while Acuff-Rose would have us find evidence of a rap market in the very facts that 2 Live Crew
   recorded a rap parody of "Oh, Pretty Woman" and another rap group sought a license to record a
   rap derivative, there was no evidence that a potential rap market was harmed in any way by 2 Live
   Crew's parody, rap version. The fact that 2 Live Crew's parody sold as part of a collection of rap
   songs says very little about the parody's effect on a market for a rap version of the original, either
   of the music alone or of the music with its lyrics. The District Court essentially passed on this issue,
   observing that Acuff-Rose is free to record "whatever version of the original it desires," 754 F. Supp.,
   at 1158; the Court of Appeals went the other way by erroneous presumption. Contrary to each
   treatment, it is impossible to deal with the fourth factor except by recognizing that a silent record
   on an important factor bearing on fair use disentitled the proponent of the defense, 2 Live Crew, to
   summary judgment. The evidentiary hole will doubtless be plugged on remand.

   III

22. See Nimmer  13.05[A][4], p. 13-102.61 ("a substantially adverse impact on the potential market"); Leval 1125 ("reasonably
    substantial" harm); Patry & Perlmutter 697-698 (same).

23. We express no opinion as to the derivative markets for works using elements of an original as vehicles for satire or
    amusement, making no comment on the original or criticism of it.

24. In some cases it may be difficult to determine whence the harm flows. In such cases, the other fair use factors may provide
    some indicia of the likely source of the harm. A work whose overriding purpose and character is parodic and whose
    borrowing is slight in relation to its parody will be far less likely to cause cognizable harm than a work with little parodic
    content and much copying.

                                    15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 249
It was error for the Court of Appeals to conclude that the commercial nature of 2 Live Crew's
parody of "Oh, Pretty Woman" rendered it presumptively unfair. No such evidentiary presumption
is available to address either the first factor, the character and purpose of the use, or the fourth,
market harm, in determining whether a transformative use, such as parody, is a fair one. The court
also erred in holding that 2 Live Crew had necessarily copied excessively from the Orbison original,
considering the parodic purpose of the use. We therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals
and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
APPENDIX A TO OPINION OF THE COURT
"Oh, Pretty Woman" by Roy Orbison and William Dees
Pretty Woman, walking down the street,
Pretty Woman, the kind I like to meet,
Pretty Woman, I don't believe you, you're not the truth,
No one could look as good as you Mercy
Pretty Woman, won't you pardon me,
Pretty Woman, I couldn't help but see,
Pretty Woman, that you look lovely as can be Are you lonely just like me?
Pretty Woman, stop a while,
Pretty Woman, talk a while,
Pretty Woman give your smile to me
Pretty Woman, yeah, yeah, yeah
Pretty Woman, look my way,
Pretty Woman, say you'll stay with me
`Cause I need you, I'll treat you right
Come to me baby, Be mine tonight
Pretty Woman, don't walk on by,
Pretty Woman, don't make me cry,
Pretty Woman, don't walk away,
Hey, O. K.

250 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
If that's the way it must be, O. K.
I guess I'll go on home, it's late
There'll be tomorrow night, but wait!
What do I see
Is she walking back to me?
Yeah, she's walking back to me!
Oh, Pretty Woman.
APPENDIX B TO OPINION OF THE COURT
"Pretty Woman" as Recorded by 2 Live Crew
Pretty woman walkin' down the street
Pretty woman girl you look so sweet
Pretty woman you bring me down to that knee
Pretty woman you make me wanna beg please
Oh, pretty woman
Big hairy woman you need to shave that stuff
Big hairy woman you know I bet it's tough
Big hairy woman all that hair it ain't legit
`Cause you look like `Cousin It'
Big hairy woman
Bald headed woman girl your hair won't grow
Bald headed woman you got a teeny weeny afro
Bald headed woman you know your hair could look nice
Bald headed woman first you got to roll it with rice
Bald headed woman here, let me get this hunk of biz for ya
Ya know what I'm saying you look better than rice a roni
Oh bald headed woman
Big hairy woman come on in

                               15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 251
And don't forget your bald headed friend

Hey pretty woman let the boys Jump in

Two timin' woman girl you know you ain't right

Two timin' woman you's out with my boy last night

Two timin' woman that takes a load off my mind

Two timin' woman now I know the baby ain't mine

Oh, two timin' woman

Oh pretty woman

JUSTICE KENNEDY, concurring.

I agree that remand is appropriate and join the opinion of the Court, with these further observations
about the fair use analysis of parody.

The common-law method instated by the fair use provision of the copyright statute, 17 U. S. C. 
107 (1988 ed. and Supp. IV), presumes that rules will emerge from the course of decisions. I agree
that certain general principles are now discernible to define the fair use exception for parody. One
of these rules, as the Court observes, is that parody may qualify as fair use regardless of whether it
is published or performed for profit. Ante, at 591. Another is that parody may qualify as fair use only
if it draws upon the original composition to make humorous or ironic commentary about that same
composition. Ante, at 580. It is not enough that the parody use the original in a humorous fashion,
however creative that humor may be. The parody must target the original, and not just its general
style, the genre of art to which it belongs, or society as a whole (although if it targets the original, it
may target those features as well). See Rogers v. Koons, 960 F. 2d 301, 310 (CA2 1992) ("[T]hough the
satire need not be only of the copied work and may . . . also be a parody of modern society, the copied
work must be, at least in part, an object of the parody"); Fisher v. Dees, 794 F. 2d 432, 436 (CA9 1986)
("[A] humorous or satiric work deserves protection under the fair-use doctrine only if the copied work
is at least partly the target of the work in question"). This prerequisite confines fair use protection to
works whose very subject is the original composition and so necessitates some borrowing from it. See
MCA, Inc. v. Wilson, 677 F. 2d 180, 185 (CA2 1981) ("[I]f the copyrighted song is not at least in part an
object of the parody, there is no need to conjure it up"); Bisceglia, Parody and Copyright Protection:
Turning the Balancing Act Into a Juggling Act, in ASCAP, Copyright Law Symposium, No. 34, pp.
23-29 (1987). It also protects works we have reason to fear will not be licensed by copyright holders
who wish to shield their works from criticism. See Fisher, supra, at 437 ("Self-esteem is seldom strong
enough to permit the granting of permission even in exchange for a reasonable fee"); Posner, When Is
Parody Fair Use?, 21 J. Legal Studies 67, 73 (1992) ("There is an obstruction when the parodied work
is a target of the parodist's criticism, for it may be in the private interest of the copyright owner, but
not in the social interest, to suppress criticism of the work") (emphasis deleted).

If we keep the definition of parody within these limits, we have gone most of the way towards
satisfying the four-factor fair use test in  107. The first factor (the purpose and character of use) itself
concerns the definition of parody. The second factor (the nature of the copyrighted work) adds little

252 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
to the first, since "parodies almost invariably copy publicly known, expressive works." Ante, at 586.
The third factor (the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the whole) is likewise
subsumed within the definition of parody. In determining whether an alleged parody has taken too
much, the target of the parody is what gives content to the inquiry. Some parodies, by their nature,
require substantial copying. See Elsmere Music, Inc. v. National Broadcasting Co., 623 F. 2d 252 (CA2
1980) (holding that "I Love Sodom" skit on "Saturday Night Live" is legitimate parody of the "I Love
New York" campaign). Other parodies, like Lewis Carroll's "You Are Old, Father William," need only
take parts of the original composition. The third factor does reinforce the principle that courts should
not accord fair use protection to profiteers who do no more than add a few silly words to someone
else's song or place the characters from a familiar work in novel or eccentric poses. See, e. g., Walt
Disney Productions v. Air Pirates, 581 F. 2d 751 (CA9 1978); DC Comics Inc. v. Unlimited Monkey Business,
Inc., 598 F. Supp. 110 (ND Ga. 1984). But, as I believe the Court acknowledges, ante, at 588-589, it is
by no means a test of mechanical application. In my view, it serves in effect to ensure compliance with
the targeting requirement.

As to the fourth factor (the effect of the use on the market for the original), the Court acknowledges
that it is legitimate for parody to suppress demand for the original by its critical effect. Ante, at
591-592. What it may not do is usurp demand by its substitutive effect. Ibid. It will be difficult,
of course, for courts to determine whether harm to the market results from a parody's critical or
substitutive effects. But again, if we keep the definition of parody within appropriate bounds, this
inquiry may be of little significance. If a work targets another for humorous or ironic effect, it is by
definition a new creative work. Creative works can compete with other creative works for the same
market, even if their appeal is overlapping. Factor four thus underscores the importance of ensuring
that the parody is in fact an independent creative work, which is why the parody must "make some
critical comment or statement about the original work which reflects the original perspective of the
parodist--thereby giving the parody social value beyond its entertainment function." Metro-Goldwyn-
Mayer, Inc. v. Showcase Atlanta Cooperative Productions, Inc., 479 F. Supp. 351, 357 (ND Ga. 1979).

The fair use factors thus reinforce the importance of keeping the definition of parody within proper
limits. More than arguable parodic content should be required to deem a would-be parody a fair
use. Fair use is an affirmative defense, so doubts about whether a given use is fair should not be
resolved in favor of the self-proclaimed parodist. We should not make it easy for musicians to exploit
existing works and then later claim that their rendition was a valuable commentary on the original.
Almost any revamped modern version of a familiar composition can be construed as a "comment
on the naivet of the original," ante, at 583, because of the difference in style and because it will
be amusing to hear how the old tune sounds in the new genre. Just the thought of a rap version
of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony or "Achy Breaky Heart" is bound to make people smile. If we allow
any weak transformation to qualify as parody, however, we weaken the protection of copyright. And
under-protection of copyright disserves the goals of copyright just as much as overprotection, by
reducing the financial incentive to create.

The Court decides it is "fair to say that 2 Live Crew's song reasonably could be perceived as
commenting on the original or criticizing it, to some degree." Ibid. (applying the first fair use factor).
While I am not so assured that 2 Live Crew's song is a legitimate parody, the Court's treatment of the
remaining factors leaves room for the District Court to determine on remand that the song is not a
fair use. As future courts apply our fair use analysis, they must take care to ensure that not just any
commercial takeoff is rationalized post hoc as a parody.

                               15. STATUTORY LIMITS ON COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT, INCLUDING FAIR USE 253
With these observations, I join the opinion of the Court.

254 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 16

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:

           Recall the facts and legal holding of Star Athletica v. Varsity Brands.
           Explain the following concepts: useful articles doctrine, separability and merger.
           Recall the statutory components of the useful articles doctrine; and
           Analyze fact patterns in terms of the useful articles doctrine.

One of the most complex issues in intellectual property law is dealing with products or activities at the
boundaries of one or more doctrine. This matters because often specific policy choices are made in
the context of one form of intellectual property right and allowing another intellectual property right
to also cover the same subject matter as the first right results in those policy choices essentially being
overridden by the policy choices embedded in the second right. We can think of this as keeping each
intellectual property right in its own "channel." This is especially important when the policy choices
for particular intellectual property right manifest in negative protection - that is, a policy decision to
allow copying or use by others. An example of this would be the 20-year term on a patent. If another
form of intellectual property allowed for longer protection of the same subject matter, then others
would not be able to use or build on that invention after the expiration of the patent.

In the section, we examined preemption, which is one approach to policing the boundaries of an
intellectual property right and preventing it from bleeding over into another. However, preemption
only applies in the context of federal-state relationships. Another approach is to statutorily limit an
intellectual property right so as to keep it from crossing over into the subject matter governed by
another intellectual property right.

You have already seen one example of statutorily limiting an intellectual property right in the concept
of functionality in trademark law. In this section we will examine another example: the limits on
copyright protection for "useful articles."

17 U.S.C.  101. Definitions (2010)

                                     16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 255
   ...
   Useful Article: A "useful article" is an article having an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not merely to
   portray the appearance of the article or to convey information. An article that is normally a part of a useful
   article is considered a "useful article".
   ...
   Pictorial, Graphical, and Sculptural Works: "Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works" include two-
   dimensional and three-dimensional works of fine, graphic, and applied art, photographs, prints and art
   reproductions, maps, globes, charts, diagrams, models, and technical drawings, including architectural
   plans. Such works shall include works of artistic craftsmanship insofar as their form but not their
   mechanical or utilitarian aspects are concerned; the design of a useful article, as defined in this section,
   shall be considered a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work only if, and only to the extent that, such design
   incorporates pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features that can be identified separately from, and are capable
   of existing independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the article.

256 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
STAR ATHLETICA, L.L.C. V. VARSITY BRANDS (2017)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Star Athletica v. Varisity Brands, think about these questions:
           How do the different components of the copyright state relating to useful articles fit together?
           What rule does the court adopt for determining whether a feature is separable?
           Based on Star Athletica, how would you analyze copyright protection in a three-dimensional object,
              such as the wavy bike racks you can see around town?

                                     Star Athletica, L.L.C. v. Varsity Brands, et al.
                                                      137 S.Ct. 1002 (2017)

Justice THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
Congress has provided copyright protection for original works of art, but not for industrial designs.
The line between art and industrial design, however, is often difficult to draw. This is particularly true
when an industrial design incorporates artistic elements. Congress has afforded limited protection for
these artistic elements by providing that "pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features" of the "design of a
useful article" are eligible for copyright protection as artistic works if those features "can be identified
separately from, and are capable of existing independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the article." 17
U.S.C.  101.
We granted certiorari to resolve widespread disagreement over the proper test for implementing
 101's separate-identification and independent-existence requirements. 578 U.S. ----, 136 S.Ct.
1823, 194 L.Ed.2d 829 (2016). We hold that a feature incorporated into the design of a useful article is
eligible for copyright protection only if the feature (1) can be perceived as a two- or three-dimensional
work of art separate from the useful article and (2) would qualify as a protectable pictorial, graphic, or
sculptural work--either on its own or fixed in some other tangible medium of expression--if it were
imagined separately from the useful article into which it is incorporated. Because that test is satisfied
in this case, we affirm.
I

Respondents Varsity Brands, Inc., Varsity Spirit Corporation, and Varsity Spirit Fashions & Supplies,
Inc., design, make, and sell cheerleading uniforms. Respondents have obtained or acquired more
than 200 U.S. copyright registrations for two-dimensional designs appearing on the surface of their

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 257
uniforms and other garments. These designs are primarily "combinations, positionings, and
arrangements of elements" that include "chevrons ..., lines, curves, stripes, angles, diagonals, inverted
[chevrons], coloring, and shapes." App. 237. At issue in this case are Designs 299A, 299B, 074, 078, and
0815. See Appendix, infra.

Petitioner Star Athletica, L.L.C., also markets and sells cheerleading uniforms. Respondents sued
petitioner for infringing their copyrights in the five designs. The District Court entered summary
judgment for petitioner on respondents' copyright claims on the ground that the designs did not
qualify as protectable pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works. It reasoned that the designs served the
useful, or "utilitarian," function of identifying the garments as "cheerleading uniforms" and therefore
could not be "physically or conceptually" separated under  101 "from the utilitarian function" of the
uniform. 2014 WL 819422, *8-*9 (W.D.Tenn., Mar. 1, 2014).

The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed. 799 F.3d 468, 471 (2015). In its view, the "graphic
designs" were "separately identifiable" because the designs "and a blank cheerleading uniform can
appear `side by side'--one as a graphic design, and one as a cheerleading uniform." Id., at 491 (quoting
Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices  924.2(B) (3d ed. 2014) (Compendium)). And it
determined that the designs were " `capable of existing independently' " because they could be
incorporated onto the surface of different types of garments, or hung on the wall and framed as art.
799 F.3d, at 491, 492.

Judge McKeague dissented. He would have held that, because "identifying the wearer as a cheerleader"
is a utilitarian function of a cheerleading uniform and the surface designs were "integral to" achieving
that function, the designs were inseparable from the uniforms. Id., at 495-496.

II

The first element of a copyright-infringement claim is "ownership of a valid copyright." Feist
Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 361, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d 358
(1991). A valid copyright extends only to copyrightable subject matter. See 4 M. Nimmer & D.
Nimmer, Copyright  13.01[A] (2010) (Nimmer). The Copyright Act of 1976 defines copyrightable
subject matter as "original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression." 17 U.S.C.
 102(a).

"Works of authorship" include "pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works,"  102(a)(5), which the statute
defines to include "two-dimensional and three-dimensional works of fine, graphic, and applied art,
photographs, prints and art reproductions, maps, globes, charts, diagrams, models, and technical
drawings, including architectural plans,"  101. And a work of authorship is " `fixed' in a tangible
medium of expression when it[ is] embodi[ed] in a" "material objec[t] ... from which the work can be
perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated." Ibid. (definitions of "fixed" and "copies").

The Copyright Act also establishes a special rule for copyrighting a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural
work incorporated into a "useful article," which is defined as "an article having an intrinsic utilitarian
function that is not merely to portray the appearance of the article or to convey information." Ibid. The
statute does not protect useful articles as such. Rather, "the design of a useful article" is "considered a
pictorial, graphical, or sculptural work only if, and only to the extent that, such design incorporates

258 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features that can be identified separately from, and are capable of
existing independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the article." Ibid.

Courts, the Copyright Office, and commentators have described the analysis undertaken to determine
whether a feature can be separately identified from, and exist independently of, a useful article as
"separability." In this case, our task is to determine whether the arrangements of lines, chevrons,
and colorful shapes appearing on the surface of respondents' cheerleading uniforms are eligible for
copyright protection as separable features of the design of those cheerleading uniforms.

A

As an initial matter, we must address whether separability analysis is necessary in this case.

1

Respondents argue that "[s]eparability is only implicated when a [pictorial, graphic, or sculptural]
work is the `design of a useful article.' " Brief for Respondents 25. They contend that the surface
decorations in this case are "two-dimensional graphic designs that appear on useful articles," but are
not themselves designs of useful articles. Id., at 52. Consequently, the surface decorations are protected
two-dimensional works of graphic art without regard to any separability analysis under  101. Ibid.;
see 2 W. Patry, Copyright  3:151, p. 3-485 (2016) (Patry) ("Courts looking at two-dimensional design
claims should not apply the separability analysis regardless of the three-dimensional form that design
is embodied in"). Under this theory, two-dimensional artistic features on the surface of useful articles
are "inherently separable." Brief for Respondents 26.

This argument is inconsistent with the text of  101. The statute requires separability analysis for
any "pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features" incorporated into the "design of a useful article."
"Design" refers here to "the combination" of "details" or "features" that "go to make up" the useful
article. 3 Oxford English Dictionary 244 (def. 7, first listing) (1933) (OED). Furthermore, the words
"pictorial" and "graphic" include, in this context, two-dimensional features such as pictures, paintings,
or drawings. See 4 id., at 359 (defining "[g]raphic" to mean "[o]f or pertaining to drawing or painting");
7 id., at 830 (defining "[p]ictorial" to mean "of or pertaining to painting or drawing"). And the statute
expressly defines "[p]ictorial, graphical, and sculptural works" to include "two-dimensional ... works
of ... art."  101. The statute thus provides that the "design of a useful article" can include two-
dimensional "pictorial" and "graphic" features, and separability analysis applies to those features just
as it does to three-dimensional "sculptural" features.

2

The United States makes a related but distinct argument against applying separability analysis in this
case, which respondents do not and have not advanced. As part of their copyright registrations for
the designs in this case, respondents deposited with the Copyright Office drawings and photographs
depicting the designs incorporated onto cheerleading uniforms. App. 213-219; Appendix, infra. The
Government argues that, assuming the other statutory requirements were met, respondents obtained
a copyright in the deposited drawings and photographs and have simply reproduced those
copyrighted works on the surface of a useful article, as they would have the exclusive right to do
under the Copyright Act. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 14-15, 17-22. Accordingly, the
Government urges, separability analysis is unnecessary on the record in this case. We generally do
not entertain arguments that were not raised below and that are not advanced in this Court by any

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 259
party, Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., 573 U.S. ----, ----, 134 S.Ct. 2751, 189 L.Ed.2d 675 (2014),
because "[i]t is not the Court's usual practice to adjudicate either legal or predicate factual questions in
the first instance," CRST Van Expedited, Inc. v. EEOC, 578 U.S. ----, ----, 136 S.Ct. 1642, 1653, 194
L.Ed.2d 707 (2016). We decline to depart from our usual practice here.

B

We must now decide when a feature incorporated into a useful article "can be identified separately
from" and is "capable of existing independently of" "the utilitarian aspects" of the article. This is
not a free-ranging search for the best copyright policy, but rather "depends solely on statutory
interpretation." Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 214, 74 S.Ct. 460, 98 L.Ed. 630 (1954). "The controlling
principle in this case is the basic and unexceptional rule that courts must give effect to the clear
meaning of statutes as written." Estate of Cowart v. Nicklos Drilling Co., 505 U.S. 469, 476, 112 S.Ct.
2589, 120 L.Ed.2d 379 (1992). We thus begin and end our inquiry with the text, giving each word its
"ordinary, contemporary, common meaning." Walters v. Metropolitan Ed. Enterprises, Inc., 519 U.S. 202,
207, 117 S.Ct. 660, 136 L.Ed.2d 644 (1997) (internal quotation marks omitted). We do not, however,
limit this inquiry to the text of  101 in isolation. "[I]nterpretation of a phrase of uncertain reach is not
confined to a single sentence when the text of the whole statute gives instruction as to its meaning."
Maracich v. Spears, 570 U.S. ----, ----, 133 S.Ct. 2191, 2203, 186 L.Ed.2d 275 (2013). We thus "look
to the provisions of the whole law" to determine  101's meaning. United States v. Heirs of Boisdore, 8
How. 113, 122, 12 L.Ed. 1009 (1849).

1

The statute provides that a "pictorial, graphic, or sculptural featur [e]" incorporated into the "design
of a useful article" is eligible for copyright protection if it (1) "can be identified separately from,"
and (2) is "capable of existing independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the article."  101. The first
requirement--separate identification--is not onerous. The decisionmaker need only be able to look
at the useful article and spot some two- or three-dimensional element that appears to have pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural qualities. See 2 Patry  3:146, at 3-474 to 3-475.

The independent-existence requirement is ordinarily more difficult to satisfy. The decisionmaker
must determine that the separately identified feature has the capacity to exist apart from the
utilitarian aspects of the article. See 2 OED 88 (def. 5) (defining "[c]apable" of as "[h]aving the needful
capacity, power, or fitness for"). In other words, the feature must be able to exist as its own pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural work as defined in  101 once it is imagined apart from the useful article. If the
feature is not capable of existing as a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work once separated from the
useful article, then it was not a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural feature of that article, but rather one of
its utilitarian aspects.

Of course, to qualify as a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work on its own, the feature cannot itself
be a useful article or "[a]n article that is normally a part of a useful article" (which is itself considered
a useful article).  101. Nor could someone claim a copyright in a useful article merely by creating
a replica of that article in some other medium--for example, a cardboard model of a car. Although
the replica could itself be copyrightable, it would not give rise to any rights in the useful article that
inspired it.

2

260 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The statute as a whole confirms our interpretation. The Copyright Act provides "the owner of [a]
copyright" with the "exclusive righ[t] ... to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies."  106(1). The
statute clarifies that this right "includes the right to reproduce the [copyrighted] work in or on any
kind of article, whether useful or otherwise."  113(a). Section 101 is, in essence, the mirror image
of  113(a). Whereas  113(a) protects a work of authorship first fixed in some tangible medium
other than a useful article and subsequently applied to a useful article,  101 protects art first fixed in
the medium of a useful article. The two provisions make clear that copyright protection extends to
pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works regardless of whether they were created as freestanding art
or as features of useful articles. The ultimate separability question, then, is whether the feature for
which copyright protection is claimed would have been eligible for copyright protection as a pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural work had it originally been fixed in some tangible medium other than a useful
article before being applied to a useful article.

3

This interpretation is also consistent with the history of the Copyright Act. In Mazer, a case decided
under the 1909 Copyright Act, the respondents copyrighted a statuette depicting a dancer. The
statuette was intended for use as a lamp base, "with electric wiring, sockets and lamp shades attached."
347 U.S., at 202, 74 S.Ct. 460. Copies of the statuette were sold both as lamp bases and separately
as statuettes. Id., at 203, 74 S.Ct. 460. The petitioners copied the statuette and sold lamps with the
statuette as the base. They defended against the respondents' infringement suit by arguing that the
respondents did not have a copyright in a statuette intended for use as a lamp base. Id., at 204-205, 74
S.Ct. 460.

Two of Mazer `s holdings are relevant here. First, the Court held that the respondents owned a
copyright in the statuette even though it was intended for use as a lamp base. See id., at 214, 74
S.Ct. 460. In doing so, the Court approved the Copyright Office's regulation extending copyright
protection to works of art that might also serve a useful purpose. See ibid. (approving 37 C.F.R. 
202.8(a) (1949) (protecting "works of artistic craftsmanship, in so far as their form but not their
mechanical or utilitarian aspects are concerned")).

Second, the Court held that it was irrelevant to the copyright inquiry whether the statuette was
initially created as a freestanding sculpture or as a lamp base. 347 U.S., at 218-219, 74 S.Ct. 460 ("Nor
do we think the subsequent registration of a work of art published as an element in a manufactured
article, is a misuse of copyright. This is not different from the registration of a statuette and its later
embodiment in an industrial article"). Mazer thus interpreted the 1909 Act consistently with the rule
discussed above: If a design would have been copyrightable as a standalone pictorial, graphic, or
sculptural work, it is copyrightable if created first as part of a useful article.

Shortly thereafter, the Copyright Office enacted a regulation implementing the holdings of Mazer. See
1 Nimmer  2A.08[B][1][b] (2016). As amended, the regulation introduced the modern separability test
to copyright law:

"If the sole intrinsic function of an article is its utility, the fact that the article is unique and attractively
shaped will not qualify it as a work of art. However, if the shape of a utilitarian article incorporates
features, such as artistic sculpture, carving, or pictorial representation, which can be identified
separately and are capable of existing independently as a work of art, such features will be eligible for
registration." 37 C.F.R.  202.10(c) (1960) (punctuation altered).

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 261
Congress essentially lifted the language governing protection for the design of a useful article directly
from the post-Mazer regulations and placed it into  101 of the 1976 Act. Consistent with Mazer, the
approach we outline today interprets ㎣ 101 and 113 in a way that would afford copyright protection
to the statuette in Mazer regardless of whether it was first created as a standalone sculptural work or
as the base of the lamp. See 347 U.S., at 218-219, 74 S.Ct. 460.

C

In sum, a feature of the design of a useful article is eligible for copyright if, when identified and
imagined apart from the useful article, it would qualify as a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work
either on its own or when fixed in some other tangible medium.

Applying this test to the surface decorations on the cheerleading uniforms is straightforward. First,
one can identify the decorations as features having pictorial, graphic, or sculptural qualities. Second,
if the arrangement of colors, shapes, stripes, and chevrons on the surface of the cheerleading uniforms
were separated from the uniform and applied in another medium--for example, on a painter's
canvas--they would qualify as "two-dimensional ... works of ... art,"  101. And imaginatively
removing the surface decorations from the uniforms and applying them in another medium would
not replicate the uniform itself. Indeed, respondents have applied the designs in this case to other
media of expression--different types of clothing--without replicating the uniform. See App. 273-279.
The decorations are therefore separable from the uniforms and eligible for copyright protection.[1]

The dissent argues that the designs are not separable because imaginatively removing them from
the uniforms and placing them in some other medium of expression--a canvas, for example--would
create "pictures of cheerleader uniforms." Post, at 1035 - 1036 (opinion of BREYER, J.). Petitioner
similarly argues that the decorations cannot be copyrighted because, even when extracted from the
useful article, they retain the outline of a cheerleading uniform. Brief for Petitioner 48-49.

This is not a bar to copyright. Just as two-dimensional fine art corresponds to the shape of the canvas
on which it is painted, two-dimensional applied art correlates to the contours of the article on which
it is applied. A fresco painted on a wall, ceiling panel, or dome would not lose copyright protection,
for example, simply because it was designed to track the dimensions of the surface on which it was
painted. Or consider, for example, a design etched or painted on the surface of a guitar. If that entire
design is imaginatively removed from the guitar's surface and placed on an album cover, it would still
resemble the shape of a guitar. But the image on the cover does not "replicate" the guitar as a useful
article. Rather, the design is a two-dimensional work of art that corresponds to the shape of the useful
article to which it was applied. The statute protects that work of art whether it is first drawn on the
album cover and then applied to the guitar's surface, or vice versa. Failing to protect that art would
create an anomaly: It would extend protection to two-dimensional designs that cover a part of a useful
article but would not protect the same design if it covered the entire article. The statute does not
support that distinction, nor can it be reconciled with the dissent's recognition that "artwork printed
on a t-shirt" could be protected. Post, at 1019 (internal quotation marks omitted).

To be clear, the only feature of the cheerleading uniform eligible for a copyright in this case is the
two-dimensional work of art fixed in the tangible medium of the uniform fabric. Even if respondents
ultimately succeed in establishing a valid copyright in the surface decorations at issue here,
respondents have no right to prohibit any person from manufacturing a cheerleading uniform of
identical shape, cut, and dimensions to the ones on which the decorations in this case appear. They

262 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
may prohibit only the reproduction of the surface designs in any tangible medium of expression--a
uniform or otherwise. [2]

D

Petitioner and the Government raise several objections to the approach we announce today. None is
meritorious.

1

Petitioner first argues that our reading of the statute is missing an important step. It contends that a
feature may exist independently only if it can stand alone as a copyrightable work and if the useful
article from which it was extracted would remain equally useful. In other words, copyright extends
only to "solely artistic" features of useful articles. Brief for Petitioner 33. According to petitioner,
if a feature of a useful article "advance[s] the utility of the article," id., at 38, then it is categorically
beyond the scope of copyright, id., at 33. The designs here are not protected, it argues, because they are
necessary to two of the uniforms' "inherent, essential, or natural functions"--identifying the wearer as
a cheerleader and enhancing the wearer's physical appearance. Id., at 38, 48; Reply Brief 2, 16. Because
the uniforms would not be equally useful without the designs, petitioner contends that the designs are
inseparable from the "utilitarian aspects" of the uniform. Brief for Petitioner 50.

The Government raises a similar argument, although it reaches a different result. It suggests that
the appropriate test is whether the useful article with the artistic feature removed would "remai[n]
similarly useful." Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 29 (emphasis added). In the view of the
United States, however, a plain white cheerleading uniform is "similarly useful" to uniforms with
respondents' designs. Id., at 27-28.

The debate over the relative utility of a plain white cheerleading uniform is unnecessary. The focus
of the separability inquiry is on the extracted feature and not on any aspects of the useful article that
remain after the imaginary extraction. The statute does not require the decisionmaker to imagine
a fully functioning useful article without the artistic feature. Instead, it requires that the separated
feature qualify as a nonuseful pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work on its own.

Of course, because the removed feature may not be a useful article--as it would then not qualify as a
pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work--there necessarily would be some aspects of the original useful
article "left behind" if the feature were conceptually removed. But the statute does not require the
imagined remainder to be a fully functioning useful article at all, much less an equally useful one.
Indeed, such a requirement would deprive the Mazer statuette of protection had it been created first
as a lamp base rather than as a statuette. Without the base, the "lamp" would be just a shade, bulb, and
wires. The statute does not require that we imagine a nonartistic replacement for the removed feature
to determine whether that feature is capable of an independent existence.

Petitioner's argument follows from its flawed view that the statute protects only "solely artistic"
features that have no effect whatsoever on a useful article's utilitarian function. This view is
inconsistent with the statutory text. The statute expressly protects two- and three-dimensional
"applied art."  101. "Applied art" is art "employed in the decoration, design, or execution of useful
objects," Webster's Third New International Dictionary 105 (1976) (emphasis added), or "those arts

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 263
or crafts that have a primarily utilitarian function, or ... the designs and decorations used in these arts,"
Random House Dictionary 73 (1966) (emphasis added); see also 1 OED 576 (2d ed. 1989) (defining
"applied" as "[p]ut to practical use"). An artistic feature that would be eligible for copyright protection
on its own cannot lose that protection simply because it was first created as a feature of the design of
a useful article, even if it makes that article more useful.

Indeed, this has been the rule since Mazer. In holding that the statuette was protected, the Court
emphasized that the 1909 Act abandoned any "distinctions between purely aesthetic articles and
useful works of art." 347 U.S., at 211, 74 S.Ct. 460. Congress did not enact such a distinction in the
1976 Act. Were we to accept petitioner's argument that the only protectable features are those that
play absolutely no role in an article's function, we would effectively abrogate the rule of Mazer and
read "applied art" out of the statute.

Because we reject the view that a useful article must remain after the artistic feature has been
imaginatively separated from the article, we necessarily abandon the distinction between "physical"
and "conceptual" separability, which some courts and commentators have adopted based on the
Copyright Act's legislative history. See H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, p. 55 (1976). According to this view, a
feature is physically separable from the underlying useful article if it can "be physically separated from
the article by ordinary means while leaving the utilitarian aspects of the article completely intact."
Compendium  924.2(A); see also Chosun Int'l, Inc. v. Chrisha Creations, Ltd., 413 F.3d 324, 329 (C.A.2
2005). Conceptual separability applies if the feature physically could not be removed from the useful
article by ordinary means. See Compendium  924.2(B); but see 1 P. Goldstein, Copyright  2.5.3, p.
2:77 (3d ed. 2016) (explaining that the lower courts have been unable to agree on a single conceptual
separability test); 2 Patry ㎣ 3:140-3:144.40 (surveying the various approaches in the lower courts).

The statutory text indicates that separability is a conceptual undertaking. Because separability does
not require the underlying useful article to remain, the physical-conceptual distinction is unnecessary.

2

Petitioner next argues that we should incorporate two "objective" components, Reply Brief 9, into
our test to provide guidance to the lower courts: (1) "whether the design elements can be identified
as reflecting the designer's artistic judgment exercised independently of functional influence," Brief
for Petitioner 34 (emphasis deleted and internal quotation marks omitted), and (2) whether "there is
[a] substantial likelihood that the pictorial, graphic, or sculptural feature would still be marketable
to some significant segment of the community without its utilitarian function," id., at 35 (emphasis
deleted and internal quotation marks omitted).

We reject this argument because neither consideration is grounded in the text of the statute. The first
would require the decisionmaker to consider evidence of the creator's design methods, purposes, and
reasons. Id., at 48. The statute's text makes clear, however, that our inquiry is limited to how the article
and feature are perceived, not how or why they were designed. See Brandir Int'l, Inc. v. Cascade Pacific
Lumber Co., 834 F.2d 1142, 1152 (C.A.2 1987) (Winter, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part)
(The statute "expressly states that the legal test is how the final article is perceived, not how it was
developed through various stages").

The same is true of marketability. Nothing in the statute suggests that copyrightability depends on
market surveys. Moreover, asking whether some segment of the market would be interested in a given
work threatens to prize popular art over other forms, or to substitute judicial aesthetic preferences for

264 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
the policy choices embodied in the Copyright Act. SeeBleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S.
239, 251, 23 S.Ct. 298, 47 L.Ed. 460 (1903) ("It would be a dangerous undertaking for persons trained
only to the law to constitute themselves final judges of the worth of pictorial illustrations, outside of
the narrowest and most obvious limits").

3

Finally, petitioner argues that allowing the surface decorations to qualify as a "work of authorship"
is inconsistent with Congress' intent to entirely exclude industrial design from copyright. Petitioner
notes that Congress refused to pass a provision that would have provided limited copyright
protection for industrial designs, including clothing, when it enacted the 1976 Act, see id., at 9-11
(citing S. 22, Tit. II, 94th Cong., 2d Sess., 122 Cong. Rec. 3856-3859 (1976)), and that it has enacted
laws protecting designs for specific useful articles--semiconductor chips and boat hulls, see 17 U.S.C.
㎣ 901-914, 1301-1332--while declining to enact other industrial design statutes, Brief for Petitioner
29, 43. From this history of failed legislation petitioner reasons that Congress intends to channel
intellectual property claims for industrial design into design patents. It therefore urges us to approach
this question with a presumption against copyrightability. Id.,at 27.

We do not share petitioner's concern. As an initial matter, "[c]ongressional inaction lacks persuasive
significance" in most circumstances. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation v. LTV Corp., 496 U.S. 633,
650, 110 S.Ct. 2668, 110 L.Ed.2d 579 (1990) (internal quotation marks omitted). Moreover, we have
long held that design patent and copyright are not mutually exclusive. See Mazer, 347 U.S., at 217, 74
S.Ct. 460. Congress has provided for limited copyright protection for certain features of industrial
design, and approaching the statute with presumptive hostility toward protection for industrial
design would undermine Congress' choice. In any event, as explained above, our test does not render
the shape, cut, and physical dimensions of the cheerleading uniforms eligible for copyright protection.

III

We hold that an artistic feature of the design of a useful article is eligible for copyright protection if
the feature (1) can be perceived as a two- or three-dimensional work of art separate from the useful
article and (2) would qualify as a protectable pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work either on its own
or in some other medium if imagined separately from the useful article. Because the designs on the
surface of respondents' cheerleading uniforms in this case satisfy these requirements, the judgment of
the Court of Appeals is affirmed.

It is so ordered.

APPENDIX TO OPINION OF THE COURT

Justice GINSBURG, concurring in the judgment.

I concur in the Court's judgment but not in its opinion. Unlike the majority, I would not take up
in this case the separability test appropriate under 17 U.S.C.  101.[3] Consideration of that test is
unwarranted because the designs at issue are not designs of useful articles. Instead, the designs are
themselves copyrightable pictorial or graphic works reproduced on useful articles.[4]

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 265
A pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work (PGS work) is copyrightable.  102(a)(5). PGS works include
"two-dimensional and three-dimensional works of fine, graphic, and applied art."  101. Key to this
case, a copyright in a standalone PGS work "includes the right to reproduce the work in or on any
kind of article, whether useful or otherwise."  113(a). Because the owner of a copyright in a pre-
existing PGS work may exclude a would-be infringer from reproducing that work on a useful article,
there is no need to engage in any separability inquiry to resolve the instant petition.

The designs here in controversy are standalone pictorial and graphic works that respondents Varsity
Brands, Inc., et al. (Varsity) reproduce on cheerleading uniforms. Varsity's designs first appeared as
pictorial and graphic works that Varsity's design team sketched on paper. App. 281. Varsity then
sought copyright protection for those two-dimensional designs, not for cheerleading costumes; its
registration statements claimed "2-Dimensional artwork" and "fabric design (artwork)." Appendix,
infra, at 1020 - 1023, 1025 - 1026, 1028 - 1030. Varsity next reproduced its two-dimensional graphic
designs on cheerleading uniforms, also on other garments, including T-shirts and jackets. See, e.g.,
App. 274, 276.[5]

In short, Varsity's designs are not themselves useful articles meet for separability determination under
 101; they are standalone PGS works that may gain copyright protection as such, including the
exclusive right to reproduce the designs on useful articles.[6]

Justice BREYER, with whom Justice KENNEDY joins, dissenting.

I agree with much in the Court's opinion. But I do not agree that the designs that Varsity Brands, Inc.,
submitted to the Copyright Office are eligible for copyright protection. Even applying the majority's
test, the designs cannot "be perceived as ... two- or three-dimensional work[s] of art separate from the
useful article." Ante, at 1007.

Look at the designs that Varsity submitted to the Copyright Office. See Appendix to opinion of the
Court, ante. You will see only pictures of cheerleader uniforms. And cheerleader uniforms are useful
articles. A picture of the relevant design features, whether separately "perceived" on paper or in the
imagination, is a picture of, and thereby "replicate[s]," the underlying useful article of which they are
a part. Ante, at 1007, 1031. Hence the design features that Varsity seeks to protect are not "capable of
existing independently o[f] the utilitarian aspects of the article." 17 U.S.C.  101.

I

The relevant statutory provision says that the "design of a useful article" is copyrightable "only if, and
only to the extent that, such design incorporates pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features that can be
identified separately from, and are capable of existing independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the
article." Ibid. But what, we must ask, do the words "identified separately" mean? Just when is a design
separate from the "utilitarian aspect of the [useful] article?" The most direct, helpful aspect of the
Court's opinion answers this question by stating:

"Nor could someone claim a copyright in a useful article merely by creating a replica of that article
in some other medium--for example, a cardboard model of a car. Although the replica could itself be
copyrightable, it would not give rise to any rights in the useful article that inspired it." Ante, at 1010.

Exactly so. These words help explain the Court's statement that a copyrightable work of art must be
"perceived as a two- or three-dimensional work of art separate from the useful article." Ante, at 1007,

266 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
1015 - 1016. They help clarify the concept of separateness. Cf. 1 M. Nimmer & D. Nimmer, Nimmer
on Copyright  2A.08[A][1] (2016) (Nimmer) (describing courts' difficulty in applying that concept).
They are consistent with Congress' own expressed intent. 17 U.S.C.  101; H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, pp.
55, 105 (1976) (H.R. Rep.). And they reflect long held views of the Copyright Office. See Compendium
of U.S. Copyright Office Practices  924.2(B) (3d ed. 2014), online at http://www.copyright.gov/
comp3/docs/compendium.pdf (as last visited Mar. 7, 2017) (Compendium).

Consider, for example, the explanation that the House Report for the Copyright Act of 1976 provides.
It says:

"Unless the shape of an automobile, airplane, ladies' dress, food processor, television set, or any other
industrial product contains some element that, physically or conceptually, can be identified as separable
from the utilitarian aspects of that article, the design would not be copyrighted...." H.R. Rep., at 55
(emphasis added).

These words suggest two exercises, one physical, one mental. Can the design features (the picture,
the graphic, the sculpture) be physically removed from the article (and considered separately), all the
while leaving the fully functioning utilitarian object in place? If not, can one nonetheless conceive of
the design features separately without replicating a picture of the utilitarian object? If the answer to
either of these questions is "yes," then the design is eligible for copyright protection. Otherwise, it is
not. The abstract nature of these questions makes them sound difficult to apply. But with the Court's
words in mind, the difficulty tends to disappear.

An example will help. Imagine a lamp with a circular marble base, a vertical 10-inch tall brass rod
(containing wires) inserted off center on the base, a light bulb fixture emerging from the top of the
brass rod, and a lampshade sitting on top. In front of the brass rod a porcelain Siamese cat sits on
the base facing outward. Obviously, the Siamese cat is physically separate from the lamp, as it could
be easily removed while leaving both cat and lamp intact. And, assuming it otherwise qualifies, the
designed cat is eligible for copyright protection.

Now suppose there is no long brass rod; instead the cat sits in the middle of the base and the wires
run up through the cat to the bulbs. The cat is not physically separate from the lamp, as the reality of
the lamp's construction is such that an effort to physically separate the cat and lamp will destroy both
cat and lamp. The two are integrated into a single functional object, like the similar configuration
of the ballet dancer statuettes that formed the lamp bases at issue in Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 74
S.Ct. 460, 98 L.Ed. 630 (1954). But we can easily imagine the cat on its own, as did Congress when
conceptualizing the ballet dancer. See H.R. Rep., at 55 (the statuette in Mazer was "incorporated into
a product without losing its ability to exist independently as a work of art"). In doing so, we do not
create a mental picture of a lamp (or, in the Court's words, a "replica" of the lamp), which is a useful
article. We simply perceive the cat separately, as a small cat figurine that could be a copyrightable
design work standing alone that does not replicate the lamp. Hence the cat is conceptually separate from
the utilitarian article that is the lamp. The pair of lamps pictured at Figures 1 and 2 in the Appendix
to this opinion illustrate this principle.

Case law, particularly case law that Congress and the Copyright Office have considered, reflects the
same approach. Congress cited examples of copyrightable design works, including "a carving on the
back of a chair" and "a floral relief design on silver flatware." H.R. Rep., at 55. Copyright Office
guidance on copyrightable designs in useful articles include "an engraving on a vase," "[a]rtwork

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 267
printed on a t-shirt," "[a] colorful pattern decorating the surface of a shopping bag," "[a] drawing on the
surface of wallpaper," and "[a] floral relief decorating the handle of a spoon." Compendium  924.2(B).
Courts have found copyrightable matter in a plaster ballet dancer statuette encasing the lamp's electric
cords and forming its base, see Mazer, supra, as well as carvings engraved onto furniture, see Universal
Furniture Int'l, Inc. v. Collezione Europa USA, Inc., 618 F.3d 417, 431-435 (C.A.4 2010) (per curiam ),
and designs on laminated floor tiles, see Home Legend, LLC v. Mannington Mills, Inc., 784 F.3d 1404,
1412-1413 (C.A.11 2015). See generally Brief for Intellectual Property Professors as Amici Curiae.

By way of contrast, Van Gogh's painting of a pair of old shoes, though beautifully executed and
copyrightable as a painting, would not qualify for a shoe design copyright. See Appendix, fig. 3, infra;
17 U.S.C. ㎣ 113(a)-(b). Courts have similarly denied copyright protection to objects that begin as
three-dimensional designs, such as measuring spoons shaped like heart-tipped arrows, Bonazoli v.
R.S.V.P. Int'l, Inc., 353 F.Supp.2d 218, 226-227 (D.R.I.2005); candleholders shaped like sailboats, Design
Ideas, Ltd. v. Yankee Candle Co., 889 F.Supp.2d 1119, 1128 (C.D.Ill.2012); and wire spokes on a wheel
cover, Norris Industries, Inc. v. International Tel. & Tel. Corp., 696 F.2d 918, 922-924 (C.A.11 1983). None
of these designs could qualify for copyright protection that would prevent others from selling spoons,
candleholders, or wheel covers with the same design. Why not? Because in each case the design is not
separable from the utilitarian aspects of the object to which it relates. The designs cannot be physically
separated because they themselves make up the shape of the spoon, candleholders, or wheel covers
of which they are a part. And spoons, candleholders, and wheel covers are useful objects, as are the
old shoes depicted in Van Gogh's painting. More importantly, one cannot easily imagine or otherwise
conceptualize the design of the spoons or the candleholders or the shoes without that picture, or image,
or replica being a picture of spoons, or candleholders, or wheel covers, or shoes. The designs necessarily bring
along the underlying utilitarian object. Hence each design is not conceptually separable from the
physical useful object.

The upshot is that one could copyright the floral design on a soupspoon but one could not copyright
the shape of the spoon itself, no matter how beautiful, artistic, or esthetically pleasing that shape might
be: A picture of the shape of the spoon is also a picture of a spoon; the picture of a floral design is not.
See Compendium  924.2(B).

To repeat: A separable design feature must be "capable of existing independently" of the useful article
as a separate artistic work that is not itself the useful article. If the claimed feature could be extracted
without replicating the useful article of which it is a part, and the result would be a copyrightable
artistic work standing alone, then there is a separable design. But if extracting the claimed features
would necessarily bring along the underlying useful article, the design is not separable from the useful
article. In many or most cases, to decide whether a design or artistic feature of a useful article is
conceptually separate from the article itself, it is enough to imagine the feature on its own and ask,
"Have I created a picture of a (useful part of a) useful article?" If so, the design is not separable from
the useful article. If not, it is.

In referring to imagined pictures and the like, I am not speaking technically. I am simply trying
to explain an intuitive idea of what separation is about, as well as how I understand the majority's
opinion. So understood, the opinion puts design copyrights in their rightful place. The law has long
recognized that drawings or photographs of real world objects are copyrightable as drawings or
photographs, but the copyright does not give protection against others making the underlying useful
objects. See, e.g., Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53, 4 S.Ct. 279, 28 L.Ed. 349 (1884).
That is why a copyright on Van Gogh's painting would prevent others from reproducing that painting,

268 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
but it would not prevent others from reproducing and selling the comfortable old shoes that the
painting depicts. Indeed, the purpose of  113(b) was to ensure that " `copyright in a pictorial, graphic,
or sculptural work, portraying a useful article as such, does not extend to the manufacture of the
useful article itself.' " H.R. Rep., at 105.

II

To ask this kind of simple question--does the design picture the useful article?--will not provide an
answer in every case, for there will be cases where it is difficult to say whether a picture of the design
is, or is not, also a picture of the useful article. But the question will avoid courts focusing primarily
upon what I believe is an unhelpful feature of the inquiry, namely, whether the design can be imagined
as a "two- or three-dimensional work of art." Ante, at 1007, 1015 - 1016. That is because virtually any
industrial design can be thought of separately as a "work of art": Just imagine a frame surrounding
the design, or its being placed in a gallery. Consider Marcel Duchamp's "readymades" series, the
functional mass-produced objects he designated as art. See Appendix, fig. 4, infra. What is there in
the world that, viewed through an esthetic lens, cannot be seen as a good, bad, or indifferent work of
art? What design features could not be imaginatively reproduced on a painter's canvas? Indeed, great
industrial design may well include design that is inseparable from the useful article--where, as Frank
Lloyd Wright put it, "form and function are one." F. Wright, An Autobiography 146 (1943) (reprint
2005). Where they are one, the designer may be able to obtain 15 years of protection through a design
patent. 35 U.S.C. ㎣ 171, 173; see also McKenna & Strandburg, Progress and Competition in Design,
17 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 1, 48-51 (2013). But, if they are one, Congress did not intend a century or more
of copyright protection.

III

The conceptual approach that I have described reflects Congress' answer to a problem that is
primarily practical and economic. Years ago Lord Macaulay drew attention to the problem when he
described copyright in books as a "tax on readers for the purpose of giving a bounty to writers." 56
Parl. Deb. (3d Ser.) (1841) 341, 350. He called attention to the main benefit of copyright protection,
which is to provide an incentive to produce copyrightable works and thereby "promote the Progress
of Science and useful Arts." U.S. Const. Art. I,  8, cl. 8. But Macaulay also made clear that copyright
protection imposes costs. Those costs include the higher prices that can accompany the grant of a
copyright monopoly. They also can include (for those wishing to display, sell, or perform a design,
film, work of art, or piece of music, for example) the costs of discovering whether there are previous
copyrights, of contacting copyright holders, and of securing permission to copy. Eldred v. Ashcroft,
537 U.S. 186, 248-252, 123 S.Ct. 769, 154 L.Ed.2d 683 (2003) (BREYER, J., dissenting). Sometimes,
as Thomas Jefferson wrote to James Madison, costs can outweigh "the benefit even of limited
monopolies." Letter from Thomas Jefferson to James Madison (July 31, 1788), in 13 Papers of Thomas
Jefferson 443 (J. Boyd ed. 1956) (Jefferson Letter). And that is particularly true in light of the fact that
Congress has extended the "limited Times" of protection, U.S. Const. Art. I,  8, cl. 8, from the "14
years" of Jefferson's day to potentially more than a century today. Jefferson Letter 443; see also Eldred,
supra, at 246-252, 123 S.Ct. 769 (opinion of BREYER, J.).

The Constitution grants Congress primary responsibility for assessing comparative costs and benefits
and drawing copyright's statutory lines. Courts must respect those lines and not grant copyright
protection where Congress has decided not to do so. And it is clear that Congress has not extended
broad copyright protection to the fashion design industry. See, e.g., 1 Nimmer  2A.08[H][3][c]

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 269
(describing how Congress rejected proposals for fashion design protection within the 1976 Act and
has rejected every proposed bill to this effect since then); Esquire, Inc. v. Ringer, 591 F.2d 796, 800, n.
12 (C.A.D.C.1978) (observing that at the time of the 1976 Copyright Act, Congress had rejected every
one of the approximately 70 design protection bills that had been introduced since 1914); e.g., H.R.
5055, 109th Cong., 2d Sess.: "To Amend title 17, United States Code, to provide protection for fashion
design" (introduced Mar. 30, 2006; unenacted). Congress has left "statutory ... protection ... largely
unavailable for dress designs." 1 Nimmer  2A.08[H][3] [a]; Raustiala & Sprigman, The Piracy Paradox:
Innovation and Intellectual Property in Fashion Design, 92 Va. L.Rev. 1687, 1698-1705 (2006).

Congress' decision not to grant full copyright protection to the fashion industry has not left the
industry without protection. Patent design protection is available. 35 U.S.C. ㎣ 171, 173. A maker of
clothing can obtain trademark protection under the Lanham Act for signature features of the clothing.
15 U.S.C.  1051 et seq. And a designer who creates an original textile design can receive copyright
protection for that pattern as placed, for example, on a bolt of cloth, or anything made with that cloth.
E.g., Compendium  924.3(A)(1). "[T]his [type of] claim ... is generally made by the fabric producer
rather than the garment or costume designer," and is "ordinarily made when the two-dimensional
design is applied to the textile fabric and before the garment is cut from the fabric." 56 Fed.Reg. 56531
(1991).

The fashion industry has thrived against this backdrop, and designers have contributed immeasurably
to artistic and personal self-expression through clothing. But a decision by this Court to grant
protection to the design of a garment would grant the designer protection that Congress refused to
provide. It would risk increased prices and unforeseeable disruption in the clothing industry, which in
the United States alone encompasses nearly $370 billion in annual spending and 1.8 million jobs. Brief
for Council of Fashion Designers of America, Inc., as Amicus Curiae 3-4 (citing U.S. Congress, Joint
Economic Committee, The New Economy of Fashion 1 (2016)). That is why I believe it important to
emphasize those parts of the Court's opinion that limit the scope of its interpretation. That language,
as I have said, makes clear that one may not "claim a copyright in a useful article merely by creating
a replica of that article in some other medium," which "would not give rise to any rights in the useful
article that inspired it." Ante, at 1010.

IV

If we ask the "separateness" question correctly, the answer here is not difficult to find. The majority's
opinion, in its appendix, depicts the cheerleader dress designs that Varsity submitted to the Copyright
Office. Can the design features in Varsity's pictures exist separately from the utilitarian aspects of a
dress? Can we extract those features as copyrightable design works standing alone, without bringing
along, via picture or design, the dresses of which they constitute a part?

Consider designs 074, 078, and 0815. They certainly look like cheerleader uniforms. That is to say,
they look like pictures of cheerleader uniforms, just like Van Gogh's old shoes look like shoes. I do
not see how one could see them otherwise. Designs 299A and 2999B present slightly closer questions.
They omit some of the dresslike context that the other designs possess. But the necklines, the sleeves,
and the cut of the skirt suggest that they too are pictures of dresses. Looking at all five of Varsity's
pictures, I do not see how one could conceptualize the design features in a way that does not picture,
not just artistic designs, but dresses as well.

Were I to accept the majority's invitation to "imaginatively remov[e]" the chevrons and stripes as

270 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
they are arranged on the neckline, waistline, sleeves, and skirt of each uniform, and apply them on a
"painter's canvas," ante, at 1011 - 1012, that painting would be of a cheerleader's dress. The esthetic
elements on which Varsity seeks protection exist only as part of the uniform design--there is nothing
to separate out but for dress-shaped lines that replicate the cut and style of the uniforms. Hence, each
design is not physically separate, nor is it conceptually separate, from the useful article it depicts,
namely, a cheerleader's dress. They cannot be copyrighted.

Varsity, of course, could have sought a design patent for its designs. Or, it could have sought a
copyright on a textile design, even one with a similar theme of chevrons and lines.

But that is not the nature of Varsity's copyright claim. It has instead claimed ownership of the
particular " `treatment and arrangement' " of the chevrons and lines of the design as they appear at the
neckline, waist, skirt, sleeves, and overall cut of each uniform. Brief for Respondents 50. The majority
imagines that Varsity submitted something different--that is, only the surface decorations of chevrons
and stripes, as in a textile design. As the majority sees it, Varsity's copyright claim would be the same
had it submitted a plain rectangular space depicting chevrons and stripes, like swaths from a bolt of
fabric. But considered on their own, the simple stripes are plainly unoriginal. Varsity, then, seeks to
do indirectly what it cannot do directly: bring along the design and cut of the dresses by seeking to
protect surface decorations whose "treatment and arrangement" are coextensive with that design and
cut. As Varsity would have it, it would prevent its competitors from making useful three-dimensional
cheerleader uniforms by submitting plainly unoriginal chevrons and stripes as cut and arranged on
a useful article. But with that cut and arrangement, the resulting pictures on which Varsity seeks
protection do not simply depict designs. They depict clothing. They depict the useful articles of which
the designs are inextricable parts. And Varsity cannot obtain copyright protection that would give
them the power to prevent others from making those useful uniforms, any more than Van Gogh can
copyright comfortable old shoes by painting their likeness.

I fear that, in looking past the three-dimensional design inherent in Varsity's claim by treating it as
if it were no more than a design for a bolt of cloth, the majority has lost sight of its own important
limiting principle. One may not "claim a copyright in a useful article merely by creating a replica of
that article in some other medium," such as in a picture. Ante, at 1010. That is to say, one cannot obtain
a copyright that would give its holder "any rights in the useful article that inspired it." Ante, at 1010.

With respect, I dissent.
[1] We do not today hold that the surface decorations are copyrightable. We express no opinion on
whether these works are sufficiently original to qualify for copyright protection, see Feist Publications,
Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 358-359, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d 358 (1991), or
on whether any other prerequisite of a valid copyright has been satisfied.
[2] The dissent suggests that our test would lead to the copyrighting of shovels. Post, at 1020; Appendix
to opinion of BREYER, J., fig. 4, post. But a shovel, like a cheerleading uniform, even if displayed
in an art gallery, is "an article having an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not merely to portray
the appearance of the article or to convey information." 17 U.S.C.  101. It therefore cannot be
copyrighted. A drawing of a shovel could, of course, be copyrighted. And, if the shovel included any
artistic features that could be perceived as art apart from the shovel, and which would qualify as
protectable pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works on their own or in another medium, they too could
be copyrighted. But a shovel as a shovel cannot.

                                                                                                       16. COPYRIGHT AND OBJECTS 271
[3] Courts "have struggled mightily to formulate a test" for the separability analysis. 799 F.3d 468, 484
(C.A.6 2015); see 2 W. Patry, Copyright  3:136, p. 3-420 (2016) (noting "widespread interpretative
disarray" over the separability test); Ginsburg, "Courts Have Twisted Themselves into Knots": U.S.
Copyright Protection for Applied Art, 40 Colum. J.L. & Arts 1, 2 (2016) ("The `separability' test ... has
resisted coherent application...."); 1 M. Nimmer & D. Nimmer, Copyright  2A.08[B] [6], p. 2A-84
(2016) (separability is a "perennially tangled aspect of copyright doctrine").
[4] Like the Court, I express no opinion on whether the designs otherwise meet the requirements
for copyrightable subject matter. See ante, at 1012, n. 1; 17 U.S.C.  102(a) ("Copyright protection
subsists, in accordance with this title, in original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium
of expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be perceived, reproduced, or
otherwise communicated."). In view of the dissent's assertion that Varsity's designs are "plainly
unoriginal," post,at 1036, however, I note this Court's recognition that "the requisite level of creativity
[for copyrightability] is extremely low; even a slight amount will suffice," Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural
Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 345, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 113 L.Ed.2d 358 (1991); see Atari Games Corp.
v. Oman, 979 F.2d 242 (C.A.D.C.1992).
[5] That Varsity's designs can be placed on jackets or T-shirts without replicating a cheerleader's
uniform supports their qualification as fabric designs. The dissent acknowledges that fabric designs
are copyrightable, but maintains that Varsity's designs do not count because Varsity's submissions
depict clothing, not fabric designs. Post, at 1035 - 1036. But registrants claiming copyrightable
designs may submit drawings or photos of those designs as they appear on useful articles. See
Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices  1506 (3d ed. 2014) ("To register a copyrightable
design that has been applied to the back of a useful article, such as a chair, the applicant may submit
drawings of the design as it appears on the chair[.]"), online at https://www.copyright.gov/comp3/
docs/compendium.pdf (as last visited Mar. 8, 2017). And, as noted in text, Varsity's registration
statements claimed "2-Dimensional artwork" and "fabric design (artwork)." Appendix, infra, at 1020
- 1023, 1025 - 1026, 1028 - 1030.

The dissent also acknowledges that artwork printed on a T-shirt is copyrightable. Post, at 1032.
Varsity's colored shapes and patterns can be, and indeed are, printed on T-shirts. See, e.g., App. 274.
Assuming Varsity's designs meet the other requirements for copyrightable subject matter, they would
fit comfortably within the Copyright Office guidance featured by the dissent. See post, at 1032 (citing
Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices, supra,  924.2(B)).
[6] The majority declines to address this route to decision because, it says, Varsity has not advanced
it. Ante, at 1009 - 1010. I read Varsity's brief differently. See Brief for Respondents 25 (explaining that
the Copyright Act "expressly provides that PGS designs do not lose their protection when they appear
`in or on' a useful article," quoting  113(a)); id., at 52 (disclaiming the need for separability analysis
because the designs are themselves PGS works).

272 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                            17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND
                                        DISTINCTIVENESS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 17

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain what a trademark is.
           Explain policy issues relating to trademarks, both positive and negative.
           Analyze whether a given subject matter can be a trademark.
           Explain the requirement of distinctiveness.
           Explain the policies underlying the legal requirement of distinctiveness.
           Analyze the distinctiveness of a given mark.

Although the federal agency is called the United States Patent and Trademark Office, patents and
trademarks have relatively little in common when it comes to substantive law. One (patents) is
exclusively federal; the other (trademarks) was historically rooted in state law and today exists in
a dual-authority regime. Patent law is relatively uniform due to the consolidation of appellate
decisionmaking in a single court; trademark law exhibits substantial diversity on some issues due, in
part, to the fragmentation of appellate decisionmaking. Patents relate to technological development;
trademarks involve source identification. Patent rights can only be obtained by filing for and
obtaining an issued patent; trademark rights flow from use as a mark. While registration can
strengthen trademark rights, registration alone does not provide trademark rights.
With this in mind, it may be useful to forget, for the next few weeks at least, all the substantive law
you have learned so far in this course.
THE CONCEPT OF A TRADEMARK
We will begin our discussion of trademarks by examining the nature and function of a trademark.
The first case is the classic Qualitex v. Jacobson (1995). Qualitex used a particular green-gold color on
the dry cleaning pads that it manufactures and sells to dry cleaning business. It claimed trademark
rights in the green-gold color and brought suit against Jacobson, a competitor who was selling pads
with a similar color. Jacobson contended that color alone cannot serve as a trademark.
After you have read Qualitex, go on to the next section: Distinctiveness.

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 273
   15 U.S.C. 1127. Construction and definitions; intent of chapter (2006)

   . . .
   The term "trademark" includes any word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof
   1) used by a person, or
   2) which a person has a bona fide intention to use in commerce and applies to register on the principal
   register established by this chapter, to identify and distinguish his or her goods, including a unique product,
   from those manufactured or sold by others and to indicate the source of the goods, even if that source is
   unknown

274 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
QUALITEX CO. V. JACOBSON PRODS. CO. (1995)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Qualitex, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is a trademark?
           What is the purpose of a trademark?
           What rights does a trademark owner have?
           What concerns does granting rights to a trademark owner present?
           After Qualitex, is there anything that cannot serve as a trademark?
           What limits are there on the use of color as a trademark?
           Following this decision, will Qualitex be able to prevent a clothing manufacturer from selling
              shirts that are the same green-gold color?

                                               Qualitex v. Jacobson Products
                                                       514 U.S. 159 (1995)

JUSTICE BREYER, delivered the opinion of the Court.
The question in this case is whether the Trademark Act of 1946 (Lanham Act), 15 U. S. C. ㎣
1051-1127 (1988 ed. and Supp. V), permits the registration of a trademark that consists, purely
and simply, of a color. We conclude that, sometimes, a color will meet ordinary legal trademark
requirements. And, when it does so, no special legal rule prevents color alone from serving as a
trademark.
I
The case before us grows out of petitioner Qualitex Company's use (since the 1950's) of a special
shade of green-gold color on the pads that it makes and sells to dry cleaning firms for use on dry
cleaning presses. In 1989, respondent Jacobson Products (a Qualitex rival) began to sell its own press
pads to dry cleaning firms; and it colored those pads a similar green gold. In 1991, Qualitex registered
the special greengold color on press pads with the Patent and Trademark Office as a trademark.
Registration No. 1,633,711 (Feb. 5, 1991). Qualitex subsequently added a trademark infringement
count, 15 U. S. C.  1114(1), to an unfair competition claim,  1125(a), in a lawsuit it had already filed
challenging Jacobson's use of the green-gold color.
Qualitex won the lawsuit in the District Court. 21 U. S. P. Q. 2d 1457 (CD Cal. 1991). But, the

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 275
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit set aside the judgment in Qualitex's favor on the trademark
infringement claim because, in that Circuit's view, the Lanham Act does not permit Qualitex, or
anyone else, to register "color alone" as a trademark. 13 F. 3d 1297, 1300, 1302 (1994).

The Courts of Appeals have differed as to whether or not the law recognizes the use of color alone
as a trademark. Compare NutraSweet Co. v. Stadt Corp., 917 F. 2d 1024, 1028 (CA7 1990) (absolute
prohibition against protection of color alone), with In re Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., 774 F. 2d
1116, 1128 (CA Fed. 1985) (allowing registration of color pink for fiberglass insulation), and Master
Distributors, Inc. v. Pako Corp., 986 F. 2d 219, 224 (CA8 1993) (declining to establish per se prohibition
against protecting color alone as a trademark). Therefore, this Court granted certiorari. 512 U. S. 1287
(1994). We now hold that there is no rule absolutely barring the use of color alone, and we reverse the
judgment of the Ninth Circuit.

II

The Lanham Act gives a seller or producer the exclusive right to "register" a trademark, 15 U. S. C.
 1052 (1988 ed. and Supp. V), and to prevent his or her competitors from using that trademark, 
1114(1). Both the language of the Act and the basic underlying principles of trademark law would
seem to include color within the universe of things that can qualify as a trademark. The language of
the Lanham Act describes that universe in the broadest of terms. It says that trademarks "includ[e] any
word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof."  1127. Since human beings might use as
a "symbol" or "device" almost anything at all that is capable of carrying meaning, this language, read
literally, is not restrictive. The courts and the Patent and Trademark Office have authorized for use as
a mark a particular shape (of a Coca-Cola bottle), a particular sound (of NBC's three chimes), and even
a particular scent (of plumeria blossoms on sewing thread). See, e. g., Registration No. 696,147 (Apr.
12, 1960); Registration Nos. 523,616 (Apr. 4, 1950) and 916,522 (July 13, 1971); In re Clarke, 17 U. S. P.
Q. 2d 1238, 1240 (TTAB 1990). If a shape, a sound, and a fragrance can act as symbols why, one might
ask, can a color not do the same?

A color is also capable of satisfying the more important part of the statutory definition of a trademark,
which requires that a person "us[e]" or "inten[d] to use" the mark

"to identify and distinguish his or her goods, including a unique product, from those manufactured or
sold by others and to indicate the source of the goods, even if that source is unknown." 15 U. S. C. 
1127.

True, a product's color is unlike "fanciful," "arbitrary," or "suggestive" words or designs, which almost
automatically tell a customer that they refer to a brand. Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc.,
537 F. 2d 4, 9-10 (CA2 1976) (Friendly, J.); see Two Pesos, Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc., 505 U. S. 763, 768
(1992). The imaginary word "Suntost," or the words "Suntost Marmalade," on a jar of orange jam
immediately would signal a brand or a product "source"; the jam's orange color does not do so. But,
over time, customers may come to treat a particular color on a product or its packaging (say, a color
that in context seems unusual, such as pink on a firm's insulating material or red on the head of a large
industrial bolt) as signifying a brand. And, if so, that color would have come to identify and distinguish
the goods--i. e.,"to indicate" their "source"--much in the way that descriptive words on a product
(say, "Trim" on nail clippers or "Car-Freshner" on deodorizer) can come to indicate a product's origin.
See, e. g., J. Wiss & Sons Co. v. W. E. Bassett Co., 59 C. C. P. A. 1269, 1271 (Pat.), 462 F. 2d 567, 569
(1972); Car-Freshner Corp. v. Turtle Wax, Inc., 268 F. Supp. 162, 164 (SDNY 1967). In this circumstance,

276 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
trademark law says that the word (e. g., "Trim"), although not inherently distinctive, has developed
"secondary meaning." See Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc., 456 U. S. 844, 851, n. 11
(1982) ("[S]econdary meaning" is acquired when "in the minds of the public, the primary significance
of a product feature . . . is to identify the source of the product rather than the product itself"). Again,
one might ask, if trademark law permits a descriptive word with secondary meaning to act as a mark,
why would it not permit a color, under similar circumstances, to do the same?

We cannot find in the basic objectives of trademark law any obvious theoretical objection to the
use of color alone as a trademark, where that color has attained "secondary meaning" and therefore
identifies and distinguishes a particular brand (and thus indicates its "source"). In principle, trademark
law, by preventing others from copying a source identifying mark, "reduce[s] the customer's costs of
shopping and making purchasing decisions," 1 J. McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair
Competition  2.01[2], p. 2-3 (3d ed. 1994) (hereinafter McCarthy), for it quickly and easily assures
a potential customer that this item--the item with this mark--is made by the same producer as
other similarly marked items that he or she liked (or disliked) in the past. At the same time, the law
helps assure a producer that it (and not an imitating competitor) will reap the financial, reputation-
related rewards associated with a desirable product. The law thereby "encourage[s] the production
of quality products," ibid., and simultaneously discourages those who hope to sell inferior products
by capitalizing on a consumer's inability quickly to evaluate the quality of an item offered for sale.
See, e. g., 3 L. Altman, Callmann on Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies  17.03 (4th
ed. 1983); Landes & Posner, The Economics of Trademark Law, 78 T. M. Rep. 267, 271-272 (1988);
Park `N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar Park & Fly, Inc., 469 U. S. 189, 198 (1985); S. Rep. No. 100-- 515, p. 4 (1988).
It is the source-distinguishing ability of a mark--not its ontological status as color, shape, fragrance,
word, or sign--that permits it to serve these basic purposes. See Landes & Posner, Trademark Law: An
Economic Perspective, 30 J. Law & Econ. 265, 290 (1987). And, for that reason, it is difficult to find, in
basic trademark objectives, a reason to disqualify absolutely the use of a color as a mark.

Neither can we find a principled objection to the use of color as a mark in the important
"functionality" doctrine of trademark law. The functionality doctrine prevents trademark law, which
seeks to promote competition by protecting a firm's reputation, from instead inhibiting legitimate
competition by allowing a producer to control a useful product feature. It is the province of patent
law, not trademark law, to encourage invention by granting inventors a monopoly over new product
designs or functions for a limited time, 35 U. S. C. ㎣ 154, 173, after which competitors are free to use
the innovation. If a product's functional features could be used as trademarks, however, a monopoly
over such features could be obtained without regard to whether they qualify as patents and could
be extended forever (because trademarks may be renewed in perpetuity). See Kellogg Co. v. National
Biscuit Co., 305 U. S. 111, 119-120 (1938) (Brandeis, J.); Inwood Laboratories, Inc., supra, at 863 (White,
J., concurring in result) ("A functional characteristic is `an important ingredient in the commercial
success of the product,' and, after expiration of a patent, it is no more the property of the originator
than the product itself") (citation omitted). Functionality doctrine therefore would require, to take an
imaginary example, that even if customers have come to identify the special illumination-enhancing
shape of a new patented light bulb with a particular manufacturer, the manufacturer may not use
that shape as a trademark, for doing so, after the patent had expired, would impede competition--not
by protecting the reputation of the original bulb maker, but by frustrating competitors' legitimate
efforts to produce an equivalent illumination-enhancing bulb. See, e. g., Kellogg Co., supra, at 119-120
(trademark law cannot be used to extend monopoly over "pillow" shape of shredded wheat biscuit
after the patent for that shape had expired). This Court consequently has explained that, "[i]n general

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 277
terms, a product feature is functional," and cannot serve as a trademark, "if it is essential to the use
or purpose of the article or if it affects the cost or quality of the article," that is, if exclusive use
of the feature would put competitors at a significant non-reputation-related disadvantage. Inwood
Laboratories, Inc., supra, at 850, n. 10. Although sometimes color plays an important role (unrelated
to source identification) in making a product more desirable, sometimes it does not. And, this latter
fact--the fact that sometimes color is not essential to a product's use or purpose and does not affect
cost or quality--indicates that the doctrine of "functionality" does not create an absolute bar to the
use of color alone as a mark. See Owens-Corning,774 F. 2d, at 1123 (pink color of insulation in wall
"performs no non-trademark function").

It would seem, then, that color alone, at least sometimes, can meet the basic legal requirements for
use as a trademark. It can act as a symbol that distinguishes a firm's goods and identifies their source,
without serving any other significant function. See U. S. Dept. of Commerce, Patent and Trademark
Office, Trademark Manual of Examining Procedure  1202.04(e), p. 1202-13 (2d ed. May, 1993)
(hereinafter PTO Manual) (approving trademark registration of color alone where it "has become
distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce," provided that "there is [no] competitive need for
colors to remain available in the industry" and the color is not "functional"); see also 1 McCarthy ㎣
3.01[1], 7.26, pp. 3-2, 7-113 ("requirements for qualification of a word or symbol as a trademark" are
that it be (1) a "symbol," (2) "use[d] . . . as a mark," (3) "to identify and distinguish the seller's goods from
goods made or sold by others," but that it not be "functional"). Indeed, the District Court, in this case,
entered findings (accepted by the Ninth Circuit) that show Qualitex's green-gold press pad color has
met these requirements. The green-gold color acts as a symbol. Having developed secondary meaning
(for customers identified the green-gold color as Qualitex's), it identifies the press pads' source. And,
the green-gold color serves no other function. (Although it is important to use some color on press
pads to avoid noticeable stains, the court found "no competitive need in the press pad industry for the
green-gold color, since other colors are equally usable." 21 U. S. P. Q. 2d, at 1460.) Accordingly, unless
there is some special reason that convincingly militates against the use of color alone as a trademark,
trademark law would protect Qualitex's use of the green-gold color on its press pads.

III

Respondent Jacobson Products says that there are four special reasons why the law should forbid
the use of color alone as a trademark. We shall explain, in turn, why we, ultimately, find them
unpersuasive.

First, Jacobson says that, if the law permits the use of color as a trademark, it will produce uncertainty
and unresolvable court disputes about what shades of a color a competitor may lawfully use. Because
lighting (morning sun, twilight mist) will affect perceptions of protected color, competitors and courts
will suffer from "shade confusion" as they try to decide whether use of a similar color on a similar
product does, or does not, confuse customers and thereby infringe a trademark. Jacobson adds that
the "shade confusion" problem is "more difficult" and "far different from" the "determination of the
similarity of words or symbols." Brief for Respondent 22.

We do not believe, however, that color, in this respect, is special. Courts traditionally decide quite
difficult questions about whether two words or phrases or symbols are sufficiently similar, in context,
to confuse buyers. They have had to compare, for example, such words as "Bonamine" and
"Dramamine" (motion-sickness remedies); "Huggies" and "Dougies" (diapers); "Cheracol" and
"Syrocol" (cough syrup); "Cyclone" and "Tornado" (wire fences); and "Mattres" and "1-800--Mattres"

278 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
(mattress franchisor telephone numbers). See, e. g., G. D. Searle & Co. v. Chas. Pfizer & Co., 265 F. 2d
385, 389 (CA7 1959); Kimberly-Clark Corp. v. H. Douglas Enterprises, Ltd., 774 F. 2d 1144, 1146-1147
(CA Fed. 1985); Upjohn Co. v. Schwartz, 246 F. 2d 254, 262 (CA2 1957); Hancock v. American Steel
& Wire Co. of N. J., 40 C. C. P. A. (Pat.) 931, 935, 203 F. 2d 737, 740-741 (1953); Dial-AMattress
Franchise Corp. v. Page, 880 F. 2d 675, 678 (CA2 1989). Legal standards exist to guide courts in making
such comparisons. See, e. g., 2 McCarthy  15.08; 1 McCarthy ㎣ 11.24-11.25 ("[S]trong" marks, with
greater secondary meaning, receive broader protection than "weak" marks). We do not see why courts
could not apply those standards to a color, replicating, if necessary, lighting conditions under which a
colored product is normally sold. See Ebert, Trademark Protection in Color: Do It By the Numbers!,
84 T. M. Rep. 379, 405 (1994). Indeed, courts already have done so in cases where a trademark consists
of a color plus a design, i. e., a colored symbol such as a gold stripe (around a sewer pipe), a yellow
strand of wire rope, or a "brilliant yellow" band (on ampules). See, e. g., Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v.
Tallman Conduit Co., 149 U. S. P. Q. 656, 657 (TTAB 1966); Amstead Industries, Inc. v. West Coast Wire
Rope & Rigging Inc., 2 U. S. P. Q. 2d 1755, 1760 (TTAB 1987); In re Hodes-Lange Corp., 167 U. S. P. Q.
255, 256 (TTAB 1970).

Second, Jacobson argues, as have others, that colors are in limited supply. See, e. g., NutraSweet Co.,
917 F. 2d, at 1028; Campbell Soup Co. v. Armour & Co., 175 F. 2d 795, 798 (CA3 1949). Jacobson
claims that, if one of many competitors can appropriate a particular color for use as a trademark,
and each competitor then tries to do the same, the supply of colors will soon be depleted. Put in its
strongest form, this argument would concede that "[h]undreds of color pigments are manufactured
and thousands of colors can be obtained by mixing." L. Cheskin, Colors: What They Can Do For You
47 (1947). But, it would add that, in the context of a particular product, only some colors are usable.
By the time one discards colors that, say, for reasons of customer appeal, are not usable, and adds the
shades that competitors cannot use lest they risk infringing a similar, registered shade, then one is
left with only a handful of possible colors. And, under these circumstances, to permit one, or a few,
producers to use colors as trademarks will "deplete" the supply of usable colors to the point where a
competitor's inability to find a suitable color will put that competitor at a significant disadvantage.

This argument is unpersuasive, however, largely because it relies on an occasional problem to justify a
blanket prohibition. When a color serves as a mark, normally alternative colors will likely be available
for similar use by others. See, e. g., Owens-Corning, 774 F. 2d, at 1121 (pink insulation). Moreover, if
that is not so--if a "color depletion" or "color scarcity" problem does arise--the trademark doctrine
of "functionality" normally would seem available to prevent the anti-competitive consequences that
Jacobson's argument posits, thereby minimizing that argument's practical force.

The functionality doctrine, as we have said, forbids the use of a product's feature as a trademark where
doing so will put a competitor at a significant disadvantage because the feature is "essential to the
use or purpose of the article" or "affects [its] cost or quality." Inwood Laboratories, Inc., 456 U. S., at
850, n. 10. The functionality doctrine thus protects competitors against a disadvantage (unrelated to
recognition or reputation) that trademark protection might otherwise impose, namely, their inability
reasonably to replicate important non-reputation-related product features. For example, this Court
has written that competitors might be free to copy the color of a medical pill where that color serves
to identify the kind of medication (e. g., a type of blood medicine) in addition to its source. See
id., at 853, 858, n. 20 ("[S]ome patients commingle medications in a container and rely on color to
differentiate one from another"); see also J. Ginsburg, D. Goldberg, & A. Greenbaum, Trademark and
Unfair Competition Law 194-195 (1991) (noting that drug color cases "have more to do with public
health policy" regarding generic drug substitution "than with trademark law"). And, the federal courts

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 279
have demonstrated that they can apply this doctrine in a careful and reasoned manner, with sensitivity
to the effect on competition. Although we need not comment on the merits of specific cases, we note
that lower courts have permitted competitors to copy the green color of farm machinery (because
customers wanted their farm equipment to match) and have barred the use of black as a trademark on
outboard boat motors (because black has the special functional attributes of decreasing the apparent
size of the motor and ensuring compatibility with many different boat colors). See Deere & Co. v.
Farmhand, Inc., 560 F. Supp. 85, 98 (SD Iowa 1982), aff'd, 721 F. 2d 253 (CA8 1983); Brunswick Corp.v.
British Seagull Ltd., 35 F. 3d 1527, 1532 (CA Fed. 1994), cert. pending, No. 94-1075; see also Nor-
Am Chemical v. O. M. Scott & Sons Co., 4 U. S. P. Q. 2d 1316, 1320 (ED Pa. 1987) (blue color of
fertilizer held functional because it indicated the presence of nitrogen). The Restatement (Third) of
Unfair Competition adds that, if a design's "aesthetic value" lies in its ability to "confe[r] a significant
benefit that cannot practically be duplicated by the use of alternative designs," then the design is
"functional." Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition  17, Comment c, pp. 175-176 (1993). The
"ultimate test of aesthetic functionality," it explains, "is whether the recognition of trademark rights
would significantly hinder competition." Id., at 176.

The upshot is that, where a color serves a significant nontrademark function--whether to distinguish
a heart pill from a digestive medicine or to satisfy the "noble instinct for giving the right touch of
beauty to common and necessary things," G. Chesterton, Simplicity and Tolstoy 61 (1912)--courts
will examine whether its use as a mark would permit one competitor (or a group) to interfere
with legitimate (nontrademark-related) competition through actual or potential exclusive use of
an important product ingredient. That examination should not discourage firms from creating
esthetically pleasing mark designs, for it is open to their competitors to do the same. See, e. g., W. T.
Rogers Co. v. Keene, 778 F. 2d 334, 343 (CA7 1985) (Posner, J.). But, ordinarily, it should prevent the
anticompetitive consequences of Jacobson's hypothetical "color depletion" argument, when, and if, the
circumstances of a particular case threaten "color depletion."

Third, Jacobson points to many older cases--including Supreme Court cases--in support of its
position. In 1878, this Court described the common-law definition of trademark rather broadly to
"consist of a name, symbol, figure, letter, form, or device, if adopted and used by a manufacturer
or merchant in order to designate the goods he manufactures or sells to distinguish the same from
those manufactured or sold by another." McLean v. Fleming, 96 U. S. 245, 254. Yet, in interpreting
the Trademark Acts of 1881 and 1905, 21 Stat. 502, 33 Stat. 724, which retained that common-law
definition, the Court questioned "[w]hether mere color can constitute a valid trade-mark," A. Leschen
& Sons Rope Co. v. Broderick & Bascom Rope Co., 201 U. S. 166, 171 (1906), and suggested that the
"product including the coloring matter is free to all who make it," Coca-Cola Co. v. Koke Co. of America,
254 U. S. 143, 147 (1920). Even though these statements amounted to dicta, lower courts interpreted
them as forbidding protection for color alone. See, e. g., Campbell Soup Co.,175 F. 2d, at 798, and n. 9;
Life Savers Corp. v. Curtiss Candy Co., 182 F. 2d 4, 9 (CA7 1950) (quoting Campbell Soup, supra, at 798).

These Supreme Court cases, however, interpreted trademark law as it existed before 1946, when
Congress enacted the Lanham Act. The Lanham Act significantly changed and liberalized the
common law to "dispense with mere technical prohibitions," S. Rep. No. 1333, 79th Cong., 2d Sess.,
3 (1946), most notably, by permitting trademark registration of descriptive words (say, "U-Build-It"
model airplanes) where they had acquired "secondary meaning." See Abercrombie & Fitch Co., 537 F.
2d, at 9 (Friendly, J.). The Lanham Act extended protection to descriptive marks by making clear that
(with certain explicit exceptions not relevant here)

280 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
"nothing . . . shall prevent the registration of a mark used by the applicant which has become
distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce." 15 U. S. C.  1052(f) (1988 ed., Supp. V).

This language permits an ordinary word, normally used for a nontrademark purpose (e. g.,
description), to act as a trademark where it has gained "secondary meaning." Its logic would appear to
apply to color as well. Indeed, in 1985, the Federal Circuit considered the significance of the Lanham
Act's changes as they related to color and held that trademark protection for color was consistent with
the

"jurisprudence under the Lanham Act developed in accordance with the statutory principle that if a
mark is capable of being or becoming distinctive of [the] applicant's goods in commerce, then it is
capable of serving as a trademark." Owens-Corning, 774 F. 2d, at 1120.

In 1988, Congress amended the Lanham Act, revising portions of the definitional language, but left
unchanged the language here relevant.  134, 102 Stat. 3946, 15 U. S. C.  1127. It enacted these
amendments against the following background: (1) the Federal Circuit had decided Owens-Corning;
(2) the Patent and Trademark Office had adopted a clear policy (which it still maintains) permitting
registration of color as a trademark, see PTO Manual  1202.04(e) (at p. 1200-12 of the January 1986
edition and p. 1202-13 of the May 1993 edition); and (3) the Trademark Commission had written
a report, which recommended that "the terms `symbol, or device' . . . not be deleted or narrowed to
preclude registration of such things as a color, shape, smell, sound, or configuration which functions
as a mark," The United States Trademark Association Trademark Review Commission Report and
Recommendations to USTA President and Board of Directors, 77 T. M. Rep. 375, 421 (1987); see
also 133 Cong. Rec. 32812 (1987) (statement of Sen. DeConcini) ("The bill I am introducing today is
based on the Commission's report and recommendations"). This background strongly suggests that
the language "any word, name, symbol, or device," 15 U. S. C.  1127, had come to include color. And,
when it amended the statute, Congress retained these terms. Indeed, the Senate Report accompanying
the Lanham Act revision explicitly referred to this background understanding, in saying that the
"revised definition intentionally retains . . . the words `symbol or device' so as not to preclude the
registration of colors, shapes, sounds or configurations where they function as trademarks." S. Rep.
No. 100-515, at 44. (In addition, the statute retained language providing that "[n]o trademark by
which the goods of the applicant may be distinguished from the goods of others shall be refused
registration . . . on account of its nature" (except for certain specified reasons not relevant here). 15 U.
S. C.  1052 (1988 ed., Supp. V).)

This history undercuts the authority of the precedent on which Jacobson relies. Much of the pre-1985
case law rested on statements in Supreme Court opinions that interpreted pre-Lanham Act trademark
law and were not directly related to the holdings in those cases. Moreover, we believe the Federal
Circuit was right in 1985 when it found that the 1946 Lanham Act embodied crucial legal changes that
liberalized the law to permit the use of color alone as a trademark (under appropriate circumstances).
At a minimum, the Lanham Act's changes left the courts free to reevaluate the preexisting legal
precedent which had absolutely forbidden the use of color alone as a trademark. Finally, when
Congress reenacted the terms "word, name, symbol, or device" in 1988, it did so against a legal
background in which those terms had come to include color, and its statutory revision embraced that
understanding.

Fourth, Jacobson argues that there is no need to permit color alone to function as a trademark because
a firm already may use color as part of a trademark, say, as a colored circle or colored letter or

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 281
colored word, and may rely upon "trade dress" protection, under  43(a) of the Lanham Act, if a
competitor copies its color and thereby causes consumer confusion regarding the overall appearance
of the competing products or their packaging, see 15 U. S. C.  1125(a) (1988 ed., Supp. V). The first
part of this argument begs the question. One can understand why a firm might find it difficult to place
a usable symbol or word on a product (say, a large industrial bolt that customers normally see from a
distance); and, in such instances, a firm might want to use color, pure and simple, instead of color as
part of a design. Neither is the second portion of the argument convincing. Trademark law helps the
holder of a mark in many ways that "trade dress" protection does not. See 15 U. S. C.  1124 (ability to
prevent importation of confusingly similar goods);  1072 (constructive notice of ownership);  1065
(incontestible status);  1057(b) (prima facie evidence of validity and ownership). Thus, one can easily
find reasons why the law might provide trademark protection in addition to trade dress protection.
IV
Having determined that a color may sometimes meet the basic legal requirements for use as a
trademark and that respondent Jacobson's arguments do not justify a special legal rule preventing
color alone from serving as a trademark (and, in light of the District Court's here undisputed findings
that Qualitex's use of the green-gold color on its press pads meets the basic trademark requirements),
we conclude that the Ninth Circuit erred in barring Qualitex's use of color as a trademark. For these
reasons, the judgment of the Ninth Circuit is
Reversed.

282 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
DISTINCTIVENESS

DISTINCTIVENESS
In Part A of this chapter, you learned that anything that is capable of conveying meaning, that can
distinguish goods from those sold by others, and that can indicate the source of the goods can be a
trademark. Central to this analysis was a concept called distinctiveness: the ability of a given symbol
to meet these requirements. Color, we learned, can be sufficiently distinctive--although it is not
inherently so.
The second part of this chapter examines this fundamental component of a trademark. The classic
case for discussions of distinctiveness is Zatarains v. Oak Grove Smokehouse. This case highlights two
primary legal structures for analyzing distinctiveness: the inherent/acquired distinctiveness divide
and the Abercrombie spectrum. The opinion also discusses Oak Grove's statutory fair use defense, a
topic we will return to in class 33.
Although Zatarains involves two word-marks (FISH FRY and CHICK FRY), nonverbal symbols and
logos are also frequently used as trademarks. Although the Abercrombie spectrum is sometimes used to
analyze the distinctiveness of these marks, other frameworks are also employed. The most common
comes from Seabrook Foods, Inc. v. Bar-Well Foods, Ltd., 568 F.2d 1342 (C.C.P.A. 1977). I describe this
test in the video lecture.

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 283
ZATARAINS, INC. V. OAK GROVE SMOKEHOUSE, INC. (5TH CIR. 1983)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Zatarains, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is "distinctiveness" in trademark law?
           What are the policies that underlie the requirement of distinctiveness?
           How is distinctiveness analyzed?
           How would you analyze the distinctiveness of the following marks:
                       The color red on the entire exterior surface of a telephone;
                       GLOW for women's perfume;
                       A folded grape leaf for wine;
                       LA PLAYA TAQUERIA for a Mexican fast-food restaurant located near the beach;
                       A bee and the word "BEE" for lip balm made with beeswax;
                       A picture of the Mona Lisa for a movie production company.

                                   Zatarains, Inc. v. Oak Grove Smokehouse, Inc.
                                                 698 F.2d 786 (5th Cir. 1983)

GOLDBERG, Circuit Judge:
This appeal of a trademark dispute presents us with a menu of edible delights sure to tempt
connoisseurs of fish and fowl alike. At issue is the alleged infringement of two trademarks, "Fish-Fri"
and "Chick-Fri," held by appellant Zatarain's, Inc. ("Zatarain's"). The district court held that the alleged
infringers had a "fair use" defense to any asserted infringement of the term "Fish-Fri" and that the
registration of the term "Chick-Fri" should be cancelled. We affirm.

    1. Facts and Proceedings Below
    2. The Tale of the Town Frier
Zatarain's is the manufacturer and distributor of a line of over one hundred food products. Two of
these products, "Fish-Fri" and "Chick-Fri," are coatings or batter mixes used to fry foods. These marks
serve as the entree in the present litigation.
Zatarain's "Fish-Fri" consists of 100% corn flour and is used to fry fish and other seafood. "Fish-
Fri" is packaged in rectangular cardboard boxes containing twelve or twenty-four ounces of coating

284 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
mix. The legend "Wonderful FISH-FRI " is displayed prominently on the front panel, along with the
block Z used to identify all Zatarain's products. The term "Fish-Fri" has been used by Zatarain's or its
predecessor since 1950 and has been registered as a trademark since 1962.

Zatarain's "Chick-Fri" is a seasoned corn flour batter mix used for frying chicken and other foods.
The "Chick-Fri" package, which is very similar to that used for "Fish-Fri," is a rectangular cardboard
container labelled "Wonderful CHICK-FRI." Zatarain's began to use the term "Chick-Fri" in 1968 and
registered the term as a trademark in 1976.

Zatarain's products are not alone in the marketplace. At least four other companies market coatings
for fried foods that are denominated "fish fry" or "chicken fry." Two of these competing companies are
the appellees here, and therein hangs this fish tale.

Appellee Oak Grove Smokehouse, Inc. ("Oak Grove") began marketing a "fish fry" and a "chicken fry"
in March 1979. Both products are packaged in clear glassine packets that contain a quantity of coating
mix sufficient to fry enough food for one meal. The packets are labelled with Oak Grove's name and
emblem, along with the words "FISH FRY" OR "CHICKEN FRY." Oak Grove's "FISH FRY" has a corn
flour base seasoned with various spices; Oak Grove's "CHICKEN FRY" is a seasoned coating with a
wheat flour base.

Appellee Visko's Fish Fry, Inc. ("Visko's") entered the batter mix market in March 1980 with its "fish
fry." Visko's product is packed in a cylindrical eighteen-ounce container with a resealable plastic lid.
The words "Visko's FISH FRY" appear on the label along with a photograph of a platter of fried fish.
Visko's coating mix contains corn flour and added spices.

Other food manufacturing concerns also market coating mixes. Boochelle's Spice Co. ("Boochelle's"),
originally a defendant in this lawsuit, at one time manufactured a seasoned "FISH FRY" packaged
in twelve-ounce vinyl plastic packets. Pursuant to a settlement between Boochelle's and Zatarain's,
Boochelle's product is now labelled "FISH AND VEGETABLE FRY." Another batter mix, "YOGI
Brand  OYSTER SHRIMP and FISH FRY," is also available. Arnaud Coffee Corporation ("Arnaud")
has manufactured and marketed "YOGI Brand" for ten to twenty years, but was never made a party to
this litigation.[1] A product called "Golden Dipt Old South Fish Fry" has recently entered the market
as well.

    1. Out of the Frying Pan, into the Fire

Zatarain's first claimed foul play in its original complaint filed against Oak Grove on June 19, 1979,
in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. The complaint alleged
trademark infringement and unfair competition under the Lanham Act ㎣ 32(1), 43(a), 15 U.S.C.
㎣ 1114(1), 1125(a) (1976), and La.Rev.Stat. Ann.  51:1405(A) (West Supp.1982). Zatarain's later
amended its complaint to add Boochelle's and Visko's as defendants. Boochelle's and Zatarain's
ultimately resolved their dispute, and Boochelle's was dismissed from the suit. The remaining
defendants, Oak Grove and Visko's, filed counterclaims against Zatarain's under the Sherman Act 
2, 15 U.S.C.  2 (1976); the Clayton Act  4, 15 U.S.C.  15 (1976); La.Rev.Stat.Ann.  51:1401 (West
Supp. 1982); the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act, 15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1451-1461 (1976); and the Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act  403, 21 U.S.C.  343 (1976). The defendants also counterclaimed for cancellation
of the trademarks "Fish-Fri" and "Chick-Fri" under section 37 of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1119
(1976), and for damages under section 38 of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1120 (1976).

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 285
The case was tried to the court without a jury. Treating the trademark claims first, the district court
classified the term "Fish-Fri" as a descriptive term identifying a function of the product being sold.
The court found further that the term "Fish-Fri" had acquired a secondary meaning in the New
Orleans geographical area and therefore was entitled to trademark protection, but concluded that the
defendants were entitled to fair use of the term "fish fry" to describe characteristics of their goods.
Accordingly, the court held that Oak Grove and Visko's had not infringed Zatarain's trademark "Fish-
Fri."

With respect to the alleged infringement of the term "Chick-Fri," the court found that "Chick-Fri"
was a descriptive term that had not acquired a secondary meaning in the minds of consumers.
Consequently, the court held that Zatarain's claim for infringement of its trademark "Chick-Fri"
failed and ordered that the trademark registration of "Chick-Fri" should be cancelled.

Turning to Zatarain's unfair competition claims, the court observed that the evidence showed no
likelihood of or actual confusion on the part of the buying public. Additionally, the court noted that
the dissimilarities in trade dress of Zatarain's, Oak Grove's, and Visko's products diminished any
possibility of buyer confusion. For these reasons, the court found no violations of federal or state
unfair competition laws.

Finally, the court addressed the counterclaims asserted by Oak Grove and Visko's. Because no
evidence was introduced to support the defendants' allegations of monopolistic behavior, fraud, and
bad faith on the part of Zatarain's, the court dismissed the federal and state antitrust and unfair trade
practices counterclaims. The court also dismissed the counterclaim based on Zatarain's allegedly
improper product identity labelling. Both sides now appeal to this court.

    1. Issues on Appeal

The district court found that Zatarain's trademark "Fish-Fri" was a descriptive term with an
established secondary meaning, but held that Oak Grove and Visko's had a "fair use" defense to
their asserted infringement of the mark. The court further found that Zatarain's trademark "Chick-
Fri" was a descriptive term that lacked secondary meaning, and accordingly ordered the trademark
registration cancelled. Additionally, the court concluded that Zatarain's had produced no evidence
in support of its claims of unfair competition on the part of Oak Grove and Visko's. Finally, the
court dismissed Oak Grove's and Visko's counterclaims for antitrust violations, unfair trade practices,
misbranding of food products, and miscellaneous damages.

Battered, but not fried, Zatarain's appeals from the adverse judgment on several grounds. First,
Zatarain's argues that its trademark "Fish-Fri" is a suggestive term and therefore not subject to the
"fair use" defense. Second, Zatarain's asserts that even if the "fair use" defense is applicable in this case,
appellees cannot invoke the doctrine because their use of Zatarain's trademarks is not a good faith
attempt to describe their products. Third, Zatarain's urges that the district court erred in cancelling
the trademark registration for the term "Chick-Fri" because Zatarain's presented sufficient evidence
to establish a secondary meaning for the term. For these reasons, Zatarain's argues that the district
court should be reversed.

Oak Grove and Visko's also present an appeal to this court, contending that the district court erred in
dismissing their counterclaims against Zatarain's. In particular, Oak Grove and Visko's again urge that
Zatarain's conduct has violated the Sherman Act, the Lanham Act, the federal regulations governing

286 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
product identity labelling, and Louisiana law prohibiting restraint of trade; Oak Grove and Visko's
also pray for an award of attorneys' fees. We now turn to an appraisal of these issues.

III. The Trademark Claims

    1. Basic Principles[2]

    2. Classifications of Marks

The threshold issue in any action for trademark infringement is whether the word or phrase is
initially registerable or protectable. Vision Center v. Opticks, Inc., 596 F.2d 111, 115 (5th Cir.1980);
American Heritage Life Insurance Co. v. Heritage Life Insurance Co., 494 F.2d 3, 10 (5th Cir. 1974). Courts
and commentators have traditionally divided potential trademarks into four categories. A potential
trademark may be classified as (1) generic, (2) descriptive, (3) suggestive, or (4) arbitrary or fanciful.
These categories, like the tones in a spectrum, tend to blur at the edges and merge together. The labels
are more advisory than definitional, more like guidelines than pigeonholes. Not surprisingly, they are
somewhat difficult to articulate and to apply. Soweco, Inc. v. Shell Oil Co., 617 F.2d 1178, 1183 (5th
Cir.1980); Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 115.

A generic term is "the name of a particular genus or class of which an individual article or service is
but a member." Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 115; Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537 F.2d
4, 9 (2d Cir.1976). A generic term connotes the "basic nature of articles or services" rather than the
more individualized characteristics of a particular product. American Heritage, 494 F.2d at 11. Generic
terms can never attain trademark protection. William R. Warner & Co. v. Eli Lilly & Co., 265 U.S.
526, 528, 44 S.Ct. 615, 616, 68 L.Ed. 1161 (1924); Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1183; Vision Center, 596 F.2d at
115. Furthermore, if at any time a registered trademark becomes generic as to a particular product
or service, the mark's registration is subject to cancellation. Lanham Act  14, 15 U.S.C.  1064(c)
(1976). Such terms as aspirin and cellophane have been held generic and therefore unprotectable as
trademarks. See Bayer Co. v. United Drug Co., 272 F. 505 (S.D.N.Y.1921) (aspirin); DuPont Cellophane Co.
v. Waxed Products Co., 85 F.2d 75 (2d Cir.1936) (cellophane).

A descriptive term "identifies a characteristic or quality of an article or service," Vision Center, 596 F.2d
at 115, such as its color, odor, function, dimensions, or ingredients. American Heritage, 494 F.2d at
11. Descriptive terms ordinarily are not protectable as trademarks, Lanham Act  2(e)(1), 15 U.S.C. 
1052(e)(1) (1976); they may become valid marks, however, by acquiring a secondary meaning in the
minds of the consuming public. See id.  2(f), 15 U.S.C.  1052(f). Examples of descriptive marks would
include "Alo" with reference to products containing gel of the aloe vera plant, Aloe Creme Laboratories,
Inc. v. Milsan, Inc., 423 F.2d 845 (5th Cir.1970), and "Vision Center" in reference to a business offering
optical goods and services, Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 117. As this court has often noted, the distinction
between descriptive and generic terms is one of degree. Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1184; Vision Center, 596
F.2d at 115 n. 11 (citing 3 R. Callman, The Law of Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies  70.4
(3d ed. 1969)); American Heritage, 494 F.2d at 11. The distinction has important practical consequences,
however; while a descriptive term may be elevated to trademark status with proof of secondary
meaning, a generic term may never achieve trademark protection. Vision Center,596 F.2d at 115 n.11.

A suggestive term suggests, rather than describes, some particular characteristic of the goods or
services to which it applies and requires the consumer to exercise the imagination in order to draw
a conclusion as to the nature of the goods and services. Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1184; Vision Center, 596
F.2d at 115-16. A suggestive mark is protected without the necessity for proof of secondary meaning.

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 287
The term "Coppertone" has been held suggestive in regard to sun tanning products. See Douglas
Laboratories, Inc. v. Copper Tan, Inc., 210 F.2d 453 (2d Cir.1954).

Arbitrary or fanciful terms bear no relationship to the products or services to which they are applied.
Like suggestive terms, arbitrary and fanciful marks are protectable without proof of secondary
meaning. The term "Kodak" is properly classified as a fanciful term for photographic supplies, see
Eastman Kodak Co. v. Weil, 137 Misc. 506, 243 N.Y.S. 319 (1930) ("Kodak"); "Ivory" is an arbitrary term
as applied to soap. Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9 n.6.

    2. Secondary Meaning

As noted earlier, descriptive terms are ordinarily not protectable as trademarks. They may be
protected, however, if they have acquired a secondary meaning for the consuming public. The concept
of secondary meaning recognizes that words with an ordinary and primary meaning of their own
"may by long use with a particular product, come to be known by the public as specifically designating
that product." Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschaft v. Rickard, 492 F.2d 474, 477 (5th Cir.1974). In order to
establish a secondary meaning for a term, a plaintiff "must show that the primary significance of the
term in the minds of the consuming public is not the product but the producer." Kellogg Co. v. National
Biscuit Co., 305 U.S. 111, 118, 59 S.Ct. 109, 113, 83 L.Ed. 73 (1938). The burden of proof to establish
secondary meaning rests at all times with the plaintiff; this burden is not an easy one to satisfy, for "`[a]
high degree of proof is necessary to establish secondary meaning for a descriptive term.'" Vision Center,
596 F.2d at 118 (quoting 3 R. Callman, supra,  77.3, at 359). Proof of secondary meaning is an issue
only with respect to descriptive marks; suggestive and arbitrary or fanciful marks are automatically
protected upon registration, and generic terms are unprotectible even if they have acquired secondary
meaning. See Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1185 n.20.

    3. The "Fair Use" Defense

Even when a descriptive term has acquired a secondary meaning sufficient to warrant trademark
protection, others may be entitled to use the mark without incurring liability for trademark
infringement. When the allegedly infringing term is "used fairly and in good faith only to describe to
users the goods or services of [a] party, or their geographic origin," Lanham Act  33(b)(4), 15 U.S.C.
 1115(b)(4) (1976), a defendant in a trademark infringement action may assert the "fair use" defense.
The defense is available only in actions involving descriptive terms and only when the term is used
in its descriptive sense rather than its trademark sense. Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1185; see Venetianaire Corp.
v. A & P Import Co., 429 F.2d 1079, 1081-82 (2d Cir. 1970). In essence, the fair use defense prevents
a trademark registrant from appropriating a descriptive term for its own use to the exclusion of
others, who may be prevented thereby from accurately describing their own goods. Soweco, 617 F.2d
at 1185. The holder of a protectable descriptive mark has no legal claim to an exclusive right in the
primary, descriptive meaning of the term; consequently, anyone is free to use the term in its primary,
descriptive sense so long as such use does not lead to customer confusion as to the source of the goods
or services. See 1 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition  11.-17, at 379 (1973).

    4. Cancellation of Trademarks

Section 37 of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1119 (1976), provides as follows:

In any action involving a registered mark the court may determine the right to registration, order the
cancelation of registrations, in whole or in part, restore canceled registrations, and otherwise rectify

288 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
the register with respect to the registrations of any party to the action. Decrees and orders shall be
certified by the court to the Commissioner, who shall make appropriate entry upon the records of the
Patent Office, and shall be controlled thereby.

This circuit has held that when a court determines that a mark is either a generic term or a descriptive
term lacking secondary meaning, the purposes of the Lanham Act are well served by an order
cancelling the mark's registration. American Heritage, 494 F.2d at 14.

We now turn to the facts of the instant case.

    1. "Fish-Fri"[3]

    2. Classification

Throughout this litigation, Zatarain's has maintained that the term "Fish-Fri" is a suggestive mark
automatically protected from infringing uses by virtue of its registration in 1962. Oak Grove and
Visko's assert that "fish fry" is a generic term identifying a class of foodstuffs used to fry fish;
alternatively, Oak Grove and Visko's argue that "fish fry" is merely descriptive of the characteristics
of the product. The district court found that "Fish-Fri" was a descriptive term identifying a function
of the product being sold. Having reviewed this finding under the appropriate "clearly erroneous"
standard, we affirm. See Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 113.

We are mindful that "[t]he concept of descriptiveness must be construed rather broadly." 3 R. Callman,
supra,  70.2. Whenever a word or phrase conveys an immediate idea of the qualities, characteristics,
effect, purpose, or ingredients of a product or service, it is classified as descriptive and cannot be
claimed as an exclusive trademark. Id.  71.1; see Stix Products, Inc. v. United Merchants & Manufacturers,
Inc., 295 F.Supp. 479, 488 (S.D.N.Y.1968). Courts and commentators have formulated a number of
tests to be used in classifying a mark as descriptive.

A suitable starting place is the dictionary, for "[t]he dictionary definition of the word is an appropriate
and relevant indication `of the ordinary significance and meaning of words' to the public." American
Heritage, 494 F.2d at 11 n.5; see also Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 116. Webster's Third New International
Dictionary 858 (1966) lists the following definitions for the term "fish fry": "1. a picnic at which fish
are caught, fried, and eaten; . . . . 2. fried fish." Thus, the basic dictionary definitions of the term refer
to the preparation and consumption of fried fish. This is at least preliminary evidence that the term
"Fish-Fri" is descriptive of Zatarain's product in the sense that the words naturally direct attention to
the purpose or function of the product.

The "imagination test" is a second standard used by the courts to identify descriptive terms. This test
seeks to measure the relationship between the actual words of the mark and the product to which they
are applied. If a term "requires imagination, thought and perception to reach a conclusion as to the
nature of goods," Stix Products, 295 F.Supp. at 488, it is considered a suggestive term. Alternatively, a
term is descriptive if standing alone it conveys information as to the characteristics of the product. In
this case, mere observation compels the conclusion that a product branded "Fish-Fri" is a prepackaged
coating or batter mix applied to fish prior to cooking. The connection between this merchandise and
its identifying terminology is so close and direct that even a consumer unfamiliar with the product
would doubtless have an idea of its purpose or function. It simply does not require an exercise of the
imagination to deduce that "Fish-Fri" is used to fry fish. See Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 116-17; Stix

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 289
Products, 295 F.Supp. at 487-88. Accordingly, the term "Fish-Fri" must be considered descriptive when
examined under the "imagination test."

A third test used by courts and commentators to classify descriptive marks is "whether competitors
would be likely to need the terms used in the trademark in describing their products." Union Carbide
Corp. v. Ever-Ready, Inc., 531 F.2d 366, 379 (7th Cir.1976). A descriptive term generally relates so
closely and directly to a product or service that other merchants marketing similar goods would find
the term useful in identifying their own goods. Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 116-17; Stix Products, 295
F.Supp. at 488. Common sense indicates that in this case merchants other than Zatarain's might find
the term "fish fry" useful in describing their own particular batter mixes. While Zatarain's has argued
strenuously that Visko's and Oak Grove could have chosen from dozens of other possible terms in
naming their coating mix, we find this position to be without merit. As this court has held, the fact
that a term is not the only or even the most common name for a product is not determinative, for
there is no legal foundation that a product can be described in only one fashion. Vision Center, 596
F.2d at 117 n.17. There are many edible fish in the sea, and as many ways to prepare them as there are
varieties to be prepared. Even piscatorial gastronomes would agree, however, that frying is a form of
preparation accepted virtually around the world, at restaurants starred and unstarred. The paucity of
synonyms for the words "fish" and "fry" suggests that a merchant whose batter mix is specially spiced
for frying fish is likely to find "fish fry" a useful term for describing his product.

A final barometer of the descriptiveness of a particular term examines the extent to which a term
actually has been used by others marketing a similar service or product. Vision Center, 596 F.2d at
117; Shoe Corp. of America v. Juvenile Shoe Corp., 266 F.2d 793, 796 (C.C.P.A.1959). This final test is
closely related to the question whether competitors are likely to find a mark useful in describing
their products. As noted above, a number of companies other than Zatarain's have chosen the word
combination "fish fry" to identify their batter mixes. Arnaud's product, "Oyster Shrimp and Fish Fry,"
has been in competition with Zatarain's "Fish-Fri" for some ten to twenty years. When companies
from A to Z, from Arnaud to Zatarain's, select the same term to describe their similar products, the
term in question is most likely a descriptive one.

The correct categorization of a given term is a factual issue, Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1183 n.12;
consequently, we review the district court's findings under the "clearly erroneous" standard of
Fed.R.Civ.P. 52. See Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 113; Volkswagenwerk, 492 F.2d at 478. The district court
in this case found that Zatarain's trademark "Fish-Fri" was descriptive of the function of the product
being sold. Having applied the four prevailing tests of descriptiveness to the term "Fish-Fri," we are
convinced that the district court's judgment in this matter is not only not clearly erroneous, but
clearly correct.[4]

    2. Secondary Meaning

Descriptive terms are not protectable by trademark absent a showing of secondary meaning in
the minds of the consuming public.[5] To prevail in its trademark infringement action, therefore,
Zatarain's must prove that its mark "Fish-Fri" has acquired a secondary meaning and thus warrants
trademark protection. The district court found that Zatarain's evidence established a secondary
meaning for the term "Fish-Fri" in the New Orleans area. We affirm.

The existence of secondary meaning presents a question for the trier of fact, and a district court's
finding on the issue will not be disturbed unless clearly erroneous. American Heritage, 494 F.2d at 13;

290 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Volkswagenwerk, 492 F.2d at 477. The burden of proof rests with the party seeking to establish legal
protection for the mark--the plaintiff in an infringement suit. Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 118. The
evidentiary burden necessary to establish secondary meaning for a descriptive term is substantial. Id.;
American Heritage, 494 F.2d at 12; 3 R. Callman, supra,  77.3, at 359.

In assessing a claim of secondary meaning, the major inquiry is the consumer's attitude toward the
mark. The mark must denote to the consumer "a single thing coming from a single source," Coca-Cola
Co. v. Koke Co., 254 U.S. 143, 146, 41 S.Ct. 113, 114, 65 L.Ed. 189 (1920); Aloe Creme Laboratories, 423
F.2d at 849, to support a finding of secondary meaning. Both direct and circumstantial evidence may
be relevant and persuasive on the issue.

Factors such as amount and manner of advertising, volume of sales, and length and manner of use may
serve as circumstantial evidence relevant to the issue of secondary meaning. See, e.g., Vision Center, 596
F.2d at 119; Union Carbide Corp., 531 F.2d at 380; Aloe Creme Laboratories, 423 F.2d at 849-50. While
none of these factors alone will prove secondary meaning, in combination they may establish the
necessary link in the minds of consumers between a product and its source. It must be remembered,
however, that "the question is not the extent of the promotional efforts, but their effectiveness in altering
the meaning of [the term] to the consuming public." Aloe Creme Laboratories, 423 F.2d at 850.

Since 1950, Zatarain's and its predecessor have continuously used the term "Fish-Fri" to identify this
particular batter mix. Through the expenditure of over $400,000 for advertising during the period
from 1976 through 1981, Zatarain's has promoted its name and its product to the buying public. Sales
of twelve-ounce boxes of "Fish-Fri" increased from 37,265 cases in 1969 to 59,439 cases in 1979.
From 1964 through 1979, Zatarain's sold a total of 916,385 cases of "Fish-Fri."[6]The district court
considered this circumstantial evidence of secondary meaning to weigh heavily in Zatarain's favor.
Record on Appeal, Vol. I at 273.

In addition to these circumstantial factors, Zatarain's introduced at trial two surveys conducted by its
expert witness, Allen Rosenzweig.[7] In one survey, telephone interviewers questioned 100 women in
the New Orleans area who fry fish or other seafood three or more times per month. Of the women
surveyed, twenty-three percent specified Zatarain's "Fish-Fri" as a product they "would buy at the
grocery to use as a coating" or a "product on the market that is especially made for frying fish." In a
similar survey conducted in person at a New Orleans area mall, twenty-eight of the 100 respondents
answered "Zatarain's `Fish-Fri'" to the same questions.[8]

The authorities are in agreement that survey evidence is the most direct and persuasive way of
establishing secondary meaning. Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 119; Aloe Creme Laboratories, 423 F.2d at
849; 1 J. McCarthy, supra,  15.12(D). The district court believed that the survey evidence produced
by Zatarain's, when coupled with the circumstantial evidence of advertising and usage, tipped the
scales in favor of a finding of secondary meaning. Were we considering the question of secondary
meaning de novo, we might reach a different conclusion than did the district court, for the issue is
close. Mindful, however, that there is evidence in the record to support the finding below, we cannot
say that the district court's conclusion was clearly erroneous. Accordingly, the finding of secondary
meaning in the New Orleans area for Zatarain's descriptive term "Fish-Fri" must be affirmed.

    3. The "Fair Use" Defense

Although Zatarain's term "Fish-Fri" has acquired a secondary meaning in the New Orleans
geographical area, Zatarain's does not now prevail automatically on its trademark infringement claim,

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 291
for it cannot prevent the fair use of the term by Oak Grove and Visko's. The "fair use" defense applies
only to descriptive terms and requires that the term be "used fairly and in good faith only to describe
to users the goods or services of such party, or their geographic origin." Lanham Act  33(b), 15 U.S.C.
 1115(b)(4) (1976). The district court determined that Oak Grove and Visko's were entitled to fair use
of the term "fish fry" to describe a characteristic of their goods; we affirm that conclusion.

Zatarain's term "Fish-Fri" is a descriptive term that has acquired a secondary meaning in the New
Orleans area. Although the trademark is valid by virtue of having acquired a secondary meaning, only
that penumbra or fringe of secondary meaning is given legal protection. Zatarain's has no legal claim
to an exclusive right in the original, descriptive sense of the term; therefore, Oak Grove and Visko's
are still free to use the words "fish fry" in their ordinary, descriptive sense, so long as such use will not
tend to confuse customers as to the source of the goods. See 1 J. McCarthy, supra,  11.17.

The record contains ample evidence to support the district court's determination that Oak Grove's
and Visko's use of the words "fish fry" was fair and in good faith. Testimony at trial indicated that the
appellees did not intend to use the term in a trademark sense and had never attempted to register the
words as a trademark. Record on Appeal, Vol. II at 28, 33, 226-30, 243-47. Oak Grove and Visko's
apparently believed "fish fry" was a generic name for the type of coating mix they manufactured. Id. at
28, 226, 244. In addition, Oak Grove and Visko's consciously packaged and labelled their products in
such a way as to minimize any potential confusion in the minds of consumers. Id. at 244-45, 251-52.
The dissimilar trade dress of these products prompted the district court to observe that confusion at
the point of purchase--the grocery shelves--would be virtually impossible. Our review of the record
convinces us that the district court's determinations are correct. We hold, therefore, that Oak Grove
and Visko's are entitled to fair use of the term "fish fry" to describe their products; accordingly,
Zatarain's claim of trademark infringement must fail.[9]

    1. "Chick-Fri"

    2. Classification

Most of what has been said about "Fish-Fri" applies with equal force to Zatarain's other culinary
concoction, "Chick-Fri." "Chick-Fri" is at least as descriptive of the act of frying chicken as "Fish-Fri"
is descriptive of frying fish. It takes no effort of the imagination to associate the term "Chick-Fri" with
Southern fried chicken. Other merchants are likely to want to use the words "chicken fry" to describe
similar products, and others have in fact done so. Sufficient evidence exists to support the district
court's finding that "Chick-Fri" is a descriptive term; accordingly, we affirm.

    2. Secondary Meaning

The district court concluded that Zatarain's had failed to establish a secondary meaning for the term
"Chick-Fri." We affirm this finding. The mark "Chick-Fri" has been in use only since 1968; it was
registered even more recently, in 1976. In sharp contrast to its promotions with regard to "Fish-
Fri," Zatarain's advertising expenditures for "Chick-Fri" were mere chickenfeed; in fact, Zatarain's
conducted no direct advertising campaign to publicize the product. Thus the circumstantial evidence
presented in support of a secondary meaning for the term "Chick-Fri" was paltry.

Allen Rosenzweig's survey evidence regarding a secondary meaning for "Chick-Fri" also "lays an egg."
The initial survey question was a "qualifier:" "Approximately how many times in an average month
do you, yourself, fry fish or other seafood?" Only if respondents replied "three or more times a month"

292 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
were they asked to continue the survey. This qualifier, which may have been perfectly adequate for
purposes of the "Fish-Fri" questions, seems highly unlikely to provide an adequate sample of potential
consumers of "Chick-Fri." This survey provides us with nothing more than some data regarding fish
friers' perceptions about products used for frying chicken. As such, it is entitled to little evidentiary
weight.[10]

It is well settled that Zatarain's, the original plaintiff in this trademark infringement action, has the
burden of proof to establish secondary meaning for its term. Vision Center, 596 F.2d at 118; American
Heritage, 494 F.2d at 12. This it has failed to do. The district court's finding that the term "Chick-Fri"
lacks secondary meaning is affirmed.

    3. Cancellation

Having concluded that the district court was correct in its determination that Zatarain's mark "Chick-
Fri" is a descriptive term lacking in secondary meaning, we turn to the issue of cancellation. The
district court, invoking the courts' power over trademark registration as provided by section 37 of the
Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1119 (1976), ordered that the registration of the term "Chick-Fri" should be
cancelled. The district court's action was perfectly appropriate in light of its findings that "Chick-Fri"
is a descriptive term without secondary meaning. We affirm. See American Heritage, 494 F.2d at 13-14.

    1. The Counterclaims

The last morsels on our plate are the counterclaims filed against Zatarain's by Oak Grove and
Visko's. One group of counterclaims alleges violations of federal antitrust statutes and Louisiana
law prohibiting the restraint of trade. In addition, the counterclaims pray for awards of attorneys'
fees under the Lanham Act  35, 15 U.S.C.  1117 (1976), due to Zatarain's alleged bad faith in
instituting this infringement action. The district court found these allegations to be clearly without
merit, noting that Oak Grove and Visko's had introduced absolutely no evidence at trial to support
the counterclaims. Our review of the record fully supports the district court's judgment in this regard,
and it is hereby affirmed.

Finally, Oak Grove and Visko's assert a counterclaim based on the federal regulations governing
the identity labelling of packaged foods, 21 C.F.R.  101.3 (1982).[11] The counterclaim alleges that
Zatarain's sale of 100% corn flour under the name "Fish-Fri" is deceptive and misleading to the
public. In particular, Oak Grove and Visko's maintain that the size of the product identification "corn
flour" on the "Fish-Fri" box is not reasonably related to the most predominate words on the box
as required by the regulations. After examining the "Fish-Fri" package, the district court found this
counterclaim to be without merit. The court initially noted that the size of the words "corn flour"
complies with the specifications of 21 C.F.R.  101.2(c) (1982), which sets a minimum requirement for
information appearing on the principal display panel of packaged foods. The court then found that
the identification of Zatarain's "Fish-Fri" as a corn flour product was reasonably related in size to the
words "Fish-Fri." This finding is not clearly erroneous and therefore is affirmed.

We agree with the district court that this smorgasbord of counterclaims by Oak Grove and Visko's is
without merit, and we affirm their dismissal by the district court. Sadly, for Oak Grove and Visko's at
least, these are "the ones that got away."

    1. Conclusion

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 293
And so our tale of fish and fowl draws to a close. We need not tarry long, for our taster's choice yields
but one result, and we have other fish to fry. Accordingly, the judgment of the district court is hereby
and in all things

Affirmed.
[1] Prior to trial, Visko's moved to dismiss Zatarain's complaint for failure to join Arnaud as a party
under Fed.R.Civ.P. 19(a). In the alternative, Visko's moved to join Arnaud as a third-party defendant
under Fed.R.Civ.P. 14(a). The district court denied the motion.
[2] We are not the first to swim up this stream. For excellent discussions of the basics of trademark
law, see Soweco, Inc. v. Shell Oil Co., 617 F.2d 1178 (5th Cir.1980); Vision Center v. Opticks, Inc., 596
F.2d 111 (5th Cir.1979); Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537 F.2d 4 (2d Cir.1976); Union
Carbide Corp. v. Ever-Ready, Inc., 531 F.2d 366 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 830, 97 S.Ct. 91, 50
L.Ed.2d 94 (1976).
[3] We note at the outset that Zatarain's use of the phonetic equivalent of the words "fish fry"--that is,
misspelling it--does not render the mark protectable. Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1186 n. 24.
[4] Oak Grove and Visko's argue in a conclusory manner that the term "fish fry" is a generic name
for the class of substances used to coat fish prior to frying. We are unable to agree. No evidence
in the record indicates that the term "fish fry" is the common, recognized name for any class of
foodstuffs. The district court specifically rejected the contention that the term "Fish-Fri" was generic.
This finding was not clearly erroneous and must be affirmed.

Zatarain's urges that its "Fish-Fri" mark is suggestive rather than descriptive, and our lengthy
discussion in text addresses this contention fully. We pause here, however, to speak to Zatarain's
argument that certain survey evidence introduced at trial proves the suggestive nature of the term
"Fish-Fri." Just as the compleat angler exaggerates his favorite fish story, so Zatarain's overstates the
results of its consumer survey. We consider the survey unpersuasive on the issue of suggestiveness for
several reasons.

First, the survey was not intended to investigate the term's descriptiveness or suggestiveness. Rather,
as expert witness Allen Rosenzweig testified, the survey was designed to explore two completely
different issues: likelihood of confusion in the marketplace and secondary meaning. Record on
Appeal, Vol. II at 130, 173. Furthermore, the district court prohibited Rosenzweig's testimony as to
whether the survey data showed Zatarain's term to be suggestive or descriptive. Id. at 149.

Second, a glance at the survey itself convinces us that, regardless of its purpose, the questions were
not framed in a manner adequate to classify the mark properly. Respondents were asked the following
questions: "2. If you planned to fry fish tonight, what would you buy at the grocery to use as a coating?
3. Are you familiar with any product on the market that is especially made for frying fish?" If these
questions were to test the associational link between the mark "Fish-Fri" and Zatarain's product, they
should have been devoid of such broad hints as the place of purchase ("grocery"), the nature of the
product ("coating"), and the purpose or function of the product ("to fry fish"). Furthermore, we caution
that survey samples such as these--100 women in each of four randomly selected cities--may not be
adequate in size to prove much of anything. Cf. Union Carbide Corp., 531 F.2d at 385-88 (citing cases);
American Thermos Products Co. v. Aladdin Industries, Inc., 207 F.Supp. 9, 20-22 (D.Conn.1962).

Survey evidence is often critically important in the field of trademark law. We heartily embrace its use,
so long as the survey design is relevant to the legal issues, open-ended in its construction, and neutral
in its administration. Given the admitted purposes of this survey and its obvious design limitations,

294 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
it is rather disingenuous of Zatarain's to assert that the survey provided conclusive evidence of
suggestiveness. We therefore reject Zatarain's contention in this regard.

Finally, Zatarain's urges that it is entitled to a legal presumption of suggestiveness by virtue of its
federal registration of the term "Fish-Fri." The Lanham Act provides that:

[Registration] shall be prima facie evidence of registrant's exclusive right to use the registered mark
in commerce on the goods or services specified in the registration subject to any conditions or
limitations stated therein, but shall not preclude an opposing party from proving any legal or
equitable defense or defect which might have been asserted if such mark had not been registered.

Lanham Act  33(a), 15 U.S.C.  1115(a) (1976). See also id.  7(b), 15 U.S.C.  1057(b). This statutory
presumption can be rebutted by establishing the generic or descriptive nature of the mark. Vision
Center, 596 F.2d at 119; Flexitized, Inc. v. National Flexitized Corp., 335 F.2d 774, 779 (2d Cir.1964), cert.
denied, 380 U.S. 913, 85 S.Ct. 899, 13 L.Ed.2d 799 (1965).

Zatarain's maintains that Oak Grove and Visko's failed to show that the term "Fish-Fri" is a descriptive
one. We cannot agree. As our discussion in text indicates, ample evidence supports the appellees'
contention that "Fish-Fri" is descriptive of a coating used to fry fish. This evidence is sufficient to
rebut the presumption that the term is suggestive rather than descriptive. See Vision Center, 596 F.2d
at 119-20.
[5] A mark that has become "incontestable" under section 15 of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1065
(1976), cannot be challenged as lacking secondary meaning, although it is subject to seven statutory
defenses. See id.  33(b), 15 U.S.C.  1115(b). In order for a registrant's mark to be deemed
"incontestable," the registrant must use the mark for five continuous years following the registration
date and must file certain affidavits with the Commissioner of Patents. Id.  15, 15 U.S.C.  1065. No
evidence in the record indicates that Zatarain's has satisfied the requirements of "incontestability;"
consequently, we must determine whether proof of secondary meaning otherwise exists.
[6] This figure represents the total sales volume for all sizes of "Fish-Fri."
[7] See supra note 4. Visko's and Oak Grove argue that the survey evidence should not have been
admitted at trial because it was hearsay. We find this argument to be without merit. See Holiday Inns,
Inc. v. Holiday Out in America, 481 F.2d 445, 447-48 (5th Cir.1973); Zippo Mfg. Co. v. Rogers Imports, Inc.,
216 F.Supp. 670, 680-684 & n.104 (S.D.N.Y.1963); Fed.R. Evid. 703 advisory committee note.
[8] The telephone survey also included this question: "When you mentioned `fish fry,' did you have
a specific product in mind or did you use that term to mean any kind of coating used to fry fish?"
To this inartfully worded question, 77% of the New Orleans respondents answered "specific product"
and 23% answered "any kind of coating." Unfortunately, Rosenzweig did not ask the logical follow-up
question that seemingly would have ended the inquiry conclusively: "Who makes the specific product
you have in mind?" Had he but done so, our task would have been much simpler.
[9] The district court also rejected Zatarain's claims of unfair competition under the Lanham Act
 43(a), 15 U.S.C.  1125(a) (1976), and La.Rev.Stat.Ann.  51:1405(A) (West Supp. 1982), relying
upon the absence of any likelihood of confusion between the products of Zatarain's, Oak Grove, and
Visko's. We affirm these conclusions also.

It would make no sense to characterize defendant's use as "fair" within the meaning of the Lanham
Act for the purposes of a trademark infringement claim and at the same time characterize his use as
"unfair" for the purpose of a section 43(a) unfair competition claim under the same statute.

                                                                       17. WHAT A TRADEMARK IS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 295
Soweco, 617 F.2d at 1190. See T.G.I. Fridays, Inc. v. International Restaurant Group, 569 F.2d 895 (5th
Cir.1978).
[10] Even were we to accept the results of the survey as relevant, the result would not change. In
the New Orleans area, only 11 of the 100 respondents in the telephone survey named "Chick-Fri,"
"chicken fry," or "Zatarain's `Chick-Fri'" as a product used as a coating for frying chicken. Rosenzweig
himself testified that this number was inconclusive for sampling purposes. Thus the survey evidence
cannot be said to establish a secondary meaning for the term "Chick-Fri."
[11] The regulation reads in pertinent part as follows:
(a) The principal display panel of a food in package form shall bear as one of its principal features a
statement of the identity of the commodity.
(b) Such statement of identity shall be in terms of:
(1) The name now or hereafter specified in or required by any applicable Federal law or regulation;
or, in the absence thereof,
(2) The common or usual name of the food; or, in the absence thereof,
(3) An appropriately descriptive term, or when the nature of the food is obvious, a fanciful name
commonly used by the public for such food.
. . . .
(d) This statement of identity shall be presented in bold type on the principal display panel, shall be
in a size reasonably related to the most prominent printed matter on such panel, and shall be in lines
generally parallel to the base on which the package rests as it is designed to be displayed.

296 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                      18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 18

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
   1) explain the concept of trade dress;
   2) explain how to analyze the distinctiveness of trade dress and the consequences of that analysis;
   3) analyze the distinctiveness of trade dress in a given factual scenario.

What company makes these products?

Attribution: "Arroser"; Source 1: Wikimedia Commons; license: CCA-Share Alike 3.0 Unported.
Source 2: Mytheresa.com
(In the event that these images are not in color, the image on the left is of a harvester with a green
body and yellow stripe, while the image on the right is a pair of black shoes with red soles.)
If you grew up in the Midwest, you likely identified the harvester as a John Deere & Co. product. If
you know fashion, you likely identified the shoes as Christian Louboutin. If you didn't identify either
one, ask your friends if they can identify them. Some most likely will be able to.

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 297
How are people able to identify the source of these products even though they don't contain any word
marks or logos? The reason is that certain attributes of the products themselves can function as a
source identifier. Louboutin is famous for its red soled-shoes. John Deere is famous for its green-
and-yellow agricultural equipment. And as we learned in Qualitex, the color of a product can be a
trademark.

Other attributes of a product can also function as source identifiers. Consider, for example, the
silhouette of an iPhone, the design of a Coca-Cola bottle, or the shape of a Ferrari. Or the appearance
of a McDonald's as compared with an In-n-Out or a Culver's. These attributes of a product or service
can be, or comprise, trade dress.

As with word and symbol marks, trade dress raises the issue of distinctiveness. The three primary
Supreme Court opinions that address distinctiveness in the context of trade dress are Two Pesos v. Taco
Cabana (1992), Qualitex v. Jacobson (1995), and Wal-mart v. Samara (2000).

One important aspect of these cases is that the legal claim is typically based on 15 U.S.C.  1125(a),
rather than on the provision for infringement of a registered mark (15 U.S.C.  1114). Although
trade dress may be registered under current law (as with the John Deere trade dress shown above),
for reasons that may become apparent from reading the cases it is frequently not. Consequently,
plaintiffs usually rely on the more general unfair competition provision of  1125(a) (also known as
Lanham Act  43(a)) for their legal claim. Before reading these cases, look at that statute to familiarize
yourself with its contents. Do not, however, become too bogged down in its specifics yet: as the cases
indicate, there is more to this statute than meets the eye.

   15 U.S.C. 1125. False designations of origin, false descriptions, and dilution
   forbidden (2012)

   (a) Civil action

            1) Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or services, or any container for
            goods, uses in commerce any word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof, or
            any false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact, or false or misleading
            representation of fact, which

                     (A) is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive as to the affiliation,
                     connection, or association of such person with another person, or as to the origin,
                     sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods, services, or commercial activities by
                     another person, or

                     (B) in commercial advertising or promotion, misrepresents the nature, characteristics,
                     qualities, or geographic origin of his or her or another person's goods, services, or
                     commercial activities,

   shall be liable in a civil action by any person who believes that he or she is or is likely to be damaged by
   such act...

298 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
TWO PESOS V. TACO CABANA

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read these cases, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is "trade dress"?
           What challenges does protecting trade dress present above and beyond those for word marks such
              as "Fish Fri" or logo marks such as the Coca-Cola logo?
           What policy and theory concerns underlie the Court's opinions?
           How does the Court structure the legal analysis for trade dress? Where does it place the weight of
              the analysis?
           Given these cases, how would you analyze the packaging for an Apple iPhone? (If you are
              unfamiliar with iPhone packaging, there are numerous "unboxing" videos available on YouTube,
              such as https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KzJVPiEdTqE

                                                  Two Pesos v. Taco Cabana
                                                       505 U.S. 763 (1992)

JUSTICE WHITE, delivered the opinion of the Court.
The issue in this case is whether the trade dress[1] of a restaurant may be protected under  43(a) of
the Trademark Act of 1946 (Lanham Act), 60 Stat. 441, 15 U. S. C.  1125(a) (1982 ed.), based on a
finding of inherent distinctiveness, without proof that the trade dress has secondary meaning.
I
Respondent Taco Cabana, Inc., operates a chain of fast-food restaurants in Texas. The restaurants
serve Mexican food. The first Taco Cabana restaurant was opened in San Antonio in September
1978, and five more restaurants had been opened in San Antonio by 1985. Taco Cabana describes its
Mexican trade dress as
"a festive eating atmosphere having interior dining and patio areas decorated with artifacts, bright
colors, paintings and murals. The patio includes interior and exterior areas with the interior patio
capable of being sealed off from the outside patio by overhead garage doors. The stepped exterior
of the building is a festive and vivid color scheme using top border paint and neon stripes. Bright
awnings and umbrellas continue the theme." 932 F. 2d 1113, 1117 (CA5 1991).
In December 1985, a Two Pesos, Inc., restaurant was opened in Houston. Two Pesos adopted a

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 299
motif very similar to the foregoing description of Taco Cabana's trade dress. Two Pesos restaurants
expanded rapidly in Houston and other markets, but did not enter San Antonio. In 1986, Taco Cabana
entered the Houston and Austin markets and expanded into other Texas cities, including Dallas and
El Paso where Two Pesos was also doing business.

In 1987, Taco Cabana sued Two Pesos in the United States District Court for the Southern District
of Texas for trade dress infringement under  43(a) of the Lanham Act, 15 U. S. C.  1125(a) (1982
ed.),[2] and for theft of trade secrets under Texas common law. The case was tried to a jury, which
was instructed to return its verdict in the form of answers to five questions propounded by the trial
judge. The jury's answers were: Taco Cabana has a trade dress; taken as a whole, the trade dress is
nonfunctional; the trade dress is inherently distinctive;[3] the trade dress has not acquired a secondary
meaning[4] in the Texas market; and the alleged infringement creates a likelihood of confusion on
the part of ordinary customers as to the source or association of the restaurant's goods or services.
Because, as the jury was told, Taco Cabana's trade dress was protected if it either was inherently
distinctive or had acquired a secondary meaning, judgment was entered awarding damages to Taco
Cabana. In the course of calculating damages, the trial court held that Two Pesos had intentionally
and deliberately infringed Taco Cabana's trade dress.[5]

The Court of Appeals ruled that the instructions adequately stated the applicable law and that
the evidence supported the jury's findings. In particular, the Court of Appeals rejected petitioner's
argument that a finding of no secondary meaning contradicted a finding of inherent distinctiveness.

In so holding, the court below followed precedent in the Fifth Circuit. In Chevron Chemical Co. v.
Voluntary Purchasing Groups, Inc., 659 F. 2d 695, 702 (CA5 1981), the court noted that trademark law
requires a demonstration of secondary meaning only when the claimed trademark is not sufficiently
distinctive of itself to identify the producer; the court held that the same principles should apply to
protection of trade dresses. The Court of Appeals noted that this approach conflicts with decisions of
other courts, particularly the holding of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Vibrant Sales,
Inc. v. New Body Boutique, Inc., 652 F. 2d 299 (1981), cert. denied, 455 U. S. 909 (1982), that  43(a)
protects unregistered trademarks or designs only where secondary meaning is shown. Chevron, supra,
at 702. We granted certiorari to resolve the conflict among the Courts of Appeals on the question
whether trade dress that is inherently distinctive is protectible under  43(a) without a showing that it
has acquired secondary meaning.[6] 502 U. S. 1071 (1992). We find that it is, and we therefore affirm.

II

The Lanham Act[7] was intended to make "actionable the deceptive and misleading use of marks"
and "to protect persons engaged in . . . commerce against unfair competition."  45, 15 U. S. C. 
1127. Section 43(a) "prohibits a broader range of practices than does  32," which applies to registered
marks, Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc., 456 U. S. 844, 858 (1982), but it is common
ground that  43(a) protects qualifying unregistered trademarks and that the general principles
qualifying a mark for registration under  2 of the Lanham Act are for the most part applicable in
determining whether an unregistered mark is entitled to protection under  43(a). See A. J. Canfield
Co. v. Honickman,808 F. 2d 291, 299, n. 9 (CA3 1986); Thompson Medical Co. v. Pfizer Inc., 753 F. 2d 208,
215-216 (CA2 1985).

A trademark is defined in 15 U. S. C.  1127 as including "any word, name, symbol, or device or any
combination thereof" used by any person "to identify and distinguish his or her goods, including a

300 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
unique product, from those manufactured or sold by others and to indicate the source of the goods,
even if that source is unknown." In order to be registered, a mark must be capable of distinguishing
the applicant's goods from those of others.  1052. Marks are often classified in categories of generally
increasing distinctiveness; following the classic formulation set out by Judge Friendly, they may be
(1) generic; (2) descriptive; (3) suggestive; (4) arbitrary; or (5) fanciful. See Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v.
Hunting World, Inc., 537 F. 2d 4, 9 (CA2 1976). The Court of Appeals followed this classification and
petitioner accepts it. Brief for Petitioner 11-15. The latter three categories of marks, because their
intrinsic nature serves to identify a particular source of a product, are deemed inherently distinctive
and are entitled to protection. In contrast, generic marks--those that "refe[r] to the genus of which
the particular product is a species," Park 'N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar Park & Fly, Inc., 469 U. S. 189, 194 (1985),
citing Abercrombie & Fitch, supra, at 9--are not registrable as trademarks. Park 'N Fly, supra, at 194.

Marks which are merely descriptive of a product are not inherently distinctive. When used to describe
a product, they do not inherently identify a particular source, and hence cannot be protected.
However, descriptive marks may acquire the distinctiveness which will allow them to be protected
under the Act. Section 2 of the Lanham Act provides that a descriptive mark that otherwise could not
be registered under the Act may be registered if it "has become distinctive of the applicant's goods
in commerce." ㎣ 2(e), (f), 15 U. S. C. ㎣ 1052(e), (f). See Park 'N Fly, supra, at 194, 196. This acquired
distinctiveness is generally called "secondary meaning." See ibid.; Inwood Laboratories, supra, at 851, n.
11; Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co., 305 U. S. 111, 118 (1938). The concept of secondary meaning
has been applied to actions under  43(a). See, e. g., University of Georgia Athletic Assn. v. Laite, 756 F. 2d
1535 (CA11 1985); Thompson Medical Co. v. Pfizer Inc., supra.

The general rule regarding distinctiveness is clear: An identifying mark is distinctive and capable
of being protected if it either (1) is inherently distinctive or (2) has acquired distinctiveness through
secondary meaning. Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition  13, pp. 37-38, and Comment a
(Tent. Draft No. 2, Mar. 23, 1990). Cf. Park 'N Fly, supra, at 194. It is also clear that eligibility for
protection under  43(a) depends on nonfunctionality. See, e. g., Inwood Laboratories, supra, at 863
(White, J., concurring in result); see also, e. g., Brunswick Corp. v. Spinit Reel Co., 832 F. 2d 513, 517
(CA10 1987); First Brands Corp. v. Fred Meyers, Inc., 809 F. 2d 1378, 1381 (CA9 1987); Stormy Clime
Ltd. v. ProGroup, Inc., 809 F. 2d 971, 974 (CA2 1987); Ambrit, Inc. v. Kraft, Inc., 812 F. 2d 1531, 1535
(CA11 1986); American Greetings Corp. v. Dan-Dee Imports, Inc., 807 F. 2d 1136, 1141 (CA3 1986). It is,
of course, also undisputed that liability under  43(a) requires proof of the likelihood of confusion.
See, e. g., Brunswick Corp., supra, at 516-517; Ambrit, supra,at 1535; First Brands, supra, at 1381; Stormy
Clime, supra, at 974; American Greetings, supra, at 1141.

The Court of Appeals determined that the District Court's instructions were consistent with the
foregoing principles and that the evidence supported the jury's verdict. Both courts thus ruled that
Taco Cabana's trade dress was not descriptive but rather inherently distinctive, and that it was not
functional. None of these rulings is before us in this case, and for present purposes we assume,
without deciding, that each of them is correct. In going on to affirm the judgment for respondent,
the Court of Appeals, following its prior decision in Chevron, held that Taco Cabana's inherently
distinctive trade dress was entitled to protection despite the lack of proof of secondary meaning. It
is this issue that is before us for decision, and we agree with its resolution by the Court of Appeals.
There is no persuasive reason to apply to trade dress a general requirement of secondary meaning
which is at odds with the principles generally applicable to infringement suits under  43(a). Petitioner
devotes much of its briefing to arguing issues that are not before us, and we address only its arguments

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 301
relevant to whether proof of secondary meaning is essential to qualify an inherently distinctive trade
dress for protection under  43(a).

Petitioner argues that the jury's finding that the trade dress has not acquired a secondary meaning
shows conclusively that the trade dress is not inherently distinctive. Brief for Petitioner 9. The Court
of Appeals' disposition of this issue was sound:

"Two Pesos' argument--that the jury finding of inherent distinctiveness contradicts its finding of
no secondary meaning in the Texas market--ignores the law in this circuit. While the necessarily
imperfect (and often prohibitively difficult) methods for assessing secondary meaning address the
empirical question of current consumer association, the legal recognition of an inherently distinctive
trademark or trade dress acknowledges the owner's legitimate proprietary interest in its unique and
valuable informational device, regardless of whether substantial consumer association yet bestows the
additional empirical protection of secondary meaning." 932 F. 2d, at 1120, n. 7.

Although petitioner makes the above argument, it appears to concede elsewhere in its brief that
it is possible for a trade dress, even a restaurant trade dress, to be inherently distinctive and thus
eligible for protection under  43(a). Brief for Petitioner 10-11, 17-18; Reply Brief for Petitioner
10-14. Recognizing that a general requirement of secondary meaning imposes "an unfair prospect of
theft [or] financial loss" on the developer of fanciful or arbitrary trade dress at the outset of its use,
petitioner suggests that such trade dress should receive limited protection without proof of secondary
meaning. Id.,at 10. Petitioner argues that such protection should be only temporary and subject to
defeasance when over time the dress has failed to acquire a secondary meaning. This approach is
also vulnerable for the reasons given by the Court of Appeals. If temporary protection is available
from the earliest use of the trade dress, it must be because it is neither functional nor descriptive,
but an inherently distinctive dress that is capable of identifying a particular source of the product.
Such a trade dress, or mark, is not subject to copying by concerns that have an equal opportunity
to choose their own inherently distinctive trade dress. To terminate protection for failure to gain
secondary meaning over some unspecified time could not be based on the failure of the dress to
retain its fanciful, arbitrary, or suggestive nature, but on the failure of the user of the dress to be
successful enough in the marketplace. This is not a valid basis to find a dress or mark ineligible for
protection. The user of such a trade dress should be able to maintain what competitive position it has
and continue to seek wider identification among potential customers.

This brings us to the line of decisions by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit that would find
protection for trade dress unavailable absent proof of secondary meaning, a position that petitioner
concedes would have to be modified if the temporary protection that it suggests is to be recognized.
Brief for Petitioner 10-14. In Vibrant Sales, Inc. v. New Body Boutique, Inc., 652 F. 2d 299 (1981), the
plaintiff claimed protection under  43(a) for a product whose features the defendant had allegedly
copied. The Court of Appeals held that unregistered marks did not enjoy the "presumptive source
association" enjoyed by registered marks and hence could not qualify for protection under  43(a)
without proof of secondary meaning. Id., at 303, 304. The court's rationale seemingly denied
protection for unregistered, but inherently distinctive, marks of all kinds, whether the claimed mark
used distinctive words or symbols or distinctive product design. The court thus did not accept the
arguments that an unregistered mark was capable of identifying a source and that copying such a
mark could be making any kind of a false statement or representation under  43(a).

This holding is in considerable tension with the provisions of the Lanham Act. If a verbal or symbolic

302 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
mark or the features of a product design may be registered under  2, it necessarily is a mark "by which
the goods of the applicant may be distinguished from the goods of others," 60 Stat. 428, and must be
registered unless otherwise disqualified. Since  2 requires secondary meaning only as a condition to
registering descriptive marks, there are plainly marks that are registrable without showing secondary
meaning. These same marks, even if not registered, remain inherently capable of distinguishing the
goods of the users of these marks. Furthermore, the copier of such a mark may be seen as falsely
claiming that his products may for some reason be thought of as originating from the plaintiff.

Some years after Vibrant, the Second Circuit announced in Thompson Medical Co. v. Pfizer Inc., 753 F.
2d 208 (1985), that in deciding whether an unregistered mark is eligible for protection under  43(a),
it would follow the classification of marks set out by Judge Friendly in Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F. 2d,
at 9. Hence, if an unregistered mark is deemed merely descriptive, which the verbal mark before the
court proved to be, proof of secondary meaning is required; however, "[s]uggestive marks are eligible
for protection without any proof of secondary meaning, since the connection between the mark and
the source is presumed." 753 F. 2d, at 216. The Second Circuit has nevertheless continued to deny
protection for trade dress under  43(a) absent proof of secondary meaning, despite the fact that 
43(a) provides no basis for distinguishing between trademark and trade dress. See, e. g., Stormy Clime
Ltd. v. ProGroup, Inc., 809 F. 2d, at 974; Union Mfg. Co. v. Han Baek Trading Co., 763 F. 2d 42, 48 (1985);
LeSportsac, Inc. v. K mart Corp., 754 F. 2d 71, 75 (1985).

The Fifth Circuit was quite right in Chevron, and in this case, to follow the Abercrombie classifications
consistently and to inquire whether trade dress for which protection is claimed under  43(a) is
inherently distinctive. If it is, it is capable of identifying products or services as coming from a specific
source and secondary meaning is not required. This is the rule generally applicable to trademarks,
and the protection of trademarks and trade dress under  43(a) serves the same statutory purpose
of preventing deception and unfair competition. There is no persuasive reason to apply different
analysis to the two. The "proposition that secondary meaning must be shown even if the trade dress
is a distinctive, identifying mark, [is] wrong, for the reasons explained by Judge Rubin for the Fifth
Circuit in Chevron." Blau Plumbing, Inc. v. S. O. S. Fix-It, Inc., 781 F. 2d 604, 608 (CA7 1986). The
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit also follows Chevron, Ambrit, Inc. v. Kraft, Inc., 805 F. 2d 974,
979 (1986), and the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit appears to think that proof of secondary
meaning is superfluous if a trade dress is inherently distinctive, Fuddruckers, Inc. v. Doc's B. R. Others,
Inc., 826 F. 2d 837, 843 (1987).

It would be a different matter if there were textual basis in  43(a) for treating inherently distinctive
verbal or symbolic trademarks differently from inherently distinctive trade dress. But there is none.
The section does not mention trademarks or trade dress, whether they be called generic, descriptive,
suggestive, arbitrary, fanciful, or functional. Nor does the concept of secondary meaning appear in the
text of  43(a). Where secondary meaning does appear in the statute, 15 U. S. C.  1052 (1982 ed.), it is
a requirement that applies only to merely descriptive marks and not to inherently distinctive ones. We
see no basis for requiring secondary meaning for inherently distinctive trade dress protection under
 43(a) but not for other distinctive words, symbols, or devices capable of identifying a producer's
product.

Engrafting onto  43(a) a requirement of secondary meaning for inherently distinctive trade dress
also would undermine the purposes of the Lanham Act. Protection of trade dress, no less than
of trademarks, serves the Act's purpose to "secure to the owner of the mark the goodwill of his
business and to protect the ability of consumers to distinguish among competing producers. National

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 303
protection of trademarks is desirable, Congress concluded, because trademarks foster competition
and the maintenance of quality by securing to the producer the benefits of good reputation." Park 'N
Fly, 469 U. S., at 198, citing S. Rep. No. 1333, 79th Cong., 2d Sess., 3-5 (1946) (citations omitted).
By making more difficult the identification of a producer with its product, a secondary meaning
requirement for a nondescriptive trade dress would hinder improving or maintaining the producer's
competitive position.

Suggestions that under the Fifth Circuit's law, the initial user of any shape or design would cut
off competition from products of like design and shape are not persuasive. Only nonfunctional,
distinctive trade dress is protected under  43(a). The Fifth Circuit holds that a design is legally
functional, and thus unprotectible, if it is one of a limited number of equally efficient options available
to competitors and free competition would be unduly hindered by according the design trademark
protection. See Sicilia Di R. Biebow & Co. v. Cox, 732 F. 2d 417, 426 (1984). This serves to assure that
competition will not be stifled by the exhaustion of a limited number of trade dresses.

On the other hand, adding a secondary meaning requirement could have anticompetitive effects,
creating particular burdens on the startup of small companies. It would present special difficulties
for a business, such as respondent, that seeks to start a new product in a limited area and then
expand into new markets. Denying protection for inherently distinctive nonfunctional trade dress
until after secondary meaning has been established would allow a competitor, which has not adopted
a distinctive trade dress of its own, to appropriate the originator's dress in other markets and to deter
the originator from expanding into and competing in these areas.

As noted above, petitioner concedes that protecting an inherently distinctive trade dress from its
inception may be critical to new entrants to the market and that withholding protection until
secondary meaning has been established would be contrary to the goals of the Lanham Act. Petitioner
specifically suggests, however, that the solution is to dispense with the requirement of secondary
meaning for a reasonable, but brief, period at the outset of the use of a trade dress. Reply Brief for
Petitioner 11-12. If  43(a) does not require secondary meaning at the outset of a business' adoption
of trade dress, there is no basis in the statute to support the suggestion that such a requirement comes
into being after some unspecified time.

III

We agree with the Court of Appeals that proof of secondary meaning is not required to prevail on
a claim under  43(a) of the Lanham Act where the trade dress at issue is inherently distinctive, and
accordingly the judgment of that court is affirmed.

It is so ordered.

JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring.

I write separately to note my complete agreement with JUSTICE THOMAS's explanation as to how
the language of  43(a) and its common-law derivation are broad enough to embrace inherently
distinctive trade dress. Nevertheless, because I find that analysis to be complementary to (and not
inconsistent with) the Court's opinion, I concur in the latter.

304 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
JUSTICE STEVENS, concurring in the judgment.

As the Court notes in its opinion, the text of  43(a) of the Lanham Act, 15 U. S. C.  1125(a) (1982
ed.), "does not mention trademarks or trade dress." Ante, at 774. Nevertheless, the Court interprets
this section as having created a federal cause of action for infringement of an unregistered trademark
or trade dress and concludes that such a mark or dress should receive essentially the same protection
as those that are registered. Although I agree with the Court's conclusion, I think it is important to
recognize that the meaning of the text has been transformed by the federal courts over the past few
decades. I agree with this transformation, even though it marks a departure from the original text,
because it is consistent with the purposes of the statute and has recently been endorsed by Congress.

I

It is appropriate to begin with the relevant text of  43(a).[8] See, e. g., Moskal v. United States, 498 U. S.
103 (1990); K mart Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 486 U. S. 281, 291 (1988); United States v. Turkette, 452 U. S. 576,
580 (1981). Section 43(a)[9] provides a federal remedy for using either "a false designation of origin"
or a "false description or representation" in connection with any goods or services. The full text of
the section makes it clear that the word "origin" refers to the geographic location in which the goods
originated, and in fact, the phrase "false designation of origin" was understood to be limited to false
advertising of geographic origin. For example, the "false designation of origin" language contained in
the statute makes it unlawful to represent that California oranges came from Florida, or vice versa.[10]

For a number of years after the 1946 enactment of the Lanham Act, a "false description or
representation," like "a false designation of origin," was construed narrowly. The phrase encompassed
two kinds of wrongs: false advertising[11] and the common-law tort of "passing off."[12] False
advertising meant representing that goods or services possessed characteristics that they did not
actually have and passing off meant representing one's goods as those of another. Neither "secondary
meaning" nor "inherent distinctiveness" had anything to do with false advertising, but proof of
secondary meaning was an element of the common-law passing-off cause of action. See, e. g., G. & C.
Merriam Co. v. Saalfield, 198 F. 369, 372 (CA6 1912) ("The ultimate offense always is that defendant has
passed off his goods as and for those of the complainant").

II

Over time, the Circuits have expanded the categories of "false designation of origin" and "false
description or representation." One treatise[13] identified the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
as the first to broaden the meaning of "origin" to include "origin of source or manufacture" in addition
to geographic origin.[14] Another early case, described as unique among the Circuit cases because it
was so "forward-looking,"[15] interpreted the "false description or representation" language to mean
more than mere "palming off." L'Aiglon Apparel, Inc. v. Lana Lobell, Inc., 214 F. 2d 649 (CA3 1954). The
court explained: "We find nothing in the legislative history of the Lanham Act to justify the view
that [ 43(a)] is merely declarative of existing law. . . . It seems to us that Congress has defined a
statutory civil wrong of false representation of goods in commerce and has given a broad class of
suitors injured or likely to be injured by such wrong the right to relief in the federal courts." Id., at
651. Judge Clark, writing a concurrence in 1956, presciently observed: "Indeed, there is indication
here and elsewhere that the bar has not yet realized the potential impact of this statutory provision [
43(a)]." Maternally Yours, Inc. v. Your Maternity Shop, Inc., 234 F. 2d 538, 546 (CA2). Although some have
criticized the expansion as unwise,[16] it is now "a firmly embedded reality."[17] The United States

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 305
Trade Association Trademark Review Commission noted this transformation with approval: "Section
43(a) is an enigma, but a very popular one. Narrowly drawn and intended to reach false designations
or representations as to the geographical origin of products, the section has been widely interpreted
to create, in essence, a federal law of unfair competition. . . . It has definitely eliminated a gap in unfair
competition law, and its vitality is showing no signs of age."[18]

Today, it is less significant whether the infringement falls under "false designation of origin" or
"false description or representation"[19] because in either case  43(a) may be invoked. The federal
courts are in agreement that  43(a) creates a federal cause of action for trademark and trade dress
infringement claims. 1 J. Gilson, Trademark Protection and Practice  2.13, p. 2-178 (1991). They
are also in agreement that the test for liability is likelihood of confusion: "[U]nder the Lanham Act
[ 43(a)], the ultimate test is whether the public is likely to be deceived or confused by the similarity
of the marks. . . . Whether we call the violation infringement, unfair competition or false designation
of origin, the test is identical--is there a `likelihood of confusion?'" New West Corp. v. NYM Co. of
California, Inc., 595 F. 2d 1194, 1201 (CA9 1979) (footnote omitted). And the Circuits are in general
agreement,[20] with perhaps the exception of the Second Circuit,[21] that secondary meaning need
not be established once there is a finding of inherent distinctiveness in order to establish a trade dress
violation under  43(a).

III

Even though the lower courts' expansion of the categories contained in  43(a) is unsupported by the
text of the Act, I am persuaded that it is consistent with the general purposes of the Act. For example,
Congressman Lanham, the bill's sponsor, stated: "The purpose of [the Act] is to protect legitimate
business and the consumers of the country."[22] 92 Cong. Rec. 7524 (1946). One way of accomplishing
these dual goals was by creating uniform legal rights and remedies that were appropriate for a national
economy. Although the protection of trademarks had once been "entirely a State matter," the result of
such a piecemeal approach was that there were almost "as many different varieties of common law as
there are States" so that a person's right to a trademark "in one State may differ widely from the rights
which [that person] enjoys in another." H. R. Rep. No. 944, 76th Cong., 1st Sess., 4 (1939). The House
Committee on Trademarks and Patents, recognizing that "trade is no longer local, but . . . national,"
saw the need for "national legislation along national lines [to] secur[e] to the owners of trademarks in
interstate commerce definite rights." Ibid.[23]

Congress has revisited this statute from time to time, and has accepted the "judicial legislation" that
has created this federal cause of action. Recently, for example, in the Trademark Law Revision Act
of 1988, 102 Stat. 3935, Congress codified the judicial interpretation of  43(a), giving its imprimatur
to a growing body of case law from the Circuits that had expanded the section beyond its original
language.

Although Congress has not specifically addressed the question whether secondary meaning is
required under  43(a), the steps it has taken in this subsequent legislation suggest that secondary
meaning is not required if inherent distinctiveness has been established.[24] First, Congress
broadened the language of  43(a) to make explicit that the provision prohibits "any word, term, name,
symbol, or device, or any combination thereof" that is "likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake,
or to deceive as to the affiliation, connection, or association of such person with another person, or
as to the origin, sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods, services, or commercial activities by
another person." 15 U. S. C.  1125(a). That language makes clear that a confusingly similar trade

306 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
dress is actionable under  43(a), without necessary reference to "falsity." Second, Congress approved
and confirmed the extensive judicial development under the provision, including its application to
trade dress that the federal courts had come to apply.[25] Third, the legislative history of the 1988
amendments reaffirms Congress' goals of protecting both businesses and consumers with the Lanham
Act.[26] And fourth, Congress explicitly extended to any violation of  43(a) the basic Lanham Act
remedial provisions whose text previously covered only registered trademarks.[27] The aim of the
amendments was to apply the same protections to unregistered marks as were already afforded to
registered marks. See S. Rep. No. 100-515, p. 40 (1988). These steps buttress the conclusion that 
43(a) is properly understood to provide protection in accordance with the standards for registration
in  2. These aspects of the 1988 legislation bolster the claim that an inherently distinctive trade dress
may be protected under  43(a) without proof of secondary meaning.

IV

In light of the consensus among the Courts of Appeals that have actually addressed the question,
and the steps on the part of Congress to codify that consensus, stare decisis concerns persuade me
to join the Court's conclusion that secondary meaning is not required to establish a trade dress
violation under  43(a) once inherent distinctiveness has been established. Accordingly, I concur in
the judgment, but not in the opinion, of the Court.

JUSTICE THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.

***
[1] The District Court instructed the jury: "`[T]rade dress' is the total image of the business. Taco
Cabana's trade dress may include the shape and general appearance of the exterior of the restaurant,
the identifying sign, the interior kitchen floor plan, the decor, the menu, the equipment used to serve
food, the servers' uniforms and other features reflecting on the total image of the restaurant." 1 App.
83-84. The Court of Appeals accepted this definition and quoted from Blue Bell Bio-Medical v. CinBad,
Inc.,864 F. 2d 1253, 1256 (CA5 1989): "The `trade dress' of a product is essentially its total image and
overall appearance." See 932 F. 2d 1113, 1118 (CA5 1991). It "involves the total image of a product
and may include features such as size, shape, color or color combinations, texture, graphics, or even
particular sales techniques." John H. Harland Co. v. Clarke Checks, Inc., 711 F. 2d 966, 980 (CA11 1983).
Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition  16, Comment a (Tent. Draft No. 2, Mar. 23, 1990).
[2] Section 43(a) provides: "Any person who shall affix, apply, or annex, or use in connection with
any goods or services, or any container or containers for goods, a false designation of origin, or any
false description or representation, including words or other symbols tending falsely to describe or
represent the same, and shall cause such goods or services to enter into commerce, and any person
who shall with knowledge of the falsity of such designation of origin or description or representation
cause or procure the same to be transported or used in commerce or deliver the same to any carrier
to be transported or used, shall be liable to a civil action by any person doing business in the
locality falsely indicated as that of origin or in the region in which said locality is situated, or by any
person who believes that he is or is likely to be damaged by the use of any such false description or
representation." 60 Stat. 441.

This provision has been superseded by  132 of the Trademark Law Revision Act of 1988, 102 Stat.
3946, 15 U. S. C.  1121.
[3] The instructions were that, to be found inherently distinctive, the trade dress must not be
descriptive.

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 307
[4] Secondary meaning is used generally to indicate that a mark or dress "has come through use
to be uniquely associated with a specific source." Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition  13,
Comment e (Tent. Draft No. 2, Mar. 23, 1990). "To establish secondary meaning, a manufacturer
must show that, in the minds of the public, the primary significance of a product feature or term is
to identify the source of the product rather than the product itself." Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives
Laboratories, Inc.,456 U. S. 844, 851, n. 11 (1982).
[5] The Court of Appeals agreed: "The weight of the evidence persuades us, as it did Judge Singleton,
that Two Pesos brazenly copied Taco Cabana's successful trade dress, and proceeded to expand in a
manner that foreclosed several lucrative markets within Taco Cabana's natural zone of expansion."
932 F. 2d, at 1127, n. 20.
[6] We limited our grant of certiorari to the above question on which there is a conflict. We did not
grant certiorari on the second question presented by the petition, which challenged the Court of
Appeals' acceptance of the jury's finding that Taco Cabana's trade dress was not functional.
[7] The Lanham Act, including the provisions at issue here, has been substantially amended since the
present suit was brought. See Trademark Law Revision Act of 1988, 102 Stat. 3946, 15 U. S. C.  1121.
[8] The text that we consider today is  43(a) of the Lanham Act prior to the 1988 amendments; it
provides:

"Any person who shall affix, apply, or annex, or use in connection with any goods or services, or
any container or containers for goods, a false designation of origin, or any false description or
representation, including words or other symbols tending falsely to describe or represent the same,
and shall cause such goods or services to enter into commerce, and any person who shall with
knowledge of the falsity of such designation of origin or description or representation cause or
procure the same to be transported or used in commerce or deliver the same to any carrier to be
transported or used, shall be liable to a civil action by any person doing business in the locality falsely
indicated as that of origin or in the region in which said locality is situated, or by any person who
believes that he is or is likely to be damaged by the use of any such false description or representation."
15 U. S. C.  1125(a) (1982 ed.).
[9] Section 43(a) replaced and extended the coverage of  3 of the Trademark Act of 1920, 41 Stat. 534,
as amended. Section 3 was destined for oblivion largely because it referred only to false designation of
origin, was limited to articles of merchandise, thus excluding services, and required a showing that the
use of the false designation of origin occurred "willfully and with intent to deceive." Ibid. As a result,
"[a]lmost no reported decision can be found in which relief was granted to either a United States or
foreign party based on this newly created remedy." Derenberg, Federal Unfair Competition Law at
the End of the First Decade of the Lanham Act: Prologue or Epilogue?, 32 N. Y. U. L. Rev. 1029, 1034
(1957).
[10] This is clear from the fact that the cause of action created by this section is available only to a
person doing business in the locality falsely indicated as that of origin. See n. 1, supra.
[11] The deleterious effects of false advertising were described by one commentator as follows:
"[A] campaign of false advertising may completely discredit the product of an industry, destroy the
confidence of consumers and impair a communal or trade good will. Less tangible but nevertheless
real is the injury suffered by the honest dealer who finds it necessary to meet the price competition
of inferior goods, glamorously misdescribed by the unscrupulous merchant. The competition of a liar
is always dangerous even though the exact injury may not be susceptible of precise proof." Handler,
Unfair Competition, 21 Iowa L. Rev. 175, 193 (1936).
[12] The common-law tort of passing off has been described as follows:

308 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
"Beginning in about 1803, English and American common law slowly developed an offshoot of the
tort of fraud and deceit and called it `passing off' or `palming off.' Simply stated, passing off as a tort
consists of one passing off his goods as the goods of another. In 1842 Lord Langdale wrote:

"`I think that the principle on which both the courts of law and equity proceed is very well understood.
A man is not to sell his own goods under the pretence [sic] that they are the goods of another man. . . .'

"In 19th century cases, trademark infringement embodied much of the elements of fraud and deceit
from which trademark protection developed. That is, the element of fraudulent intent was
emphasized over the objective facts of consumer confusion." 1 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair
Competition  5.2, p. 133 (2d ed. 1984) (McCarthy) (footnotes omitted).

[13] Id.,  27:3, p. 345.
[14] Federal-Mogul-Bower Bearings, Inc. v. Azoff, 313 F. 2d 405, 408 (CA6 1963).
[15] Derenberg, 32 N. Y. U. L. Rev., at 1047, 1049.
[16] See, e. g., Germain, Unfair Trade Practices Under  43(a) of the Lanham Act: You've Come a Long
Way Baby--Too Far, Maybe?, 64 Trademark Rep. 193, 194 (1974) ("It is submitted that the cases have
applied Section 43(a) to situations it was not intended to cover and have used it in ways that it was not
designed to function").
[17] 2 McCarthy  27:3, p. 345.
[18] The United States Trademark Association Trademark Review Commission Report and
Recommendations to USTA President and Board of Directors, 77 Trademark Rep. 375, 426 (1987).
[19] Indeed, in count one of the complaint, respondent alleged that petitioner "is continuing to affix,
apply, or use in connection with its restaurants, goods and services a false designation o[f] origin, or
a false description and representation, tending to falsely describe or represent the same," and that
petitioner "has falsely designated the origin of its restaurants, goods and services and has falsely
described and represented the same . . . ." App. 44-45; see Tr. of Oral Arg. 37.
[20] See, e. g., Ambrit, Inc. v. Kraft, Inc., 805 F. 2d 974 (CA11 1986), cert. denied, 481 U. S. 1041 (1987);
Blau Plumbing, Inc. v. S. O. S. Fix-It, Inc., 781 F. 2d 604 (CA7 1986); In re Morton-Norwich Products, Inc.,
671 F. 2d 1332, 1343 (C. C. P. A. 1982); Chevron Chemical Co. v. Voluntary Purchasing Groups, Inc., 659
F. 2d 695 (CA5 1981), cert. denied, 457 U. S. 1126 (1982); see also Fuddruckers, Inc. v. Doc's B. R. Others,
Inc., 826 F. 2d 837, 843-844 (CA9 1987); M. Kramer Mfg. Co. v. Andrews, 783 F. 2d 421, 449, n. 26 (CA4
1986).
[21] Consistent with the common-law background of  43(a), the Second Circuit has said that proof
of secondary meaning is required to establish a claim that the defendant has traded on the plaintiff's
good will by falsely representing that his goods are those of the plaintiff. See, e. g., Crescent Tool
Co. v. Kilborn & Bishop Co., 247 F. 299 (1917). To my knowledge, however, the Second Circuit has
not explained why "inherent distinctiveness" is not an appropriate substitute for proof of secondary
meaning in a trade dress case. Most of the cases in which the Second Circuit has said that secondary
meaning is required did not involve findings of inherent distinctiveness. For example, in Vibrant Sales,
Inc. v. New Body Boutique, Inc., 652 F. 2d 299 (1981), cert. denied, 455 U. S. 909 (1982), the product
at issue--a velcro belt--was functional and lacked "any distinctive, unique or non-functional mark
or feature." 652 F. 2d, at 305. Similarly, in Stormy Clime Ltd. v. ProGroup, Inc., 809 F. 2d 971, 977
(1987), the court described functionality as a continuum, and placed the contested rainjacket closer
to the functional end than to the distinctive end. Although the court described the lightweight bag in
LeSportsac, Inc. v. K mart Corp., 754 F. 2d 71 (1985), as having a distinctive appearance and concluded

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 309
that the District Court's finding of nonfunctionality was not clearly erroneous, id.,at 74, it did not
explain why secondary meaning was also required in such a case.
[22] The Senate Report elaborated on these two goals:

"The purpose underlying any trade-mark statute is twofold. One is to protect the public so it may be
confident that, in purchasing a product bearing a particular trade-mark which it favorably knows, it
will get the product which it asks for and wants to get. Secondly, where the owner of a trade-mark
has spent energy, time, and money in presenting to the public the product, he is protected in his
investment from its misappropriation by pirates and cheats. This is the well-established rule of law
protecting both the public and the trade-mark owner." S. Rep. No. 1333, 79th Cong., 2d Sess., 3 (1946).

By protecting trademarks, Congress hoped "to protect the public from deceit, to foster fair
competition, and to secure to the business community the advantages of reputation and good will by
preventing their diversion from those who have created them to those who have not. This is the end
to which this bill is directed." Id., at 4.

[23] Forty years later, the USTA Trademark Review Commission assessed the state of trademark law.
The conclusion that it reached serves as a testimonial to the success of the Act in achieving its goal of
uniformity: "The federal courts now decide, under federal law, all but a few trademark disputes. State
trademark law and state courts are less influential than ever. Today the Lanham Act is the paramount
source of trademark law in the United States, as interpreted almost exclusively by the federal courts."
Trademark Review Commission, 77 Trademark Rep., at 377.
[24] "When several acts of Congress are passed touching the same subject matter, subsequent
legislation may be considered to assist in the interpretation of prior legislation upon the same subject."
Tiger v. Western Investment Co., 221 U. S. 286, 309 (1911); see NLRB v. Bell Aerospace Co. of Textron, Inc.,
416 U. S. 267, 275 (1974); Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U. S.367,380-381 (1969); United States
v. Stafoff, 260 U. S.477, 480 (1923) (opinion of Holmes, J.).
[25] As the Senate Report explained, revision of  43(a) is designed "to codify the interpretation it
has been given by the courts. Because Section 43(a) of the Act fills an important gap in federal unfair
competition law, the committee expects the courts to continue to interpret the section.

"As written, Section 43(a) appears to deal only with false descriptions or representations and false
designations of geographic origin. Since its enactment in 1946, however, it has been widely
interpreted as creating, in essence, a federal law of unfair competition. For example, it has been
applied to cases involving the infringement of unregistered marks, violations of trade dress and
certain nonfunctional configurations of goods and actionable false advertising claims." S. Rep. No.
100-515, p. 40 (1988).
[26] "Trademark protection is important to both consumers and producers. Trademark law protects
the public by making consumers confident that they can identify brands they prefer and can purchase
those brands without being confused or misled. Trademark laws also protec[t] trademark owners.
When the owner of a trademark has spent conside[r]able time and money bringing a product to the
marketplace, trademark law protects the producer from pirates and counterfeiters." Id., at 4.
[27] See 15 U. S. C. ㎣ 1114, 1116-1118.

310 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
WAL-MART STORES V. SAMARA BROS.

                                          Wal-Mart Stores v. Samara Brothers

                                                       529 U.S. 205 (2000)

JUSTICE SCALIA, delivered the opinion of the Court.

In this case, we decide under what circumstances a product's design is distinctive, and therefore
protectible, in an action for infringement of unregistered trade dress under  43(a) of the Trademark
Act of 1946 (Lanham Act), 60 Stat. 441, as amended, 15 U. S. C.  1125(a).

I

Respondent Samara Brothers, Inc., designs and manufactures children's clothing. Its primary product
is a line of spring/summer one-piece seersucker outfits decorated with appliqus of hearts, flowers,
fruits, and the like. A number of chain stores, including JCPenney, sell this line of clothing under
contract with Samara.

Petitioner Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., is one of the Nation's best known retailers, selling among other
things children's clothing. In 1995, Wal-Mart contracted with one of its suppliers, Judy-Philippine,
Inc., to manufacture a line of children's outfits for sale in the 1996 spring/summer season. Wal-
Mart sent Judy-Philippine photographs of a number of garments from Samara's line, on which Judy-
Philippine's garments were to be based; Judy-Philippine duly copied, with only minor modifications,
16 of Samara's garments, many of which contained copyrighted elements. In 1996, Wal-Mart briskly
sold the so-called knockoffs, generating more than $1.15 million in gross profits.

In June 1996, a buyer for JCPenney called a representative at Samara to complain that she had
seen Samara garments on sale at Wal-Mart for a lower price than JCPenney was allowed to charge
under its contract with Samara. The Samara representative told the buyer that Samara did not
supply its clothing to Wal-Mart. Their suspicions aroused, however, Samara officials launched an
investigation, which disclosed that Wal-Mart and several other major retailers-- Kmart, Caldor, Hills,
and Goody's--were selling the knockoffs of Samara's outfits produced by Judy-Philippine.

After sending cease-and-desist letters, Samara brought this action in the United States District Court
for the Southern District of New York against Wal-Mart, Judy-Philippine, Kmart, Caldor, Hills, and
Goody's for copyright infringement under federal law, consumer fraud and unfair competition under
New York law, and--most relevant for our purposes--infringement of unregistered trade dress under
 43(a) of the Lanham Act, 15 U. S. C.  1125(a). All of the defendants except Wal-Mart settled before
trial.

After a week long trial, the jury found in favor of Samara on all of its claims. Wal-Mart then renewed
a motion for judgment as a matter of law, claiming, inter alia, that there was insufficient evidence
to support a conclusion that Samara's clothing designs could be legally protected as distinctive trade

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 311
dress for purposes of  43(a). The District Court denied the motion, 969 F. Supp. 895 (SDNY 1997),
and awarded Samara damages, interest, costs, and fees totaling almost $1.6 million, together with
injunctive relief, see App. to Pet. for Cert. 56-58. The Second Circuit affirmed the denial of the motion
for judgment as a matter of law, 165 F. 3d 120 (1998), and we granted certiorari, 528 U. S. 808 (1999).

II

The Lanham Act provides for the registration of trademarks, which it defines in  45 to include "any
word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof [used or intended to be used] to identify
and distinguish [a producer's] goods . . . from those manufactured or sold by others and to indicate the
source of the goods . . . ." 15 U. S. C.  1127. Registration of a mark under  2 of the Lanham Act, 15
U. S. C.  1052, enables the owner to sue an infringer under  32, 15 U. S. C.  1114; it also entitles the
owner to a presumption that its mark is valid, see  7(b), 15 U. S. C.  1057(b), and ordinarily renders
the registered mark incontestable after five years of continuous use, see  15, 15 U. S. C.  1065. In
addition to protecting registered marks, the Lanham Act, in  43(a), gives a producer a cause of action
for the use by any person of "any word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof . . .
which . . . is likely to cause confusion . . . as to the origin, sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods
. . . ." 15 U. S. C.  1125(a). It is the latter provision that is at issue in this case.

The breadth of the definition of marks registrable under  2, and of the confusion-producing elements
recited as actionable by  43(a), has been held to embrace not just word marks, such as "Nike," and
symbol marks, such as Nike's "swoosh" symbol, but also "trade dress"--a category that originally
included only the packaging, or "dressing," of a product, but in recent years has been expanded by
many Courts of Appeals to encompass the design of a product. See, e. g., Ashley Furniture Industries,
Inc. v. Sangiacomo N. A., Ltd., 187 F. 3d 363 (CA4 1999) (bedroom furniture); Knitwaves, Inc. v. Lollytogs,
Ltd., 71 F. 3d 996 (CA2 1995) (sweaters); Stuart Hall Co., Inc. v. Ampad Corp., 51 F. 3d 780 (CA8
1995) (notebooks). These courts have assumed, often without discussion, that trade dress constitutes
a "symbol" or "device" for purposes of the relevant sections, and we conclude likewise. "Since human
beings might use as a `symbol' or `device' almost anything at all that is capable of carrying meaning,
this language, read literally, is not restrictive." Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Products Co., 514 U. S. 159, 162
(1995). This reading of  2 and  43(a) is buttressed by a recently added subsection of  43(a),  43(a)(3),
which refers specifically to "civil action[s] for trade dress infringement under this chapter for trade
dress not registered on the principal register." 15 U. S. C.  1125(a)(3) (1994 ed., Supp. V).

The text of  43(a) provides little guidance as to the circumstances under which unregistered trade
dress may be protected. It does require that a producer show that the allegedly infringing feature is
not "functional," see  43 (a)(3), and is likely to cause confusion with the product for which protection
is sought, see  43(a)(1)(A), 15 U. S. C.  1125(a)(1)(A). Nothing in  43(a) explicitly requires a producer
to show that its trade dress is distinctive, but courts have universally imposed that requirement, since
without distinctiveness the trade dress would not "cause confusion . . . as to the origin, sponsorship, or
approval of [the] goods," as the section requires. Distinctiveness is, moreover, an explicit prerequisite
for registration of trade dress under  2, and "the general principles qualifying a mark for registration
under  2 of the Lanham Act are for the most part applicable in determining whether an unregistered
mark is entitled to protection under  43(a)." Two Pesos, Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc., 505 U. S. 763, 768
(1992) (citations omitted).

In evaluating the distinctiveness of a mark under  2 (and therefore, by analogy, under  43(a)), courts
have held that a mark can be distinctive in one of two ways. First, a mark is inherently distinctive

312 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
if "[its] intrinsic nature serves to identify a particular source." Ibid. In the context of word marks,
courts have applied the now-classic test originally formulated by Judge Friendly, in which word marks
that are "arbitrary" ("Camel" cigarettes), "fanciful" ("Kodak" film), or "suggestive" ("Tide" laundry
detergent) are held to be inherently distinctive. See Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537
F. 2d 4, 10-11 (CA2 1976). Second, a mark has acquired distinctiveness, even if it is not inherently
distinctive, if it has developed secondary meaning, which occurs when, "in the minds of the public, the
primary significance of a [mark] is to identify the source of the product rather than the product itself."
Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc., 456 U. S. 844, 851, n. 11 (1982).

The judicial differentiation between marks that are inherently distinctive and those that have
developed secondary meaning has solid foundation in the statute itself. Section 2 requires that
registration be granted to any trademark "by which the goods of the applicant may be distinguished
from the goods of others"--subject to various limited exceptions. 15 U. S. C.  1052. It also provides,
again with limited exceptions, that "nothing in this chapter shall prevent the registration of a mark
used by the applicant which has become distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce"--that is,
which is not inherently distinctive but has become so only through secondary meaning.  2(f), 15 U. S.
C.  1052(f). Nothing in  2, however, demands the conclusion that every category of mark necessarily
includes some marks "by which the goods of the applicant may be distinguished from the goods of
others" without secondary meaning--that in every category some marks are inherently distinctive.

Indeed, with respect to at least one category of mark--colors--we have held that no mark can ever be
inherently distinctive. See Qualitex, supra, at 162-163. In Qualitex, petitioner manufactured and sold
green-gold dry-cleaning press pads. After respondent began selling pads of a similar color, petitioner
brought suit under  43(a), then added a claim under  32 after obtaining registration for the color
of its pads. We held that a color could be protected as a trademark, but only upon a showing of
secondary meaning. Reasoning by analogy to the Abercrombie & Fitch test developed for word marks,
we noted that a product's color is unlike a "fanciful," "arbitrary," or "suggestive" mark, since it does not
"almost automatically tell a customer that [it] refer[s] to a brand," 514 U. S., at 162-163, and does not
"immediately . . . signal a brand or a product `source,'" id., at 163. However, we noted that, "over time,
customers may come to treat a particular color on a product or its packaging . . . as signifying a brand."
Ibid. Because a color, like a "descriptive" word mark, could eventually "come to indicate a product's
origin," we concluded that it could be protected upon a showing of secondary meaning. Ibid.

It seems to us that design, like color, is not inherently distinctive. The attribution of inherent
distinctiveness to certain categories of word marks and product packaging derives from the fact
that the very purpose of attaching a particular word to a product, or encasing it in a distinctive
packaging, is most often to identify the source of the product. Although the words and packaging
can serve subsidiary functions--a suggestive word mark (such as "Tide" for laundry detergent), for
instance, may invoke positive connotations in the consumer's mind, and a garish form of packaging
(such as Tide's squat, brightly decorated plastic bottles for its liquid laundry detergent) may attract
an otherwise indifferent consumer's attention on a crowded store shelf--their predominant function
remains source identification. Consumers are therefore predisposed to regard those symbols as
indication of the producer, which is why such symbols "almost automatically tell a customer that they
refer to a brand," id., at 162-163, and "immediately . . . signal a brand or a product `source,'" id., at
163. And where it is not reasonable to assume consumer predisposition to take an affixed word or
packaging as indication of source--where, for example, the affixed word is descriptive of the product
("Tasty" bread) or of a geographic origin ("Georgia" peaches)--inherent distinctiveness will not be
found. That is why the statute generally excludes, from those word marks that can be registered

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 313
as inherently distinctive, words that are "merely descriptive" of the goods,  2(e)(1), 15 U. S. C. 
1052(e)(1), or "primarily geographically descriptive of them," see  2(e)(2), 15 U. S. C.  1052(e)(2). In
the case of product design, as in the case of color, we think consumer predisposition to equate the
feature with the source does not exist. Consumers are aware of the reality that, almost invariably, even
the most unusual of product designs--such as a cocktail shaker shaped like a penguin--is intended
not to identify the source, but to render the product itself more useful or more appealing.

The fact that product design almost invariably serves purposes other than source identification
not only renders inherent distinctiveness problematic; it also renders application of an inherent-
distinctiveness principle more harmful to other consumer interests. Consumers should not be
deprived of the benefits of competition with regard to the utilitarian and esthetic purposes that
product design ordinarily serves by a rule of law that facilitates plausible threats of suit against
new entrants based upon alleged inherent distinctiveness. How easy it is to mount a plausible suit
depends, of course, upon the clarity of the test for inherent distinctiveness, and where product design
is concerned we have little confidence that a reasonably clear test can be devised. Respondent and
the United States as amicus curiae urge us to adopt for product design relevant portions of the test
formulated by the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals for product packaging in Seabrook Foods, Inc.
v. Bar-Well Foods, Ltd., 568 F. 2d 1342 (1977). That opinion, in determining the inherent distinctiveness
of a product's packaging, considered, among other things, "whether it was a `common' basic shape or
design, whether it was unique or unusual in a particular field, [and] whether it was a mere refinement
of a commonly adopted and well-known form of ornamentation for a particular class of goods viewed
by the public as a dress or ornamentation for the goods." Id., at 1344 (footnotes omitted). Such a test
would rarely provide the basis for summary disposition of an anticompetitive strike suit. Indeed, at
oral argument, counsel for the United States quite understandably would not give a definitive answer
as to whether the test was met in this very case, saying only that "[t]his is a very difficult case for that
purpose." Tr. of Oral Arg. 19.

It is true, of course, that the person seeking to exclude new entrants would have to establish the
nonfunctionality of the design feature, see  43(a)(3), 15 U. S. C.  1125(a)(3) (1994 ed., Supp. V)--a
showing that may involve consideration of its esthetic appeal, see Qualitex, supra, at 170. Competition
is deterred, however, not merely by successful suit but by the plausible threat of successful suit,
and given the unlikelihood of inherently source-identifying design, the game of allowing suit based
upon alleged inherent distinctiveness seems to us not worth the candle. That is especially so since
the producer can ordinarily obtain protection for a design that is inherently source identifying (if
any such exists), but that does not yet have secondary meaning, by securing a design patent or a
copyright for the design--as, indeed, respondent did for certain elements of the designs in this case.
The availability of these other protections greatly reduces any harm to the producer that might ensue
from our conclusion that a product design cannot be protected under  43(a) without a showing of
secondary meaning.

Respondent contends that our decision in Two Pesos forecloses a conclusion that product-design trade
dress can never be inherently distinctive. In that case, we held that the trade dress of a chain of
Mexican restaurants, which the plaintiff described as "a festive eating atmosphere having interior
dining and patio areas decorated with artifacts, bright colors, paintings and murals," 505 U. S., at 765
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted), could be protected under  43(a) without a showing
of secondary meaning, see id., at 776. Two Pesos unquestionably establishes the legal principle that
trade dress can be inherently distinctive, see, e. g., id., at 773, but it does not establish that product-
design trade dress can be. Two Pesos is inapposite to our holding here because the trade dress at

314 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
issue, the dcor of a restaurant, seems to us not to constitute product design. It was either product
packaging--which, as we have discussed, normally is taken by the consumer to indicate origin--or
else some tertium quid that is akin to product packaging and has no bearing on the present case.
Respondent replies that this manner of distinguishing Two Pesos will force courts to draw difficult
lines between product-design and product-packaging trade dress. There will indeed be some hard
cases at the margin: a classic glass Coca-Cola bottle, for instance, may constitute packaging for those
consumers who drink the Coke and then discard the bottle, but may constitute the product itself
for those consumers who are bottle collectors, or part of the product itself for those consumers who
buy Coke in the classic glass bottle, rather than a can, because they think it more stylish to drink
from the former. We believe, however, that the frequency and the difficulty of having to distinguish
between product design and product packaging will be much less than the frequency and the difficulty
of having to decide when a product design is inherently distinctive. To the extent there are close
cases, we believe that courts should err on the side of caution and classify ambiguous trade dress as
product design, thereby requiring secondary meaning. The very closeness will suggest the existence of
relatively small utility in adopting an inherent-distinctiveness principle, and relatively great consumer
benefit in requiring a demonstration of secondary meaning.
* * *
We hold that, in an action for infringement of unregistered trade dress under  43(a) of the Lanham
Act, a product's design is distinctive, and therefore protectible, only upon a showing of secondary
meaning. The judgment of the Second Circuit is reversed, and the case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

                                                                                       18. TRADE DRESS AND DISTINCTIVENESS 315
                          19. TRADE DRESS - FUNCTIONALITY

   Learning Objectives: Unit 19

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain the concept of functionality.
           Explain the policy issues involved in the doctrine of functionality.
           Analyze functionality in factual scenarios.

As with the cases for unit 20, TrafFix Devices v. Marketing Displays (2000), involves trademark rights
being asserted in trade dress--here, the dual springs used as part of a traffic sign. You can see
examples of the MDI sign at http://www.mditrafficcontrol.com/construction-utility/mdi-compact-
reg-sign.html and the TrafFix sign at https://www.traffixdevices.com/products/signs-stands. Unlike
in those cases, however, distinctiveness is not at issue. Instead, the accused infringer is raising a
different type of challenge to trademark rights: that the feature over which rights are being claimed is
functional.

316 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
TRAFFIX DEVICES V. MARKETING DISPLAYS (2001)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   Before reading TrafFix, reread the discussion of functionality in Qualitex. As you read these cases, ask
   yourself the following questions:

           What is the functionality doctrine?
           What relationship does the functionality doctrine for trade dress have to the category of generic

              terms for word marks?
           What are the policy considerations underlying the doctrine?
           How is functionality analyzed?
           How would you analyze functionality in connection with a trademark claim over red soles on

              women's shoes, black as the color of a motorboat engine, or chartreuse (look it up if you're not
              sure) as the color of an air hose.

                                         TrafFix Devices v. Marketing Displays

                                                        532 U.S. 23 (2001)

JUSTICE KENNEDY, delivered the opinion of the Court.

Temporary road signs with warnings like "Road Work Ahead" or "Left Shoulder Closed" must
withstand strong gusts of wind. An inventor named Robert Sarkisian obtained two utility patents
for a mechanism built upon two springs (the dual-spring design) to keep these and other outdoor
signs upright despite adverse wind conditions. The holder of the now-expired Sarkisian patents,
respondent Marketing Displays, Inc. (MDI), established a successful business in the manufacture and
sale of sign stands incorporating the patented feature. MDI's stands for road signs were recognizable
to buyers and users (it says) because the dual-spring design was visible near the base of the sign.

This litigation followed after the patents expired and a competitor, TrafFix Devices, Inc., sold sign
stands with a visible spring mechanism that looked like MDI's. MDI and TrafFix products looked
alike because they were. When TrafFix started in business, it sent an MDI product abroad to have
it reverse engineered, that is to say copied. Complicating matters, TrafFix marketed its sign stands
under a name similar to MDI's. MDI used the name "WindMaster," while TrafFix, its new competitor,
used "WindBuster."

MDI brought suit under the Trademark Act of 1946 (Lanham Act), 60 Stat. 427, as amended, 15
U. S. C.  1051 et seq.,against TrafFix for trademark infringement (based on the similar names),
trade dress infringement (based on the copied dual-spring design), and unfair competition. TrafFix

                                                                                               19. TRADE DRESS - FUNCTIONALITY 317
counterclaimed on antitrust theories. After the United States District Court for the Eastern District
of Michigan considered cross-motions for summary judgment, MDI prevailed on its trademark claim
for the confusing similarity of names and was held not liable on the antitrust counterclaim; and those
two rulings, affirmed by the Court of Appeals, are not before us.

I

We are concerned with the trade dress question. The District Court ruled against MDI on its trade
dress claim. 971 F. Supp. 262 (ED Mich. 1997). After determining that the one element of MDI's
trade dress at issue was the dualspring design, id., at 265, it held that "no reasonable trier of fact
could determine that MDI has established secondary meaning" in its alleged trade dress, id., at 269. In
other words, consumers did not associate the look of the dualspring design with MDI. As a second,
independent reason to grant summary judgment in favor of TrafFix, the District Court determined
the dual-spring design was functional. On this rationale secondary meaning is irrelevant because
there can be no trade dress protection in any event. In ruling on the functional aspect of the design,
the District Court noted that Sixth Circuit precedent indicated that the burden was on MDI to prove
that its trade dress was nonfunctional, and not on TrafFix to show that it was functional (a rule since
adopted by Congress, see 15 U. S. C.  1125(a)(3) (1994 ed., Supp. V)), and then went on to consider
MDI's arguments that the dual-spring design was subject to trade dress protection. Finding none
of MDI's contentions persuasive, the District Court concluded MDI had not "proffered sufficient
evidence which would enable a reasonable trier of fact to find that MDI's vertical dual-spring design
is non functional." 971 F. Supp., at 276. Summary judgment was entered against MDI on its trade dress
claims.

The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed the trade dress ruling. 200 F. 3d 929 (1999). The
Court of Appeals held the District Court had erred in ruling MDI failed to show a genuine issue
of material fact regarding whether it had secondary meaning in its alleged trade dress, id., at 938,
and had erred further in determining that MDI could not prevail in any event because the alleged
trade dress was in fact a functional product configuration, id., at 940. The Court of Appeals suggested
the District Court committed legal error by looking only to the dual-spring design when evaluating
MDI's trade dress. Basic to its reasoning was the Court of Appeals' observation that it took "little
imagination to conceive of a hidden dual-spring mechanism or a tri or quad-spring mechanism that
might avoid infringing [MDI's] trade dress." Ibid. The Court of Appeals explained that "[i]f TrafFix
or another competitor chooses to use [MDI's] dual-spring design, then it will have to find some other
way to set its sign apart to avoid infringing [MDI's] trade dress." Ibid. It was not sufficient, according
to the Court of Appeals, that allowing exclusive use of a particular feature such as the dual-spring
design in the guise of trade dress would "hinde[r] competition somewhat." Rather, "[e]xclusive use of a
feature must `put competitors at a significant non-reputation-related disadvantage' before trade dress
protection is denied on functionality grounds." Ibid. (quoting Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Products Co., 514
U. S. 159, 165 (1995)). In its criticism of the District Court's ruling on the trade dress question, the
Court of Appeals took note of a split among Courts of Appeals in various other Circuits on the issue
whether the existence of an expired utility patent forecloses the possibility of the patentee's claiming
trade dress protection in the product's design. 200 F. 3d, at 939. Compare Sunbeam Products, Inc. v.
West Bend Co., 123 F. 3d 246 (CA5 1997) (holding that trade dress protection is not foreclosed), Thomas
& Betts Corp. v. Panduit Corp., 138 F. 3d 277 (CA7 1998) (same), and Midwest Industries, Inc. v. Karavan
Trailers, Inc., 175 F. 3d 1356 (CA Fed 1999) (same), with Vornado Air Circulation Systems, Inc. v. Duracraft
Corp., 58 F. 3d 1498, 1500 (CA10 1995) ("Where a product configuration is a significant inventive

318 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
component of an invention covered by a utility patent . . . it cannot receive trade dress protection").
To resolve the conflict, we granted certiorari. 530 U. S. 1260 (2000).

II

It is well established that trade dress can be protected under federal law. The design or packaging of
a product may acquire a distinctiveness which serves to identify the product with its manufacturer
or source; and a design or package which acquires this secondary meaning, assuming other requisites
are met, is a trade dress which may not be used in a manner likely to cause confusion as to the origin,
sponsorship, or approval of the goods. In these respects protection for trade dress exists to promote
competition. As we explained just last Term, see Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Samara Brothers, Inc., 529 U. S.
205 (2000), various Courts of Appeals have allowed claims of trade dress infringement relying on the
general provision of the Lanham Act which provides a cause of action to one who is injured when a
person uses "any word, term name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof . . . which is likely
to cause confusion . . . as to the origin, sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods." 15 U. S. C. 
1125(a)(1)(A). Congress confirmed this statutory protection for trade dress by amending the Lanham
Act to recognize the concept. Title 15 U. S. C.  1125(a)(3) (1994 ed., Supp. V) provides: "In a civil
action for trade dress infringement under this chapter for trade dress not registered on the principal
register, the person who asserts trade dress protection has the burden of proving that the matter
sought to be protected is not functional." This burden of proof gives force to the well-established rule
that trade dress protection may not be claimed for product features that are functional. Qualitex, supra,
at 164-165; Two Pesos, Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc.,505 U. S. 763, 775 (1992). And in Wal-Mart, supra, we
were careful to caution against misuse or over extension of trade dress. We noted that "product design
almost invariably serves purposes other than source identification." Id., at 213.

Trade dress protection must subsist with the recognition that in many instances there is no
prohibition against copying goods and products. In general, unless an intellectual property right such
as a patent or copyright protects an item, it will be subject to copying. As the Court has explained,
copying is not always discouraged or disfavored by the laws which preserve our competitive economy.
Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., 489 U. S. 141, 160 (1989). Allowing competitors to copy
will have salutary effects in many instances. "Reverse engineering of chemical and mechanical articles
in the public domain often leads to significant advances in technology." Ibid.

The principal question in this case is the effect of an expired patent on a claim of trade dress
infringement. A prior patent, we conclude, has vital significance in resolving the trade dress claim.
A utility patent is strong evidence that the features therein claimed are functional. If trade dress
protection is sought for those features the strong evidence of functionality based on the previous
patent adds great weight to the statutory presumption that features are deemed functional until
proved otherwise by the party seeking trade dress protection. Where the expired patent claimed the
features in question, one who seeks to establish trade dress protection must carry the heavy burden
of showing that the feature is not functional, for instance by showing that it is merely an ornamental,
incidental, or arbitrary aspect of the device.

In the case before us, the central advance claimed in the expired utility patents (the Sarkisian patents)
is the dualspring design; and the dual-spring design is the essential feature of the trade dress MDI
now seeks to establish and to protect. The rule we have explained bars the trade dress claim, for MDI
did not, and cannot, carry the burden of overcoming the strong evidentiary inference of functionality
based on the disclosure of the dual-spring design in the claims of the expired patents.

                                                                                               19. TRADE DRESS - FUNCTIONALITY 319
The dual springs shown in the Sarkisian patents were well apart (at either end of a frame for holding
a rectangular sign when one full side is the base) while the dual springs at issue here are close together
(in a frame designed to hold a sign by one of its corners). As the District Court recognized, this makes
little difference. The point is that the springs are necessary to the operation of the device. The fact that
the springs in this very different-looking device fall within the claims of the patents is illustrated by
MDI's own position in earlier litigation. In the late 1970's, MDI engaged in a long-running intellectual
property battle with a company known as Winn-Proof. Although the precise claims of the Sarkisian
patents cover sign stands with springs "spaced apart," U. S. Patent No. 3,646,696, col. 4; U. S. Patent
No. 3,662,482, col. 4, the Winn-Proof sign stands (with springs much like the sign stands at issue here)
were found to infringe the patents by the United States District Court for the District of Oregon, and
the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the judgment. Sarkisian v. WinnProof Corp., 697 F.
2d 1313 (1983). Although the WinnProof traffic sign stand (with dual springs close together) did not
appear, then, to infringe the literal terms of the patent claims (which called for "spaced apart" springs),
the WinnProof sign stand was found to infringe the patents under the doctrine of equivalents, which
allows a finding of patent infringement even when the accused product does not fall within the literal
terms of the claims. Id., at 1321-1322; see generally Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co.,
520 U. S. 17 (1997). In light of this past ruling--a ruling procured at MDI's own insistence--it must be
concluded the products here at issue would have been covered by the claims of the expired patents.

The rationale for the rule that the disclosure of a feature in the claims of a utility patent constitutes
strong evidence of functionality is well illustrated in this case. The dual-spring design serves the
important purpose of keeping the sign upright even in heavy wind conditions; and, as confirmed by
the statements in the expired patents, it does so in a unique and useful manner. As the specification
of one of the patents recites, prior art "devices, in practice, will topple under the force of a strong
wind." U. S. Patent No. 3,662,482, col. 1. The dual-spring design allows sign stands to resist toppling
in strong winds. Using a dual-spring design rather than a single spring achieves important operational
advantages. For example, the specifications of the patents note that the "use of a pair of springs . . .
as opposed to the use of a single spring to support the frame structure prevents canting or twisting
of the sign around a vertical axis," and that, if not prevented, twisting "may cause damage to the
spring structure and may result in tipping of the device." U. S. Patent No. 3,646,696, col. 3. In the
course of patent prosecution, it was said that "[t]he use of a pair of spring connections as opposed
to a single spring connection . . . forms an important part of this combination" because it "forc[es]
the sign frame to tip along the longitudinal axis of the elongated ground-engaging members." App.
218. The dual-spring design affects the cost of the device as well; it was acknowledged that the device
"could use three springs but this would unnecessarily increase the cost of the device." Id., at 217. These
statements made in the patent applications and in the course of procuring the patents demonstrate
the functionality of the design. MDI does not assert that any of these representations are mistaken or
inaccurate, and this is further strong evidence of the functionality of the dual-spring design.

III

In finding for MDI on the trade dress issue the Court of Appeals gave insufficient recognition
to the importance of the expired utility patents, and their evidentiary significance, in establishing
the functionality of the device. The error likely was caused by its misinterpretation of trade dress
principles in other respects. As we have noted, even if there has been no previous utility patent the
party asserting trade dress has the burden to establish the nonfunctionality of alleged trade dress
features. MDI could not meet this burden. Discussing trademarks, we have said "`[i]n general terms, a
product feature is functional,' and cannot serve as a trademark, `if it is essential to the use or purpose

320 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
of the article or if it affects the cost or quality of the article.'" Qualitex, 514 U. S., at 165 (quoting
Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc., 456 U. S. 844, 850, n. 10 (1982)). Expanding upon
the meaning of this phrase, we have observed that a functional feature is one the "exclusive use of
[which] would put competitors at a significant nonreputation-related disadvantage." 514 U. S., at 165.
The Court of Appeals in the instant case seemed to interpret this language to mean that a necessary
test for functionality is "whether the particular product configuration is a competitive necessity." 200
F. 3d, at 940. See also Vornado, 58 F. 3d, at 1507 ("Functionality, by contrast, has been defined both
by our circuit, and more recently by the Supreme Court, in terms of competitive need"). This was
incorrect as a comprehensive definition. As explained in Qualitex, supra, and Inwood, supra, a feature is
also functional when it is essential to the use or purpose of the device or when it affects the cost or
quality of the device. The Qualitex decision did not purport to displace this traditional rule. Instead,
it quoted the rule as Inwood had set it forth. It is proper to inquire into a "significant non-reputation-
related disadvantage" in cases of esthetic functionality, the question involved in Qualitex. Where the
design is functional under the Inwood formulation there is no need to proceed further to consider if
there is a competitive necessity for the feature. In Qualitex, by contrast, esthetic functionality was the
central question, there having been no indication that the green-gold color of the laundry press pad
had any bearing on the use or purpose of the product or its cost or quality.

The Court has allowed trade dress protection to certain product features that are inherently
distinctive. Two Pesos, 505 U. S., at 774. In Two Pesos, however, the Court at the outset made the explicit
analytic assumption that the trade dress features in question (decorations and other features to evoke
a Mexican theme in a restaurant) were not functional. Id., at 767, n. 6. The trade dress in those cases
did not bar competitors from copying functional product design features. In the instant case, beyond
serving the purpose of informing consumers that the sign stands are made by MDI (assuming it does
so), the dual-spring design provides a unique and useful mechanism to resist the force of the wind.
Functionality having been established, whether MDI's dual-spring design has acquired secondary
meaning need not be considered.

There is no need, furthermore, to engage, as did the Court of Appeals, in speculation about other
design possibilities, such as using three or four springs which might serve the same purpose. 200
F. 3d, at 940. Here, the functionality of the spring design means that competitors need not explore
whether other spring juxtapositions might be used. The dual-spring design is not an arbitrary flourish
in the configuration of MDI's product; it is the reason the device works. Other designs need not be
attempted.

Because the dual-spring design is functional, it is unnecessary for competitors to explore designs to
hide the springs, say, by using a box or framework to cover them, as suggested by the Court of Appeals.
Ibid. The dual-spring design assures the user the device will work. If buyers are assured the product
serves its purpose by seeing the operative mechanism that in itself serves an important market need.
It would be at cross-purposes to those objectives, and something of a paradox, were we to require the
manufacturer to conceal the very item the user seeks.

In a case where a manufacturer seeks to protect arbitrary, incidental, or ornamental aspects of features
of a product found in the patent claims, such as arbitrary curves in the legs or an ornamental pattern
painted on the springs, a different result might obtain. There the manufacturer could perhaps prove
that those aspects do not serve a purpose within the terms of the utility patent. The inquiry into
whether such features, asserted to be trade dress, are functional by reason of their inclusion in the
claims of an expired utility patent could be aided by going beyond the claims and examining the

                                                                                               19. TRADE DRESS - FUNCTIONALITY 321
patent and its prosecution history to see if the feature in question is shown as a useful part of the
invention. No such claim is made here, however. MDI in essence seeks protection for the dual-spring
design alone. The asserted trade dress consists simply of the dual-spring design, four legs, a base, an
upright, and a sign. MDI has pointed to nothing arbitrary about the components of its device or the
way they are assembled. The Lanham Act does not exist to reward manufacturers for their innovation
in creating a particular device; that is the purpose of the patent law and its period of exclusivity.
The Lanham Act, furthermore, does not protect trade dress in a functional design simply because an
investment has been made to encourage the public to associate a particular functional feature with
a single manufacturer or seller. The Court of Appeals erred in viewing MDI as possessing the right
to exclude competitors from using a design identical to MDI's and to require those competitors to
adopt a different design simply to avoid copying it. MDI cannot gain the exclusive right to produce
sign stands using the dual-spring design by asserting that consumers associate it with the look of
the invention itself. Whether a utility patent has expired or there has been no utility patent at all, a
product design which has a particular appearance may be functional because it is "essential to the use
or purpose of the article" or "affects the cost or quality of the article." Inwood, 456 U. S., at 850, n. 10.
TrafFix and some of its amici argue that the Patent Clause of the Constitution, Art. I,  8, cl. 8, of its
own force, prohibits the holder of an expired utility patent from claiming trade dress protection. Brief
for Petitioner 33-36; Brief for Panduit Corp. as Amicus Curiae 3; Brief for Malla Pollack as Amicus
Curiae 2. We need not resolve this question. If, despite the rule that functional features may not be the
subject of trade dress protection, a case arises in which trade dress becomes the practical equivalent of
an expired utility patent, that will be time enough to consider the matter. The judgment of the Court
of Appeals is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

322 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                            20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT

   Learning Objectives: Unit 20

   Upon completion of this class, you should be able to:
           Explain the requirements of trademark infringement;
           Analyze infringement in a factual scenario.

Determining trademark infringement involves a multi-factor analysis to assess whether there is a
likelihood of confusion between the trademark owner's use of the mark and the accused infringer's
use. We will discuss the 8th Circuit's multi-factor analysis; it is similar - although not identical - to
those used in other circuits.

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   Before reading Kemp v. Bumble Bee Seafoods (8th Cir. 2005), you should reread 15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1114 & 1125(a),
   along with any relevant statutory definitions. As you read these materials, ask yourself the following
   questions:

           What is trademark infringement?
           How is trademark infringement analyzed?
           What are the reasons for structuring the infringement analysis this way?
           How would you analyze the infringement claim described in this news article: http://www.press-

              citizen.com/story/news/local/2014/12/25/renamed-restaurant/20892445?
           How would you analyze the infringement claim as between the below bottles of hot sauce? (The

              bottle on the left is from Trader Joe's; the one on the right is made by Huy Fong Foods.)

                                                                                                    20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT 323
   15 U.S.C. 1114. Remedies; infringement; innocent infringement by printers and
   publishers (2005)

   (1) Any person who shall, without the consent of the registrant
            a) use in commerce any reproduction, counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation of a registered
            mark in connection with the sale, offering for sale, distribution, or advertising of any goods or
            services on or in connection with which such use is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or
            to deceive; or
            b) reproduce, counterfeit, copy, or colorably imitate a registered mark and apply such
            reproduction, counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation to labels, signs, prints, packages, wrappers,
            receptacles or advertisements intended to be used in commerce upon or in connection with the sale,
            offering for sale, distribution, or advertising of goods or services on or in connection with which
            such use is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive,

   shall be liable in a civil action by the registrant for the remedies hereinafter provided...

   15 U.S. Code 1125. False designations of origin, false descriptions, and dilution
   forbidden (2012)

   (a) Civil Action
            1) Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or services, or any container for
            goods, uses in commerce any word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof, or

324 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
any false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact, or false or misleading
representation of fact, which

         (A) is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive as to the affiliation,
         connection, or association of such person with another person, or as to the origin,
         sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods, services, or commercial activities by
         another person, or
         (B) in commercial advertising or promotion, misrepresents the nature, characteristics,
         qualities, or geographic origin of his or her or another person's goods, services, or
         commercial activities,
shall be liable in a civil action by any person who believes that he or she is or is likely to be damaged
by such act...
2) As used in this subsection, the term "any person" includes any State, instrumentality of a State
or employee of a State or instrumentality of a State acting in his or her official capacity. Any State,
and any such instrumentality, officer, or employee, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
in the same manner and to the same extent as any nongovernmental entity.
3) In a civil action for trade dress infringement under this chapter for trade dress not registered on
the principal register, the person who asserts trade dress protection has the burden of proving that
the matter sought to be protected is not functional ...

                                                                                       20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT 325
KEMP V. BUMBLE BEE SEAFOODS, INC. (8TH CIR. 2005)

                                           Kemp v. Bumble Bee Seafoods, Inc.

                                                 398 F.3d 1049 (8th Cir. 2005)

Before BYE, HANSEN, and MELLOY, Circuit Judges.

MELLOY, Circuit Judge.

Defendant-Appellant Bumble Bee Seafoods, Inc. ("Bumble Bee") appeals the district court's adverse
rulings following a bench trial on the trademark issues of likelihood of confusion and dilution.
Because we find that confusion was likely, we reverse and remand for entry of judgment in favor of
Bumble Bee.

    1. Background

Plaintiff-Appellee Louis E. Kemp ("Mr. Kemp") is from a family that had been engaged in the
wholesale and retail seafood business since 1930. In 1985, Mr. Kemp started Kemp Foods, Inc., which
made and sold artificial crab products containing surimi, a low-fat, processed fish product. In 1987,
Mr. Kemp sold the seafood business to Oscar Mayer Foods Corporation for $4 million pursuant
to a Stock Acquisition Agreement. Under the Agreement, Mr. Kemp transferred all trademarks
used in his business, including KEMP, KEMP'S and KEMP'S & Design to Oscar Mayer. He further
agreed not to use these marks "or any variation thereof" on any products, except as permitted under
the Agreement. Under the Agreement, Mr. Kemp retained the right to "market, sell or otherwise
distribute [certain listed products] bearing a composite trademark consisting of the word KEMP or
KEMP's and preceded by one or more additional words, the selection of which shall be approved in
advance in writing by [Oscar Mayer]."

About six months after signing the Agreement, an Oscar Mayer executive asked Mr. Kemp for
permission to use the name LOUIS KEMP to market surimi products. Oscar Mayer previously
had achieved success with two-word or full-name marks (e.g. Oscar Mayer, Louis Rich). Mr. Kemp
agreed and entered negotiations with Oscar Mayer to amend the Agreement. Ultimately, the amended
Agreement did not contain all of Oscar Mayer's desired terms, namely, express permission to use the
term LOUIS KEMP on all products and exclusion of Mr. Kemp from using the term LOUIS KEMP
on any food products. Similarly, the amended Agreement did not contain Mr. Kemp's desired term,
namely, the express reservation of a broad right to use the term LOUIS KEMP on products other than
surimi.

Under the amended Agreement, Mr. Kemp granted Oscar Mayer the right to use and register the
marks LOUIS KEMP and LOUIS KEMP SEAFOOD CO (the "LOUIS KEMP marks") for surimi-
based products and other seafood accessory products within the natural zone of expansion. The
amended Agreement also included a revised reservation of rights for Mr. Kemp that provided:

326 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
It is agreed that [Mr. Kemp], or any entity in which [he] has an interest, may utilize a composite
trademark consisting of the word KEMP or KEMP's and preceded or followed by one or more
additional words the selection of which shall be approved in advance in writing by [Oscar Mayer] in
connection with the marketing, selling, or distribution of [certain listed products].

In 1992, Oscar Mayer sold the surimi business to Tyson Foods, Inc., who in turn sold the business
to Bumble Bee. Con Agra Foods subsequently acquired Bumble Bee. Before October 1995, Bumble
Bee and its predecessors spent over $49 million to promote and advertise the LOUIS KEMP marks.
By October 1995, the LOUIS KEMP marks had achieved a brand awareness of 47%, Bumble Bee's
Louis Kemp Seafood Company held a 77% share of the market for retail pre-packaged seafood and
LOUIS KEMP was the number one surimi seafood brand with a 55% market share. It is undisputed
that Bumble Bee owns numerous registered trademarks for KEMP, including the term KEMP without
restriction as to font, trade dress or form, and more narrow registrations for the term KEMP along
with certain design elements. In addition, Bumble Bee owns registration numbers 1,859,815 and
1,859,816 (for the mark LOUIS KEMP) and 1,859,817 and 1,879,931 (for the mark LOUIS KEMP
SEAFOOD COMPANY).

In April and May 1995, Mr. Kemp wrote to Jeno F. Paulucci of Luigino's, Inc., a prospective business
partner, to propose the formation of a new company "to develop and sell a line of precooked wild
rice products." Mr. Kemp noted his intention to take advantage of the goodwill associated with the
LOUIS KEMP marks (goodwill that Bumble Bee, Tyson, and Oscar Mayer had invested $49 million
to develop) when he stated:

Non-fish products can use the `Louis Kemp' brand name which has national recognition with over
$50 million spent on advertising, 20 million lbs of `Louis Kemp' product sold annually with a 67%
market share of the prepackaged retail market in its category. [April 1995 letter]

We could use the "Louis Kemp" brand name where we can and want to, to take advantage of the
considerable equity it possesses and or any and all other brands the company can utilize, now and in
the future to develop any other specialty food items that would meet the compan[y']s goal for growth
and success. [May 1995 letter]

While Mr. Kemp expressly stated that he desired to "take advantage of the considerable equity" that
the "Louis Kemp" brand name possessed, and while he may have believed that he was entitled to do so
under the contract, he also recognized the risk attendant to this appropriation of goodwill. He sought
and obtained an opinion letter from counsel in which counsel advised that he could use his name,
"Louis Kemp" for precooked wild rice products. In counsel's opinion, these products were sufficiently
different from fish products to avoid confusion. Counsel did advise against using the term "Louis
Kemp Seafood Company," using type font or script similar to that used by [then] Tyson, and using the
marks on products that contained surimi.

Mr. Kemp and his newly formed company, Quality Finer Foods1 entered a "Custom Packing and
Sales Agreement" with Luigino's, Inc. Under the Sales Agreement, Mr. Kemp granted Luigino's the
right to cancel the agreement "if any meaningful action (in the sole discretion of Luigino's attorney)
is threatened or commenced against Quality Finer Foods or its owner, Louis Kemp, for trade mark
infringement, violation and the like." Apparently, Mr. Paulucci, his attorney, or others at Luigino's also
recognized the risk attendant to using the trademark LOUIS KEMP.

1. Hereafter, we refer to the plaintiffs collectively as Mr. Kemp.

                                                                    20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT 327
  In October 1995, Mr. Kemp began commercial use of the mark LOUIS KEMP on wild rice, chicken
  and wild rice soup, and wild rice with stir fry vegetables. Mr. Kemp did not seek Bumble Bee's
  approval, as per the amended Agreement, for use of the two-word mark on wild rice products. Mr.
  Kemp's use was accompanied by trade dress that differed from Bumble Bee's trade dress and did not
  include the words "Seafood Co." In particular, Bumble Bee displayed its LOUIS KEMP SEAFOOD
  CO. mark against a blue background and Mr. Kemp displayed the LOUIS KEMP mark against a
  white and red striped background, using a different font. Mr. Kemp juxtaposed the mark with a scene
  of lakes and wild rice while Bumble Bee's mark appeared on see-through packages that permitted
  potential consumers to view the surimi product. Mr. Kemp sought registration of the trademark
  LOUIS KEMP as applied to precooked wild rice products. The Patent and Trademark Office rejected
  Mr. Kemp's application based on a finding that Mr. Kemp's mark was confusingly similar to Bumble
  Bee's mark.

  On March 13, 1996, Tyson, then owner of the LOUIS KEMP marks, sent Mr. Kemp a cease and
  desist letter. Tyson alleged infringement and likelihood of confusion. On March 21, 1996, Mr. Kemp
  responded by explaining that he believed the amended Agreement permitted his use of the trademark
  LOUIS KEMP on non-surimi products. Mr. Kemp then filed this suit to seek a declaratory judgment
  regarding a contractual right to use the trademark LOUIS KEMP. Mr. Kemp also brought tortious
  interference and unfair competition claims against Tyson and Bumble Bee. Tyson and Bumble Bee
  filed trademark infringement and dilution counterclaims against Mr. Kemp based on federal and
  Minnesota law. In 1998, Mr. Kemp stopped selling wild rice products under the LOUIS KEMP mark.

  Over the next few years, litigation proceeded on many fronts, including state and bankruptcy courts
  in California, as well as the United States District Court in Minnesota. On May 21, 2001, upon
  stipulation of the parties, the district court below entered an Order Granting Consent Judgment
  which held that the only remaining issues were the issues of trademark infringement and dilution as
  set forth in Tyson and Bumble Bee's counterclaims.2

  The district court then held a bench trial to resolve the outstanding issues of whether Mr. Kemp's
  use of the LOUIS KEMP mark infringed or diluted Bumble Bee's trademark rights. The evidence

2. The Order provided, inter alia: 4. The parties to this litigation have been involved in a number of related litigations in the
   federal, state, and bankruptcy courts of State of California, including Kemp v. Oscar Mayer Foods Corp., No BC133535
   (Super.Ct. Los. Angeles County); Kemp v. Oscar Mayer Foods Corp., No. B105,876 (Cal.Ct.App.2d Dist.); In re Kemp, No
   LA9649617 KM (C.D.Cal.Bankr.); Dye, United States Trustee v. Kemp, No. 97-02974-KM (C.D.Cal.Bankr.); Dye, United
   States Trustee v. Kemp, No. 98-2344-AHM (C.D.Cal.); and Dye, United States Trustee v. Superior Seafoods, Inc., No.
   97-01331-KM (C.D.Cal). * * * * * * 6. The California litigations have now been resolved by means of a demurrer and grant
   of summary judgment in favor of Tyson in the California state trial court (i.e., in No. BC133535 (Super. Ct. Los Angeles
   County)) coupled with a settlement agreement signed by all of the parties to those litigations and the [parties to] present
   litigation [other than Bumble Bee Seafoods, Inc.], which settlement has been approved by the California bankruptcy court.
   7. Pursuant to the doctrine of res judicata, the Court finds that Tyson owns all right, title, and interest in and to the LOUIS
   KEMP Marks, and Tyson owns U.S. Trademark Registration Nos. 1,859,815 and 1,859,816 (for the mark LOUIS KEMP)
   and U.S. Trademark Registration Nos. 1,859,817 and 1,879,931 (for the mark LOUIS KEMP SEAFOOD CO.). Accordingly,
   the Court hereby grants judgment to Tyson on its claim for declaratory judgment (Am. Ans., Aff. Def. & Ctrcls., Ctrcl. I 떰
   32-36). 8. Tyson's LOUIS KEMP Marks are valid, enforceable, and in full force and effect. * * * * * * 11. Accordingly, the only
   issues remaining in the present litigation are whether the use by Kemp of the trademark LOUIS KEMP or any formative of
   this mark in connection with rice products, including without limitation "seasoned wild rice, chicken wild rice soup, and
   wild rice with stir fried vegetables" as well as "southwestern white and wild rice, cooked and seasoned white and wild rice
   and wild and white rice stir fry" (all as identified by Kemp in response to Tyson's Interrogatory No. 1) infringes and/or
   dilutes Tyson's rights in the Louis Kemp Marks.

  328 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
included the trial testimony of Mr. Kemp's former salesman for the wild rice products, Patrick Melby.
Mr. Melby claimed that actual confusion existed among brokers. In fact, Mr. Melby testified that
these professional buyers "always" asked if there was a connection between the wild rice and surimi
companies and that they "always" had to have it explained to them that the two products came
from different companies. This evidence was undisputed. The district court, however, discounted this
evidence and stated, "The Court does not extract from his testimony the inference or conclusion that
confusion among brokers was rampant."

Tyson and Bumble Bee submitted a customer survey that purported to show confusion among
relevant consumers. The district court discounted the survey as infirm. The district court noted that
the pool of survey participants did not accurately reflect the target market and that problems with the
format of the surveyor's questions called into doubt the validity of the survey's results.

Mr. Kemp testified that during the many years that he sold seafood products under the KEMP
trademarks, another firm sold dairy products under an identical KEMP trademark with no reports
of actual consumer confusion. An executive from Con Agra (the company that owned Bumble Bee)
testified that he was not aware of any reports of actual confusion between the LOUIS KEMP seafood
products and the third party's dairy products. Also, the evidence showed that Mr. Kemp promoted the
sale of his wild rice products as side dishes for fish, and Bumble Bee promoted its surimi products for
use with rice.

Finally, during trial, Mr. Kemp again made clear his intention to take advantage of the goodwill and
brand equity that Bumble Bee and its predecessors had built in the trademark LOUIS KEMP:

    1. Well, isn't it a fact that you used the mark LOUIS KEMP on you[r] wild rice products solely to
         take advantage of the huge investment that Oscar Mayer and Tyson invested in the brand?

    2. Absolutely true and that's because the agreement I made with them and they made with me.

The district court applied the six factor test from SquirtCo v. Seven-Up Co., 628 F.2d 1086, 1091 (8th
Cir.1980) (listing the following as factors to consider in assessing the likelihood of confusion: (1)
the strength of the owner's mark; (2) the similarity of the owner's mark and the alleged infringer's
mark; (3) the degree to which the products compete with each other; (4) the alleged infringer's intent
to "pass off" its goods as those of the trademark owner; (5) incidents of actual confusion; and (6)
the type of product, its costs and conditions of purchase (the "SquirtCo factors")). The district court
noted Mr. Kemp's concession that the first and sixth factors weighed in favor of finding a likelihood
of confusion. The district court then analyzed the remaining four factors. In doing so, the district
court conducted a side-by-side comparison of the parties' respective products' trade dress; discounted
similarities in the marks due to differences in the trade dress; noted the absence of competition
between the products; found that Mr. Kemp did not intend consumers to associate his products with
Bumble Bee's products; found no evidence of actual confusion; and, ultimately, found that there was
neither a likelihood of confusion nor actual dilution. As a result, the district court granted judgment
in favor of Mr. Kemp.

    1. Analysis -- Likelihood of Confusion

We review application of the SquirtCo factors and the ultimate determination of a likelihood of
confusion for clear error. Children's Factory, Inc. v. Benee's Toys, Inc., 160 F.3d 489, 493 (8th
Cir.1998); ConAgra, Inc. v. George A. Hormel, & Co., 990 F.2d 368, 370-71 (8th Cir.1993). Reversal under

                                                                                                    20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT 329
the clear error standard is appropriate in this case because, after reviewing the record, we are "left
with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." Anderson v. City of Bessemer
City, 470 U.S. 564, 573, 105 S.Ct. 1504, 84 L.Ed.2d 518 (1985) (quoting United States v. United States
Gypsum Co., 333 U.S. 364, 395, 68 S.Ct. 525, 92 L.Ed. 746 (1948)).

Mr. Kemp argues that minor differences in trade dress, as previously described, establish that the
marks are dissimilar. He argues further that he did not have an intent to misappropriate the goodwill
consumers associate with Bumble Bee's mark and that his receipt of advice from counsel proves this
fact. He also argues that the underlying products were not in competition with one another and that
there was no evidence of actual confusion. Although he concedes that the first factor (the strength of
the mark) and the sixth factor (the type of product, its costs, and conditions of purchase) support a
finding that confusion is likely, he argues that, on balance, the SquirtCo factors support the conclusion
that no confusion is likely.

The factors from SquirtCo guide our analysis, but the ultimate determination of whether confusion
is likely is not to be mechanically determined through rigid application of the factors.
Under SquirtCo, no one factor controls, and because the inquiry is inherently case-specific, different
factors may be entitled to more weight in different cases. SquirtCo, 628 F.2d at 1091 ("[R]esolution
of this issue does not hinge on a single factor but requires a consideration of numerous factors
to determine whether under all the circumstances there is a likelihood of confusion."). Further,
the factors are not entirely separable. For example, it is inappropriate to conduct a side-by-side
comparison of the elements of two products' trade dress, as urged by Mr. Kemp, without reference
to the senior mark's strength or the market conditions under which likely consumers would see
the marks. See, e.g., Wynn Oil Co. v. Thomas, 839 F.2d 1183, 1187 (6th Cir.1988) ("`[I]t is axiomatic
in trademark law that "side-by-side" comparison is not the test.'") (quoting Levi Strauss & Co. v.
Blue Bell, Inc., 632 F.2d 817, 822 (9th Cir.1980)). Rather, our comparison of the similarity between
marks and products must occur in a context that recognizes how consumers encounter the products
and how carefully consumers are likely to scrutinize the marks. See Homeowners Group, Inc. v. Home
Marketing Specialists, Inc., 931 F.2d 1100, 1109 (6th Cir.1991) ("Instead, the marks must be viewed in
their entirety and in context. [A] court must determine, in the light of what occurs in the marketplace,
whether the mark will be confusing to the public when singly presented.") (internal quotations
omitted).

Applying the factors in this manner, Mr. Kemp's concession that Bumble Bee's mark is strong means
that there must be greater degree of dissimilarity between the senior mark and the offending
mark. Compare General Mills, Inc. v. Kellogg Co., 824 F.2d 622, 626 (8th Cir.1987) ("Determining that
a mark is weak means that consumer confusion has been found unlikely because the mark's
components are so widely used that the public can easily distinguish slight differences in the marks,
even if the goods are related.") with SquirtCo, 628 F.2d at 1091 ("A strong and distinctive trademark is
entitled to greater protection than a weak or commonplace one."). Also, a greater level of dissimilarity
is required because the products in this case are not priced or sold in a manner that suggests a
high level of consumer sophistication or deliberation in the identification of product source. See
First National Bank, in Sioux Falls v. First National Bank, South Dakota, 153 F.3d 885, 889-90 (8th
Cir.1998) ("[C]onsumers tend to exercise a relatively high degree of care in selecting banking services.
As a result, customers are more likely to notice what, in other contexts, may be relatively minor
differences in names."); Astra Pharm. Prods., Inc. v. Beckman Instruments, Inc., 718 F.2d 1201, 1206 (1st
Cir.1983) ("[T]here is always less likelihood of confusion where goods are expensive and purchased
after careful consideration."); Electronic Design & Sales, Inc. v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 954 F.2d 713,

330 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  718 (Fed.Cir.1992) ("[P]urchaser[ ] . . . sophistication is important and often dispositive because
  `[s]ophisticated consumers may be expected to exercise greater care.'") (third bracket in original)
  (quoting Pignons S.A. de Mecanique de Precision v. Polaroid Corp., 657 F.2d 482, 489 (1st.
  Cir.1981)); SquirtCo, 628 F.2d at 1091 ("`[T]he kind of product, its cost and the conditions of purchase
  are important factors in considering whether the degree of care exercised by the purchaser can
  eliminate the likelihood of confusion which would otherwise exist.'") (quoting Grotrian, Helfferich,
  Schulz, Th. Steinweg Nachf. v. Steinway & Sons, 523 F.2d 1331, 1342 (2d. Cir.1975)).

  As to the second SquirtCo factor, then, we reject Mr. Kemp's argument that slight differences in trade
  dress such as type font, text color, and package art make confusion unlikely. Bumble Bee's mark and
  Mr. Kemp's mark share a dominant feature--the phrase Louis Kemp. Viewed in reference to the facts
  that Bumble Bee's mark is strong and likely consumers are not expected to exercise great scrutiny
  in the purchase of low-price, supermarket items, we must conclude that the second SquirtCo factor,
  similarity of the marks, does not strongly support Mr. Kemp's position.3

  Turning to the third factor, the degree of competition, we note that the two products, wild rice
  products and surimi-based products, were not in direct competition. A showing of direct competition,
  however, is not required, and the factor, "degree of competition" requires a broader examination of
  the products' relationship in the market. See 15 U.S.C.  1125(a)(1)(A) (providing for protection against
  confusion regarding "origin, sponsorship, or approval"); Mutual of Omaha Ins. Co. v. Novak, 836 F.2d
  397, 399 (8th Cir.1987) (stating that "[i]t is error to assume that trademark law protects against use of a
  mark only on directly competitive products" and that where "there was little or no direct competition
  . . . infringement still could be found . . . for confusion, not competition, is the touchstone of trademark
  infringement."); SquirtCo, 628 F.2d at 1091 ("Competitive proximity is one factor to be considered,
  even though infringement may be found in the absence of direct competition."). Where products are
  wholly unrelated, this factor weighs against a finding that confusion is likely. Where products are
  related, however, it is reasonable for consumers to think that the products come from the same source,
  and confusion, therefore, is more likely. Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. Balducci Publ'ns, 28 F.3d 769, 774 (8th
  Cir.1994) (noting that protection extends "`against use of [plaintiff's] mark on any product or service
  which would reasonably be thought by the buying public to come from the same source, or thought

3. In the appropriate case, minor differences in trade dress may provide a valid basis for finding otherwise identical marks
   to be distinguishable. In General Mills, 824 F.2d at 627, for example, the court found that the mark "OATMEAL RAISIN
   CRISP" was not likely to be confused with the mark "APPLE RAISIN CRISP" when both marks were used on similar
   products. There, the underlying cereal products were closely related to the commonly used descriptive terms in their
   respective composite trademarks, such that the marks were weak. Id. at 626 (recognizing that the highly descriptive nature
   of the mark "APPLE RAISIN CRISP" made it a weak mark). Further, both parties used their marks in combination with
   highly distinctive trade dress, namely, prominently displayed, widely recognized house marks. Id. (describing trade dress
   that featured prominent displays of the house marks "KELLOGGS" and "GENERAL MILLS"). Similarly in Luigino's, Inc.
   v. Stouffer Corp., 170 F.3d 827, 830 (8th Cir.1999), the court found "LEAN `N TASTY" not confusingly similar to "LEAN
   CUISINE," both as applied to pre-packaged meals marketed as healthy or diet meals. In Luigino's, the only common ground
   between the marks was the descriptive word "LEAN." It would have been inappropriate to extend trademark protection
   in the term "LEAN CUISINE" so broadly as to prohibit a competitor from employing the descriptive term "LEAN" in
   combination with other terms as part of a composite mark. Further, the court in Luigino's specifically noted that consumers
   of specialty health-food or diet items were likely to exercise greater care at the point of purchase such that the conditions of
   purchase mitigated against a likelihood of confusion. Id.at 831. Finally, as in General Mills, both parties' products used trade
   dress that employed prominent displays of their respective, well known house marks. Id. at 829. Accordingly, in both of these
   prior cases, unlike the present case, it was particularly appropriate to emphasize the distinctions in trade dress since the
   marks were weak, the additional trade dress was distinctive rather than descriptive, and, at least in the case of Luigino's, the
   consumers were presumed to exercise a high degree of care in their purchases.

                                                                                                       20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT 331
to be affiliated with, connected with, or sponsored by, the trademark owner'") (quoting J. Thomas
McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition  24.03 (3d.1992)).

Here, the record clearly reflects a connection between the two products. Mr. Kemp advocated the
marketing of his rice products with fish and Bumble Bee promoted its surimi product for use with
rice. Mr. Kemp's products were intended as side dishes, likely to be served with meat, fish, or poultry.
Because direct competition is not the only aspect of this inquiry (although a showing of direct
competition may increase the likelihood of confusion), proper application of this factor requires
exploration of the likelihood that consumers would draw a connection between the two products
and be confused as to the identities of their respective sources. Here, the products were similarly
marketed, similarly priced, and intended for use as compliments to one another. Accordingly, this
factor weighs in favor of a finding that confusion was likely.

Turning to the fourth factor, the alleged infringer's intent to pass off his goods as those of the
trademark owner, we believe the evidence supports only one permissible view of Mr. Kemp's
admission, namely, his desire to cause consumers to associate his brand with that of Bumble Bee. The
evidence of this clear intention to appropriate for his own benefit the considerable equity, i.e., the
trademark goodwill, of the LOUIS KEMP brand name was undisputed. Further, this intention did not
change over time. Rather, Mr. Kemp noted his intent in his solicitation letters to Mr. Paulucci and
again testified at trial that his subsequent, actual use of the name was designed to take advantage of
the investment Oscar Mayer and Tyson had made in the mark.

Rarely will a junior user admit such an intention. Mr. Kemp apparently did so in this case because
he believed contract rights entitled him to use the trademark LOUIS KEMP. His subjective opinions
regarding his contract rights, however, in no way diminish the effect of his statement. He openly
admitted his intention to market his products to take advantage of the considerable equity of the
Oscar Mayer and Tyson investments. The only way to take advantage of this brand equity is to cause
consumers to mistakenly believe there is, at a minimum, an association between the sources of the
products.

No party contemplated, much less used, a composite term that contained the words "LOUIS KEMP"
to market surimi-based seafood products -- or any other food products -- prior to Oscar Mayer's
request that precipitated renegotiation of the Agreement. Accordingly, no party enjoyed trademark
rights related to the phrase "LOUIS KEMP" before Oscar Mayer invested and developed its mark in
association with its surimi business. There are no claims before the court related to state law rights
of publicity nor claims that Mr. Kemp enjoyed celebrity status that would merit protection of his
personal name under such laws. Accordingly, when Mr. Kemp referred to "the considerable equity" of
the LOUIS KEMP brand name, the only equity to which he could have been referring was the equity
built by Bumble Bee's predecessors.

We cannot discount this intent based on the fact that Mr. Kemp believed the contract entitled him
to play on the goodwill of Bumble Bee's marks. As noted, the contract conditioned Mr. Kemp's right
to use a related mark upon Oscar Mayer's prior approval, which Mr. Kemp did not seek. Further, we
cannot discount this intent based on the fact that Mr. Kemp received advice of counsel and slightly
modified his presentation of his LOUIS KEMP mark. Discounting a showing of intent based on minor
changes in presentation is inappropriate because:

[f]ew businesspeople are foolhardy enough to be so blatant in their attempt to increase profits. To

332 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  find trademark infringement only by exact identity and not where the junior user makes some slight
  modification would be in effect to reward the cunning infringer and punish only the bumbling one.

     23. Thomas McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition 23.20 (4th ed.2002) (citations and
           internal quotations omitted). Clearly, Mr. Kemp attempted to minimize his legal risk. His
           desire to minimize his legal risk, however, cannot be equated with a diminution of his desire
           to "take advantage of the considerable equity" of Bumble Bee's trademark.

  It is important to note that intent as a SquirtCo factor is relevant not because trademark infringement
  requires intent, bad faith, or any other mens rea. Instead, this SquirtCo factor is relevant because it
  demonstrates the junior user's true opinion as to the dispositive issue, namely, whether confusion is
  likely. Accordingly, it is irrelevant that he may have believed contract rights excused his use.4 He
  adopted the mark LOUIS KEMP specifically to take advantage of the "considerable equity" Bumble
  Bee and its predecessors had built in the mark. He admitted this regarding his prospective intentions
  in his letter to solicit Mr. Paulucci as a partner, and he admitted this under examination regarding his
  intentions surrounding his actual use. We believe this evidence permits only one possible conclusion,
  namely, that Mr. Kemp believed consumers would associate his products with those of the senior user.
  Accordingly, this factor weighs very strongly in favor of finding that confusion was likely.

  Finally, turning to the fifth factor, incidents of actual confusion, we cannot say that the district
  court committed clear error in discounting the survey. The district court acted well within its broad
  fact finding authority when it chose to discount the survey evidence. We believe, however, that the
  undisputed testimony of Mr. Kemp's salesman for the wild rice products, Patrick Melby, that actual
  confusion existed among sophisticated professional buyers, supports a finding of actual confusion.
  Such buyers are individuals who make their living purchasing food products like those of Bumble Bee
  and Mr. Kemp, and they may be presumed to exercise a high standard of care. See, e.g., Ford Motor Co.
  v. Summit Motor Prods., Inc., 930 F.2d 277, 293 (3d.Cir.1991) ("[P]rofessional buyers, or consumers of
  very expensive goods, will be held to a higher standard of care."); Oreck Corp. v. U.S. Floor Sys., Inc., 803
  F.2d 166, 173-74 (5th Cir.1986) (finding that buyers for professional and institutional purposes were
  likely to be informed, deliberative buyers not easily confused as to product source). As such, when
  even professional buyers are confused, it serves as strong evidence that the average consumer, who
  exercises less scrutiny, is likely to be confused. See Checkpoint Systems, Inc. v. Check Point Software Tech.,
  Inc., 269 F.3d 270, 285 (3d.Cir.2001) ("[P]rofessionals or commercial buyers familiar with the field .
  . . are sophisticated enough not to be confused by trademarks that are closely similar. That is, it is
  assumed that such professional buyers are less likely to be confused than the ordinary consumer.")
  (quoting J. Thomas McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition,  23:101 (4th ed.2000)); see
  also; Perini Corp. v. Perini Constr., Inc., 915 F.2d 121, 128 (4th Cir.1990) ("[I]n a market with extremely
  sophisticated buyers, the likelihood of consumer confusion cannot be presumed on the basis of the
  similarity in trade name alone.").

  The district court, as the fact-finder in this case, was entitled to discount Mr. Melby's testimony.
  We do not believe, however, that the district court's opinion contains a finding that Mr. Melby
  was non-credible. The district court merely found that Mr. Melby's testimony failed to demonstrate
  that instances of confusion were "rampant." Accordingly, the record contains undisputed testimony
  that there were instances of actual confusion, even if those instances were not "rampant." When, as

4. As noted previously, the only issue before us is the issue of infringement. Based on the stipulation of the parties and the
   related California litigation, there is no contractual right to use an infringing mark.

                                                                                                       20. TRADEMARK INFRINGEMENT 333
here, it is shown by an alleged infringer's own salesman that even sophisticated professional buyers
experienced actual confusion, such evidence supports a finding that confusion is likely.
In summary, a balancing of the SquirtCo factors support a finding that consumer confusion was likely
and Mr. Kemp's use was infringement. Having found infringement due to a likelihood of confusion,
and there being no remedies for dilution separate from the available remedies for infringement, we
need not address the issue of dilution. The judgment of the district court is reversed and this case is
remanded for determination of an appropriate remedy.

334 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                           21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND
                                       INCONTESTABILITY

   Learning Objectives: Unit 21

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Describe the relevant laws and institutions relating to trademarks.
           Explain how priority works in trademark law.
           Explain how federal trademark registration works.
           Explain what incontestability means.

A fundamental principle of trademark law in the United States is that trademark rights arise from
use of a mark as a mark. Company A may obtain trademark rights simply by placing a mark on
its products and selling those products. If Company B subsequently begins to use that mark on its
products, Company A may bring a legal claim based on state law and on 15 U.S.C.  1125(a). Put
simply, the first to use a mark receives priority as against subsequent users of the mark.
Although trademark rights flow from actual use, they can be strengthened by registering the mark.
The strongest form of registration is the federal system, which provides several nationwide benefits to
the registrant. Federal trademark law--and registration, in particular--is authorized by the Lanham
Act, codified at 15 U.S.C.  1051 et. seq. It states the conditions of registration (㎣ 1051 and 1052),
establishes the evidentiary effect of registration ( 1115), and provides a specific cause of action for
infringement of a registered mark ( 1114). It also limits the grounds on which a registered mark can
be challenged after five years have passed from registration.
Read 15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1051, 1052,  1114, and 1115. As you read these statutes, ask yourself the following
questions:

      What requirements must be met for a mark to be registered?
      What are the consequences of registering a mark?
      What does "incontestable" mean in the trademark context?
      What are the effects of a mark being "incontestable"?
As you read  1052, you may have noticed that subsection (a) prohibits registration of material
that comprises "immoral, deceptive, or scandalous matter; or matter which may disparage or falsely
suggest a connection with persons, living or dead, institutions, beliefs, or national symbols..." The

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 335
USPTO long used  1052(a) to deny registration of marks that constituted "scandalous" or
"disparaging" subject matter, most recently in the context of Simon Tam's effort to register the name
of his band, The Slants. Other groups, most famously native American tribes, sought to use  1052(a)
to revoke the registration of disparaging marks. In Matal v. Tam, the Supreme Court took up the
Constitutionality of the  1052(a) prohibition on registration of "disparaging" subject matter.

   15 U.S.C.  1127. Construction and definitions; intent of chapter: Use in Commerce
   Definition (2006)

   The term "use in commerce" means the bona fide use of a mark in the ordinary course of trade, and not
   made merely to reserve a right in a mark. For purposes of this chapter, a mark shall be deemed to be
   in use in commerce--

            (1) on goods when--
                     (A) it is placed in any manner on the goods or their containers or the displays associated
                     therewith or on the tags or labels affixed thereto, or if the nature of the goods makes such
                     placement impracticable, then on documents associated with the goods or their sale, and
                     (B) the goods are sold or transported in commerce, and

            (2) on services when it is used or displayed in the sale or advertising of services and the services are
            rendered in commerce, or the services are rendered in more than one State or in the United States
            and a foreign country and the person rendering the services is engaged in commerce in connection
            with the services.

   15 U.S.C.  1051. Application for registration; verification (2020)

   (a) Application for use of trademark
            1) The owner of a trademark used in commerce may request registration of its trademark on the
            principal register hereby established by paying the prescribed fee and filing in the Patent and
            Trademark Office an application and a verified statement, in such form as may be prescribed by the
            Director, and such number of specimens or facsimiles of the mark as used as may be required by the
            Director.
            2) The application shall include specification of the applicant's domicile and citizenship, the date
            of the applicant's first use of the mark, the date of the applicant's first use of the mark in commerce,
            the goods in connection with which the mark is used, and a drawing of the mark.

   ...
   (b) Application for bona fide intention to use trademark

            1) A person who has a bona fide intention, under circumstances showing the good faith of such

336 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
         person, to use a trademark in commerce may request registration of its trademark on the principal
         register hereby established by paying the prescribed fee and filing in the Patent and Trademark
         Office an application and a verified statement, in such form as may be prescribed by the Director...

(c) Amendment of application under subsection (b) to conform to requirements of subsection (a)

         At any time during examination of an application filed under subsection (b), an applicant who has
         made use of the mark in commerce may claim the benefits of such use for purposes of this chapter,
         by amending his or her application to bring it into conformity with the requirements of subsection
         (a).

...

(e) Third party submission of evidence

A third party may submit for consideration for inclusion in the record of an application evidence relevant
to a ground for refusal of registration. The third-party submission shall identify the ground for refusal and
include a concise description of each piece of evidence submitted in support of each identified ground for
refusal. Not later than 2 months after the date on which the submission is filed, the Director shall
determine whether the evidence should be included in the record of the application. The Director shall
establish by regulation appropriate procedures for the consideration of evidence submitted by a third party
under this subsection and may prescribe a fee to accompany the submission. If the Director determines that
the third-party evidence should be included in the record of the application, only the evidence and the
ground for refusal to which the evidence relates may be so included. Any determination by the Director
whether or not to include evidence in the record of an application shall be final and non-reviewable, and a
determination to include or to not include evidence in the record shall not prejudice any party's right to
raise any issue and rely on any evidence in any other proceeding.

15 U.S.C. 1052. Trademarks registrable on principal register; concurrent
registration (2006)

No trademark by which the goods of the applicant may be distinguished from the goods of others shall be
refused registration on the principal register on account of its nature unless it

         (a) Consists of or comprises immoral, deceptive, or scandalous matter; or matter which may
         disparage or falsely suggest a connection with persons, living or dead, institutions, beliefs, or
         national symbols, or bring them into contempt, or disrepute; or a geographical indication which,
         when used on or in connection with wines or spirits, identifies a place other than the origin of the
         goods and is first used on or in connection with wines or spirits by the applicant on or after one year
         after the date on which the WTO Agreement (as defined in section 3501(9) of title 19) enters into
         force with respect to the United States.

         (b) Consists of or comprises the flag or coat of arms or other insignia of the United States, or of any
         State or municipality, or of any foreign nation, or any simulation thereof.

                                                               21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 337
            (c) Consists of or comprises a name, portrait, or signature identifying a particular living individual
            except by his written consent, or the name, signature, or portrait of a deceased President of the
            United States during the life of his widow, if any, except by the written consent of the widow.

            (d) Consists of or comprises a mark which so resembles a mark registered in the Patent and
            Trademark Office, or a mark or trade name previously used in the United States by another and not
            abandoned, as to be likely, when used on or in connection with the goods of the applicant, to cause
            confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive . . .

            (e) Consists of a mark which (1) when used on or in connection with the goods of the applicant is
            merely descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of them, (2) when used on or in connection with
            the goods of the applicant is primarily geographically descriptive of them, except as indications of
            regional origin may be registrable under section 1054 of this title, (3) when used on or in connection
            with the goods of the applicant is primarily geographically deceptively misdescriptive of them, (4) is
            primarily merely a surname, or (5) comprises any matter that, as a whole, is functional.

            (f) Except as expressly excluded in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e)(3), and (e)(5) of this section,
            nothing in this chapter shall prevent the registration of a mark used by the applicant which has
            become distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce. The Director may accept as prima facie
            evidence that the mark has become distinctive, as used on or in connection with the applicant's
            goods in commerce, proof of substantially exclusive and continuous use thereof as a mark by the
            applicant in commerce for the five years before the date on which the claim of distinctiveness is
            made. Nothing in this section shall prevent the registration of a mark which, when used on or in
            connection with the goods of the applicant, is primarily geographically deceptively misdescriptive of
            them, and which became distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce before December 8, 1993.

   A mark which would be likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment under section
   1125(c) of this title, may be refused registration only pursuant to a proceeding brought under section 1063
   of this title. A registration for a mark which would be likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by
   tarnishment under section 1125(c) of this title, may be canceled pursuant to a proceeding brought under
   either section 1064 of this title or section 1092 of this title.

   15 U.S.C. 1115. Registration on principal register as evidence of exclusive right to
   use mark; defenses (2002)

   . . .

   (b) Incontestability; defenses: To the extent that the right to use the registered mark has become
   incontestable under section 1065 of this title, the registration shall be conclusive evidence of the validity of
   the registered mark and of the registration of the mark, of the registrant's ownership of the mark, and of
   the registrant's exclusive right to use the registered mark in commerce. Such conclusive evidence shall
   relate to the exclusive right to use the mark on or in connection with the goods or services specified in the
   affidavit filed under the provisions of section 1065 of this title, or in the renewal application filed under the
   provisions of section 1059 of this title if the goods or services specified in the renewal are fewer in number,

338 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
subject to any conditions or limitations in the registration or in such affidavit or renewal application. Such
conclusive evidence of the right to use the registered mark shall be subject to proof of infringement as
defined in section 1114 of this title, and shall be subject to the following defenses or defects:

         1) That the registration or the incontestable right to use the mark was obtained fraudulently; or

         2) That the mark has been abandoned by the registrant; or

         3) That the registered mark is being used by or with the permission of the registrant or a person in
         privity with the registrant, so as to misrepresent the source of the goods or services on or in
         connection with which the mark is used; or

         4) That the use of the name, term, or device charged to be an infringement is a use, otherwise than
         as a mark, of the party's individual name in his own business, or of the individual name of anyone in
         privity with such party, or of a term or device which is descriptive of and used fairly and in good
         faith only to describe the goods or services of such party, or their geographic origin ...

15 U.S. Code 1064. Cancellation of registration (2020)

A petition to cancel a registration of a mark, stating the grounds relied upon, may, upon payment of the
prescribed fee, be filed as follows by any person who believes that he is or will be damaged, including as a
result of a likelihood of dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment under section 1125(c) of this title,
by the registration of a mark on the principal register established by this chapter, or under the Act
of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905:

         1) Within five years from the date of the registration of the mark under this chapter.

         2) ...

         3) At any time if the registered mark becomes the generic name for the goods or services, or a
         portion thereof, for which it is registered, or is functional, or has been abandoned, or its registration
         was obtained fraudulently or contrary to the provisions of section 1054 of this title or of subsection
         (a), (b), or (c) of section 1052 of this title for a registration under this chapter, or contrary to similar
         prohibitory provisions of such prior Acts for a registration under such Acts, or if the registered mark
         is being used by, or with the permission of, the registrant so as to misrepresent the source of the
         goods or services on or in connection with which the mark is used. If the registered mark becomes
         the generic name for less than all of the goods or services for which it is registered, a petition to
         cancel the registration for only those goods or services may be filed. A registered mark shall not be
         deemed to be the generic name of goods or services solely because such mark is also used as a name
         of or to identify a unique product or service. The primary significance of the registered mark to the
         relevant public rather than purchaser motivation shall be the test for determining whether the
         registered mark has become the generic name of goods or services on or in connection with which it
         has been used.

         ...

                                                               21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 339
            (6) At any time after the 3-year period following the date of registration, if the registered mark has
            never been used in commerce on or in connection with some or all of the goods or services recited
            in the registration:
            ...

   15 U.S. Code 1065. Incontestability of right to use mark under certain conditions
   (2020)

   Except on a ground for which application to cancel may be filed at any time under paragraphs (3), (5), and
   (6) of section 1064 of this title, and except to the extent, if any, to which the use of a mark registered on the
   principal register infringes a valid right acquired under the law of any State or Territory by use of a mark
   or trade name continuing from a date prior to the date of registration under this chapter of such registered
   mark, the right of the owner to use such registered mark in commerce for the goods or services on or in
   connection with which such registered mark has been in continuous use for five consecutive years
   subsequent to the date of such registration and is still in use in commerce, shall be incontestable: Provided,
   That ...

340 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
MATAL V. TAM (2017)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Matal v. Tam, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the Constitutional basis for Tam's challenge to 1052(a)?
           What are the counterarguments to the Constitutional challenge?
           What is the Court's holding? The reasoning underlying that holding?
           Predict consequences that you foresee emerging from this case. How could you test whether those
              consequences have occurred?
           In light of Matal v. Tam, is the rest of  1052 vulnerable to Constitutional challenge, including 
              1052(b) and (d)? If not, how would you distinguish  1052(b) and (d) from Tam?

                                                           Matal v. Tam
                                                      137 S.Ct. 1744 (2017)
Justice ALITO announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the opinion of the Court with
respect to Parts I, II, and III-A, and an opinion with respect to Parts III-B, III-C, and IV, in which
THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice BREYER join.
This case concerns a dance-rock band's application for federal trademark registration of the band's
name, "The Slants." "Slants" is a derogatory term for persons of Asian descent, and members of the
band are Asian-Americans. But the band members believe that by taking that slur as the name of their
group, they will help to "reclaim" the term and drain its denigrating force.
The Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) denied the application based on a provision of federal law
prohibiting the registration of trademarks that may "disparage ... or bring ... into contemp[t] or
disrepute" any "persons, living or dead." 15 U.S.C.  1052(a). We now hold that this provision violates
the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment. It offends a bedrock First Amendment principle:
Speech may not be banned on the ground that it expresses ideas that offend.
I
A
"The principle underlying trademark protection is that distinctive marks--words, names, symbols,
and the like--can help distinguish a particular artisan's goods from those of others." B & B Hardware,
Inc. v. Hargis Industries, Inc., 575 U.S. ----, ----, 135 S.Ct. 1293, 1299, 191 L.Ed.2d 222 (2015); see

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 341
also Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Samara Brothers, Inc., 529 U.S. 205, 212, 120 S.Ct. 1339, 146 L.Ed.2d 182
(2000). A trademark "designate [s] the goods as the product of a particular trader" and "protect[s] his
good will against the sale of another's product as his." United Drug Co. v. Theodore Rectanus Co., 248
U.S. 90, 97, 39 S.Ct. 48, 63 L.Ed. 141 (1918); see also Hanover Star Milling Co. v. Metcalf, 240 U.S. 403,
412-413, 36 S.Ct. 357, 60 L.Ed. 713 (1916). It helps consumers identify goods and services that they
wish to purchase, as well as those they want to avoid. See Wal-Mart Stores, supra, at 212-213, 120 S.Ct.
1339; Park `N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar Park & Fly, Inc., 469 U.S. 189, 198, 105 S.Ct. 658, 83 L.Ed.2d 582 (1985).

"[F]ederal law does not create trademarks." B & B Hardware, supra, at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 1299.
Trademarks and their precursors have ancient origins, and trademarks were protected at common
law and in equity at the time of the founding of our country. 3 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair
Competition  19:8 (4th ed. 2017) (hereinafter McCarthy); 1 id., ㎣ 5:1, 5:2, 5:3; Pattishall, The
Constitutional Foundations of American Trademark Law, 78 Trademark Rep. 456, 457-458 (1988);
Pattishall, Two Hundred Years of American Trademark Law, 68 Trademark Rep. 121, 121-123 (1978);
see Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. 82, 92, 25 L.Ed. 550 (1879). For most of the 19th century, trademark
protection was the province of the States. See Two Pesos, Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc., 505 U.S. 763,
780-782, 112 S.Ct. 2753, 120 L.Ed.2d 615 (1992) (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 785,
112 S.Ct. 2753 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). Eventually, Congress stepped in to provide a
degree of national uniformity, passing the first federal legislation protecting trademarks in 1870. See
Act of July 8, 1870, ㎣ 77-84, 16 Stat. 210-212. The foundation of current federal trademark law is
the Lanham Act, enacted in 1946. See Act of July 5, 1946, ch. 540, 60 Stat. 427. By that time, trademark
had expanded far beyond phrases that do no more than identify a good or service. Then, as now,
trademarks often consisted of catchy phrases that convey a message.

Under the Lanham Act, trademarks that are "used in commerce" may be placed on the "principal
register," that is, they may be federally registered. 15 U.S.C.  1051(a)(1). And some marks "capable of
distinguishing [an] applicant's goods or services and not registrable on the principal register ... which
are in lawful use in commerce by the owner thereof" may instead be placed on a different federal
register: the supplemental register.  1091(a). There are now more than two million marks that have
active federal certificates of registration. PTO Performance and Accountability Report, Fiscal Year
2016, p. 192 (Table 15), https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/ documents/USPTOFY16PAR.pdf
(all Internet materials as last visited June 16, 2017). This system of federal registration helps to ensure
that trademarks are fully protected and supports the free flow of commerce. "[N]ational protection
of trademarks is desirable," we have explained, "because trademarks foster competition and the
maintenance of quality by securing to the producer the benefits of good reputation." San Francisco
Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U.S. 522, 531, 107 S.Ct. 2971, 97 L.Ed.2d 427
(1987) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Park `N Fly, Inc., supra, at 198, 105 S.Ct. 658 ("The
Lanham Act provides national protection of trademarks in order to secure to the owner of the mark
the goodwill of his business and to protect the ability of consumers to distinguish among competing
producers").

B

Without federal registration, a valid trademark may still be used in commerce. See 3 McCarthy 
19:8. And an unregistered trademark can be enforced against would-be infringers in several ways.
Most important, even if a trademark is not federally registered, it may still be enforceable under
 43(a) of the Lanham Act, which creates a federal cause of action for trademark infringement.
See Two Pesos, supra, at 768, 112 S.Ct. 2753 ("Section 43(a) prohibits a broader range of practices

342 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
than does  32, which applies to registered marks, but it is common ground that  43(a) protects
qualifying unregistered trademarks" (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).[1] Unregistered
trademarks may also be entitled to protection under other federal statutes, such as the
Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act, 15 U.S.C.  1125(d). See 5 McCarthy  25A:49, at
25A-198 ("[T]here is no requirement [in the Anticybersquatting Act] that the protected `mark' be
registered: unregistered common law marks are protected by the Act"). And an unregistered
trademark can be enforced under state common law, or if it has been registered in a State, under
that State's registration system. See 3 id.,  19:3, at 19-23 (explaining that "[t]he federal system of
registration and protection does not preempt parallel state law protection, either by state common
law or state registration" and "[i]n the vast majority of situations, federal and state trademark law
peacefully coexist"); id.,  22:1 (discussing state trademark registration systems).

Federal registration, however, "confers important legal rights and benefits on trademark owners who
register their marks." B & B Hardware, 575 U.S., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 1317 (internal quotation marks
omitted). Registration on the principal register (1) "serves as `constructive notice of the registrant's
claim of ownership' of the mark," ibid. (quoting 15 U.S.C.  1072); (2) "is `prima facie evidence of
the validity of the registered mark and of the registration of the mark, of the owner's ownership
of the mark, and of the owner's exclusive right to use the registered mark in commerce on or in
connection with the goods or services specified in the certificate,' " B & B Hardware, 575 U.S. at ----,
135 S.Ct., at 1300 (quoting  1057(b)); and (3) can make a mark " `incontestable' " once a mark has been
registered for five years," ibid. (quoting ㎣ 1065, 1115(b)); see Park `N Fly, 469 U.S., at 193, 105 S.Ct.
658. Registration also enables the trademark holder "to stop the importation into the United States of
articles bearing an infringing mark." 3 McCarthy  19:9, at 19-38; see 15 U.S.C.  1124.

C

The Lanham Act contains provisions that bar certain trademarks from the principal register. For
example, a trademark cannot be registered if it is "merely descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive"
of goods,  1052(e)(1), or if it is so similar to an already registered trademark or trade name that it is
"likely ... to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive,"  1052(d).

At issue in this case is one such provision, which we will call "the disparagement clause." This
provision prohibits the registration of a trademark "which may disparage ... persons, living or dead,
institutions, beliefs, or national symbols, or bring them into contempt, or disrepute."  1052(a).[2] This
clause appeared in the original Lanham Act and has remained the same to this day. See  2(a), 60 Stat.
428.

When deciding whether a trademark is disparaging, an examiner at the PTO generally applies a
"two-part test." The examiner first considers "the likely meaning of the matter in question, taking
into account not only dictionary definitions, but also the relationship of the matter to the other
elements in the mark, the nature of the goods or services, and the manner in which the mark is
used in the marketplace in connection with the goods or services." Trademark Manual of Examining
Procedure  1203.03(b)(i) (Apr. 2017), p. 1200-150, http://tmep.uspto.gov. "If that meaning is found
to refer to identifiable persons, institutions, beliefs or national symbols," the examiner moves to the
second step, asking "whether that meaning may be disparaging to a substantial composite[3] of the
referenced group." Ibid. If the examiner finds that a "substantial composite, although not necessarily a
majority, of the referenced group would find the proposed mark ... to be disparaging in the context
of contemporary attitudes," a prima facie case of disparagement is made out, and the burden shifts to

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 343
the applicant to prove that the trademark is not disparaging. Ibid. What is more, the PTO has specified
that "[t]he fact that an applicant may be a member of that group or has good intentions underlying its
use of a term does not obviate the fact that a substantial composite of the referenced group would find
the term objectionable." Ibid.

D

Simon Tam is the lead singer of "The Slants." In re Tam, 808 F.3d 1321, 1331 (C.A.Fed.2015) (en
banc), as corrected (Feb. 11, 2016). He chose this moniker in order to "reclaim" and "take ownership"
of stereotypes about people of Asian ethnicity. Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). The group
"draws inspiration for its lyrics from childhood slurs and mocking nursery rhymes" and has given its
albums names such as "The Yellow Album" and "Slanted Eyes, Slanted Hearts." Ibid.

Tam sought federal registration of "THE SLANTS," on the principal register, App. 17, but an
examining attorney at the PTO rejected the request, applying the PTO's two-part framework and
finding that "there is ... a substantial composite of persons who find the term in the applied-for mark
offensive." Id., at 30. The examining attorney relied in part on the fact that "numerous dictionaries
define `slants' or `slant-eyes' as a derogatory or offensive term." Id., at 29. The examining attorney
also relied on a finding that "the band's name has been found offensive numerous times"--citing a
performance that was canceled because of the band's moniker and the fact that "several bloggers and
commenters to articles on the band have indicated that they find the term and the applied-for mark
offensive." Id., at 29-30.

Tam contested the denial of registration before the examining attorney and before the PTO's
Trademark Trial and Appeal Board (TTAB) but to no avail. Eventually, he took the case to federal
court, where the en banc Federal Circuit ultimately found the disparagement clause facially
unconstitutional under the First Amendment's Free Speech Clause. The majority found that the
clause engages in viewpoint-based discrimination, that the clause regulates the expressive component
of trademarks and consequently cannot be treated as commercial speech, and that the clause is
subject to and cannot satisfy strict scrutiny. See 808 F.3d, at 1334-1339. The majority also rejected
the Government's argument that registered trademarks constitute government speech, as well as
the Government's contention that federal registration is a form of government subsidy. See id., at
1339-1355. And the majority opined that even if the disparagement clause were analyzed under this
Court's commercial speech cases, the clause would fail the "intermediate scrutiny" that those cases
prescribe. See id., at 1355-1357.

Several judges wrote separately, advancing an assortment of theories. Concurring, Judge O'Malley
agreed with the majority's reasoning but added that the disparagement clause is unconstitutionally
vague. See id., at 1358-1363. Judge Dyk concurred in part and dissented in part. He argued that
trademark registration is a government subsidy and that the disparagement clause is facially
constitutional, but he found the clause unconstitutional as applied to THE SLANTS because that
mark constitutes "core expression" and was not adopted for the purpose of disparaging
Asian-Americans. See id., at 1363-1374. In dissent, Judge Lourie agreed with Judge Dyk that the
clause is facially constitutional but concluded for a variety of reasons that it is also constitutional as
applied in this case. See id., at 1374-1376. Judge Reyna also dissented, maintaining that trademarks
are commercial speech and that the disparagement clause survives intermediate scrutiny because it
"directly advances the government's substantial interest in the orderly flow of commerce." See id., at
1376-1382.

344 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
The Government filed a petition for certiorari, which we granted in order to decide whether the
disparagement clause "is facially invalid under the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment." Pet.
for Cert. i; see sub. nom. Lee v. Tam, 579 U.S. ----, 137 S.Ct. 30, 195 L.Ed.2d 902 (2016).

II

Before reaching the question whether the disparagement clause violates the First Amendment, we
consider Tam's argument that the clause does not reach marks that disparage racial or ethnic groups.
The clause prohibits the registration of marks that disparage "persons," and Tam claims that the term
"persons" "includes only natural and juristic persons," not "non-juristic entities such as racial and
ethnic groups." Brief for Respondent 46.

Tam never raised this argument before the PTO or the Federal Circuit, and we declined to grant
certiorari on this question when Tam asked us to do so, see Brief Responding to Petition for
Certiorari, pp. i, 17-21. Normally, that would be the end of the matter in this Court. See, e.g., Yee v.
Escondido, 503 U.S. 519, 534-538, 112 S.Ct. 1522, 118 L.Ed.2d 153 (1992); Freytag v. Commissioner,
501 U.S. 868, 894-895, 111 S.Ct. 2631, 115 L.Ed.2d 764 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment).

But as the Government pointed out in connection with its petition for certiorari, accepting Tam's
statutory interpretation would resolve this case and leave the First Amendment question for another
day. See Reply Brief 9. "[W]e have often stressed" that it is "importan[t] [to] avoid[d] the premature
adjudication of constitutional questions," Clinton v. Jones, 520 U.S. 681, 690, 117 S.Ct. 1636, 137
L.Ed.2d 945 (1997), and that "we ought not to pass on questions of constitutionality ... unless such
adjudication is unavoidable," Spector Motor Service, Inc. v. McLaughlin, 323 U.S. 101, 105, 65 S.Ct. 152,
89 L.Ed. 101 (1944). See also Alabama State Federation of Labor v. McAdory, 325 U.S. 450, 461, 65 S.Ct.
1384, 89 L.Ed. 1725 (1945); Burton v. United States, 196 U.S. 283, 295, 25 S.Ct. 243, 49 L.Ed. 482 (1905).
We thus begin by explaining why Tam's argument about the definition of "persons" in the Lanham Act
is meritless.

As noted, the disparagement clause prohibits the registration of trademarks "which may disparage ...
persons, living or dead." 15 U.S.C.  1052(a). Tam points to a definition of "person" in the Lanham
Act, which provides that "[i]n the construction of this chapter, unless the contrary is plainly apparent
from the context ... [t]he term `person' and any other word or term used to designate the applicant
or other entitled to a benefit or privilege or rendered liable under the provisions of this chapter
includes a juristic person as well as a natural person."  1127. Because racial and ethnic groups are
neither natural nor "juristic" persons, Tam asserts, these groups fall outside this definition. Brief for
Respondent 46-48.

Tam's argument is refuted by the plain terms of the disparagement clause. The clause applies to
marks that disparage "persons." A mark that disparages a "substantial" percentage of the members
of a racial or ethnic group, Trademark Manual  1203.03(b)(i), at 1200-150, necessarily disparages
many "persons," namely, members of that group. Tam's argument would fail even if the clause used
the singular term "person," but Congress' use of the plural "persons" makes the point doubly clear.[4]

Tam's narrow reading of the term "persons" also clashes with the breadth of the disparagement clause.
By its terms, the clause applies to marks that disparage, not just "persons," but also "institutions"
and "beliefs." 15 U.S.C.  1052(a). It thus applies to the members of any group whose members
share particular "beliefs," such as political, ideological, and religious groups. It applies to marks that

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 345
denigrate "institutions," and on Tam's reading, it also reaches "juristic" persons such as corporations,
unions, and other unincorporated associations. See  1127. Thus, the clause is not limited to marks
that disparage a particular natural person. If Congress had wanted to confine the reach of the
disparagement clause in the way that Tam suggests, it would have been easy to do so. A neighboring
provision of the Lanham Act denies registration to any trademark that "[c]onsists of or comprises a
name, portrait, or signature identifying a particular living individualexcept by his written consent." 
1052(c) (emphasis added).

Tam contends that his interpretation of the disparagement clause is supported by its legislative
history and by the PTO's willingness for many years to register marks that plainly denigrated
African-Americans and Native Americans. These arguments are unpersuasive. As always, our inquiry
into the meaning of the statute's text ceases when "the statutory language is unambiguous and the
statutory scheme is coherent and consistent." Barnhart v. Sigmon Coal Co., 534 U.S. 438, 450, 122 S.Ct.
941, 151 L.Ed.2d 908 (2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). Here, it is clear that the prohibition
against registering trademarks "which may disparage ... persons,"  1052(a), prohibits registration of
terms that disparage persons who share a common race or ethnicity.

Even if resort to legislative history and early enforcement practice were appropriate, we would find
Tam's arguments unconvincing. Tam has not brought to our attention any evidence in the legislative
history showing that Congress meant to adopt his interpretation. And the practice of the PTO in the
years following the enactment of the disparagement clause is unenlightening. The admitted vagueness
of the disparagement test[5] and the huge volume of applications have produced a haphazard record
of enforcement. (Even today, the principal register is replete with marks that many would regard as
disparaging to racial and ethnic groups.[6]) Registration of the offensive marks that Tam cites is likely
attributable not to the acceptance of his interpretation of the clause but to other factors--most likely
the regrettable attitudes and sensibilities of the time in question.

III

Because the disparagement clause applies to marks that disparage the members of a racial or ethnic
group, we must decide whether the clause violates the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment.
And at the outset, we must consider three arguments that would either eliminate any First
Amendment protection or result in highly permissive rational-basis review. Specifically, the
Government contends (1) that trademarks are government speech, not private speech, (2) that
trademarks are a form of government subsidy, and (3) that the constitutionality of the disparagement
clause should be tested under a new "government-program" doctrine. We address each of these
arguments below.

A

The First Amendment prohibits Congress and other government entities and actors from "abridging
the freedom of speech"; the First Amendment does not say that Congress and other government
entities must abridge their own ability to speak freely. And our cases recognize that "[t]he Free Speech
Clause ... does not regulate government speech." Pleasant Grove City v. Summum, 555 U.S. 460, 467, 129
S.Ct. 1125, 172 L.Ed.2d 853 (2009); see Johanns v. Livestock Marketing Assn., 544 U.S. 550, 553, 125 S.Ct.
2055, 161 L.Ed.2d 896 (2005) ("[T]he Government's own speech ... is exempt from First Amendment
scrutiny"); Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis. System v. Southworth, 529 U.S. 217, 235, 120 S.Ct. 1346, 146
L.Ed.2d 193 (2000).

346 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
As we have said, "it is not easy to imagine how government could function" if it were subject to the
restrictions that the First Amendment imposes on private speech. Summum, supra, at 468, 129 S.Ct.
1125; see Walker v. Texas Div., Sons of Confederate Veterans, Inc., 576 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 135
S.Ct. 2239, 2245-2247, 192 L.Ed.2d 274 (2015). " `[T]he First Amendment forbids the government to
regulate speech in ways that favor some viewpoints or ideas at the expense of others,' " Lamb's Chapel v.
Center Moriches Union Free School Dist., 508 U.S. 384, 394, 113 S.Ct. 2141, 124 L.Ed.2d 352 (1993), but
imposing a requirement of viewpoint-neutrality on government speech would be paralyzing. When
a government entity embarks on a course of action, it necessarily takes a particular viewpoint and
rejects others. The Free Speech Clause does not require government to maintain viewpoint neutrality
when its officers and employees speak about that venture.

Here is a simple example. During the Second World War, the Federal Government produced and
distributed millions of posters to promote the war effort.[7] There were posters urging enlistment,
the purchase of war bonds, and the conservation of scarce resources.[8] These posters expressed a
viewpoint, but the First Amendment did not demand that the Government balance the message of
these posters by producing and distributing posters encouraging Americans to refrain from engaging
in these activities.

But while the government-speech doctrine is important--indeed, essential--it is a doctrine that is
susceptible to dangerous misuse. If private speech could be passed off as government speech by
simply affixing a government seal of approval, government could silence or muffle the expression
of disfavored viewpoints. For this reason, we must exercise great caution before extending our
government-speech precedents.

At issue here is the content of trademarks that are registered by the PTO, an arm of the Federal
Government. The Federal Government does not dream up these marks, and it does not edit marks
submitted for registration. Except as required by the statute involved here, 15 U.S.C.  1052(a), an
examiner may not reject a mark based on the viewpoint that it appears to express. Thus, unless that
section is thought to apply, an examiner does not inquire whether any viewpoint conveyed by a
mark is consistent with Government policy or whether any such viewpoint is consistent with that
expressed by other marks already on the principal register. Instead, if the mark meets the Lanham
Act's viewpoint-neutral requirements, registration is mandatory. Ibid. (requiring that "[n]o trademark
... shall be refused registration on the principal register on account of its nature unless" it falls within
an enumerated statutory exception). And if an examiner finds that a mark is eligible for placement
on the principal register, that decision is not reviewed by any higher official unless the registration
is challenged. See ㎣ 1062(a), 1071; 37 C.F.R  41.31(a) (2016). Moreover, once a mark is registered,
the PTO is not authorized to remove it from the register unless a party moves for cancellation, the
registration expires, or the Federal Trade Commission initiates proceedings based on certain grounds.
See 15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1058(a), 1059, 1064; 37 C.F.R. ㎣ 2.111(b), 2.160.

In light of all this, it is far-fetched to suggest that the content of a registered mark is government
speech. If the federal registration of a trademark makes the mark government speech, the Federal
Government is babbling prodigiously and incoherently. It is saying many unseemly things. See App.
to Brief for Pro-Football, Inc., as Amicus Curiae. It is expressing contradictory views.[9] It is
unashamedly endorsing a vast array of commercial products and services. And it is providing Delphic
advice to the consuming public.

For example, if trademarks represent government speech, what does the Government have in mind

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 347
when it advises Americans to "make.believe" (Sony),[10] "Think different" (Apple),[11] "Just do it"
(Nike),[12] or "Have it your way" (Burger King)[13]? Was the Government warning about a coming
disaster when it registered the mark "EndTime Ministries"[14]?

The PTO has made it clear that registration does not constitute approval of a mark. See In re Old Glory
Condom Corp., 26 USPQ 2d 1216, 1220, n. 3 (T.T.A.B.1993) ("[I]ssuance of a trademark registration
... is not a government imprimatur"). And it is unlikely that more than a tiny fraction of the public
has any idea what federal registration of a trademark means. See Application of National Distillers
& Chemical Corp., 49 C.C.P.A. (Pat.) 854, 863, 297 F.2d 941, 949 (1962) (Rich, J., concurring) ("The
purchasing public knows no more about trademark registrations than a man walking down the street
in a strange city knows about legal title to the land and buildings he passes" (emphasis deleted)).

None of our government speech cases even remotely supports the idea that registered trademarks are
government speech. In Johanns, we considered advertisements promoting the sale of beef products.
A federal statute called for the creation of a program of paid advertising " `to advance the image and
desirability of beef and beef products.' " 544 U.S., at 561, 125 S.Ct. 2055 (quoting 7 U.S.C.  2902(13)).
Congress and the Secretary of Agriculture provided guidelines for the content of the ads, Department
of Agriculture officials attended the meetings at which the content of specific ads was discussed, and
the Secretary could edit or reject any proposed ad. 544 U.S., at 561, 125 S.Ct. 2055. Noting that "[t]he
message set out in the beef promotions [was] from beginning to end the message established by the
Federal Government," we held that the ads were government speech. Id., at 560, 125 S.Ct. 2055. The
Government's involvement in the creation of these beef ads bears no resemblance to anything that
occurs when a trademark is registered.

Our decision in Summum is similarly far afield. A small city park contained 15 monuments. 555
U.S., at 464, 129 S.Ct. 1125. Eleven had been donated by private groups, and one of these displayed
the Ten Commandments. Id., at 464-465, 129 S.Ct. 1125. A religious group claimed that the city,
by accepting donated monuments, had created a limited public forum for private speech and was
therefore obligated to place in the park a monument expressing the group's religious beliefs.

Holding that the monuments in the park represented government speech, we cited many factors.
Governments have used monuments to speak to the public since ancient times; parks have
traditionally been selective in accepting and displaying donated monuments; parks would be overrun
if they were obligated to accept all monuments offered by private groups; "[p]ublic parks are often
closely identified in the public mind with the government unit that owns the land"; and "[t]he
monuments that are accepted ... are meant to convey and have the effect of conveying a government
message." Id., at 472, 129 S.Ct. 1125.

Trademarks share none of these characteristics. Trademarks have not traditionally been used to
convey a Government message. With the exception of the enforcement of 15 U.S.C.  1052(a), the
viewpoint expressed by a mark has not played a role in the decision whether to place it on the
principal register. And there is no evidence that the public associates the contents of trademarks with
the Federal Government.

This brings us to the case on which the Government relies most heavily, Walker, which likely marks
the outer bounds of the government-speech doctrine. Holding that the messages on Texas specialty
license plates are government speech, the Walker Court cited three factors distilled from Summum. 576
U.S., at ---- - ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2246-2247. First, license plates have long been used by the States

348 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
to convey state messages. Id., at ---- - ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2248-2249. Second, license plates "are
often closely identified in the public mind" with the State, since they are manufactured and owned by
the State, generally designed by the State, and serve as a form of "government ID." Id., at ----, 135
S.Ct., at 2249 (internal quotation marks omitted). Third, Texas "maintain[ed] direct control over the
messages conveyed on its specialty plates." Id., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2249. As explained above, none
of these factors are present in this case.

In sum, the federal registration of trademarks is vastly different from the beef ads in Johanns, the
monuments in Summum,and even the specialty license plates in Walker. Holding that the registration
of a trademark converts the mark into government speech would constitute a huge and dangerous
extension of the government-speech doctrine. For if the registration of trademarks constituted
government speech, other systems of government registration could easily be characterized in the
same way.

Perhaps the most worrisome implication of the Government's argument concerns the system of
copyright registration. If federal registration makes a trademark government speech and thus
eliminates all First Amendment protection, would the registration of the copyright for a book
produce a similar transformation? See 808 F.3d, at 1346 (explaining that if trademark registration
amounts to government speech, "then copyright registration" which "has identical accoutrements"
would "likewise amount to government speech").

The Government attempts to distinguish copyright on the ground that it is " `the engine of free
expression,' " Brief for Petitioner 47 (quoting Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186, 219, 123 S.Ct. 769,
154 L.Ed.2d 683 (2003)), but as this case illustrates, trademarks often have an expressive content.
Companies spend huge amounts to create and publicize trademarks that convey a message. It is
true that the necessary brevity of trademarks limits what they can say. But powerful messages can
sometimes be conveyed in just a few words.

Trademarks are private, not government, speech.

B

We next address the Government's argument that this case is governed by cases in which this
Court has upheld the constitutionality of government programs that subsidized speech expressing a
particular viewpoint. These cases implicate a notoriously tricky question of constitutional law. "[W]e
have held that the Government `may not deny a benefit to a person on a basis that infringes his
constitutionally protected ... freedom of speech even if he has no entitlement to that benefit.' " Agency
for Int'l Development v. Alliance for Open Society Int'l, Inc., 570 U.S. ----, ----, 133 S.Ct. 2321, 2328,
186 L.Ed.2d 398 (2013) (some internal quotation marks omitted). But at the same time, government is
not required to subsidize activities that it does not wish to promote. Ibid. Determining which of these
principles applies in a particular case "is not always self-evident," id., at ----, 133 S.Ct., at 2330, but
no difficult question is presented here.

Unlike the present case, the decisions on which the Government relies all involved cash subsidies or
their equivalent. InRust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173, 111 S.Ct. 1759, 114 L.Ed.2d 233 (1991), a federal law
provided funds to private parties for family planning services. In National Endowment for Arts v. Finley,
524 U.S. 569, 118 S.Ct. 2168, 141 L.Ed.2d 500 (1998), cash grants were awarded to artists. And federal
funding for public libraries was at issue in United States v. American Library Assn., Inc., 539 U.S. 194,
123 S.Ct. 2297, 156 L.Ed.2d 221 (2003). In other cases, we have regarded tax benefits as comparable

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 349
to cash subsidies. See Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash., 461 U.S. 540, 103 S.Ct. 1997, 76
L.Ed.2d 129 (1983); Cammarano v. United States, 358 U.S. 498, 79 S.Ct. 524, 3 L.Ed.2d 462 (1959).

The federal registration of a trademark is nothing like the programs at issue in these cases. The PTO
does not pay money to parties seeking registration of a mark. Quite the contrary is true: An applicant
for registration must pay the PTO a filing fee of $225-$600. 37 C.F.R.  2.6(a)(1). (Tam submitted
a fee of $275 as part of his application to register THE SLANTS. App. 18.) And to maintain federal
registration, the holder of a mark must pay a fee of $300-$500 every 10 years.  2.6(a)(5); see also 15
U.S.C.  1059(a). The Federal Circuit concluded that these fees have fully supported the registration
system for the past 27 years. 808 F.3d, at 1353.

The Government responds that registration provides valuable non-monetary benefits that "are
directly traceable to the resources devoted by the federal government to examining, publishing, and
issuing certificates of registration for those marks." Brief for Petitioner 27. But just about every
government service requires the expenditure of government funds. This is true of services that benefit
everyone, like police and fire protection, as well as services that are utilized by only some, e.g., the
adjudication of private lawsuits and the use of public parks and highways.

Trademark registration is not the only government registration scheme. For example, the Federal
Government registers copyrights and patents. State governments and their subdivisions register the
title to real property and security interests; they issue driver's licenses, motor vehicle registrations,
and hunting, fishing, and boating licenses or permits.

Cases like Rust and Finley are not instructive in analyzing the constitutionality of restrictions on
speech imposed in connection with such services.

C

Finally, the Government urges us to sustain the disparagement clause under a new doctrine that
would apply to "government-program" cases. For the most part, this argument simply merges our
government-speech cases and the previously discussed subsidy cases in an attempt to construct a
broader doctrine that can be applied to the registration of trademarks. The only new element in
this construct consists of two cases involving a public employer's collection of union dues from its
employees. But those cases occupy a special area of First Amendment case law, and they are far
removed from the registration of trademarks.

In Davenport v. Washington Ed. Assn., 551 U.S. 177, 181-182, 127 S.Ct. 2372, 168 L.Ed.2d 71 (2007), a
Washington law permitted a public employer automatically to deduct from the wages of employees
who chose not to join the union the portion of union dues used for activities related to collective
bargaining. But unless these employees affirmatively consented, the law did not allow the employer
to collect the portion of union dues that would be used in election activities. Id., at 180-182, 127
S.Ct. 2372. A public employee union argued that this law unconstitutionally restricted its speech
based on its content; that is, the law permitted the employer to assist union speech on matters
relating to collective bargaining but made it harder for the union to collect money to support its
election activities. Id., at 188, 127 S.Ct. 2372. Upholding this law, we characterized it as imposing
a "modest limitation" on an "extraordinary benefit," namely, taking money from the wages of non-
union members and turning it over to the union free of charge. Id., at 184, 127 S.Ct. 2372. Refusing to
confer an even greater benefit, we held, did not upset the marketplace of ideas and did not abridge the
union's free speech rights. Id., at 189-190, 127 S.Ct. 2372.

350 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Ysursa v. Pocatello Ed. Assn., 555 U.S. 353, 129 S.Ct. 1093, 172 L.Ed.2d 770 (2009), is similar. There,
we considered an Idaho law that allowed public employees to elect to have union dues deducted from
their wages but did not allow such a deduction for money remitted to the union's political action
committee. Id., at 355, 129 S.Ct. 1093. We reasoned that the "the government ... [was] not required to
assist others in funding the expression of particular ideas." Id., at 358, 129 S.Ct. 1093; see also id., at
355, 129 S.Ct. 1093 ("The First Amendment ... does not confer an affirmative right to use government
payroll mechanisms for the purpose of obtaining funds for expression").

Davenport and Ysursa are akin to our subsidy cases. Although the laws at issue in Davenport and Ysursa
did not provide cash subsidies to the unions, they conferred a very valuable benefit--the right to
negotiate a collective-bargaining agreement under which non-members would be obligated to pay an
agency fee that the public employer would collect and turn over to the union free of charge. As in the
cash subsidy cases, the laws conferred this benefit because it was thought that this arrangement served
important government interests. See Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Ed., 431 U.S. 209, 224-226, 97 S.Ct. 1782,
52 L.Ed.2d 261 (1977). But the challenged laws did not go further and provide convenient collection
mechanisms for money to be used in political activities. In essence, the Washington and Idaho
lawmakers chose to confer a substantial non-cash benefit for the purpose of furthering activities that
they particularly desired to promote but not to provide a similar benefit for the purpose of furthering
other activities. Thus, Davenport and Ysursa are no more relevant for present purposes than the subsidy
cases previously discussed.[15]

Potentially more analogous are cases in which a unit of government creates a limited public forum
for private speech. See, e.g., Good News Club v. Milford Central School, 533 U.S. 98, 106-107, 121
S.Ct. 2093, 150 L.Ed.2d 151 (2001); Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U.S. 819,
831, 115 S.Ct. 2510, 132 L.Ed.2d 700 (1995); Lamb's Chapel, 508 U.S., at 392-393, 113 S.Ct. 2141.
See also Legal Services Corporation v. Velazquez, 531 U.S. 533, 541-544, 121 S.Ct. 1043, 149 L.Ed.2d
63 (2001). When government creates such a forum, in either a literal or "metaphysical" sense, see
Rosenberger, 515 U.S., at 830, 115 S.Ct. 2510 some content- and speaker-based restrictions may be
allowed, see id., at 830-831, 115 S.Ct. 2510. However, even in such cases, what we have termed
"viewpoint discrimination" is forbidden. Id., at 831, 115 S.Ct. 2510.

Our cases use the term "viewpoint" discrimination in a broad sense, see ibid., and in that sense, the
disparagement clause discriminates on the bases of "viewpoint." To be sure, the clause evenhandedly
prohibits disparagement of all groups. It applies equally to marks that damn Democrats and
Republicans, capitalists and socialists, and those arrayed on both sides of every possible issue. It denies
registration to any mark that is offensive to a substantial percentage of the members of any group. But
in the sense relevant here, that is viewpoint discrimination: Giving offense is a viewpoint.

We have said time and again that "the public expression of ideas may not be prohibited merely because
the ideas are themselves offensive to some of their hearers." Street v. New York, 394 U.S. 576, 592,
89 S.Ct. 1354, 22 L.Ed.2d 572 (1969). See also Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397, 414, 109 S.Ct. 2533,
105 L.Ed.2d 342 (1989) ("If there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment, it is that
the government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea
itself offensive or disagreeable"); Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 55-56, 108 S.Ct. 876,
99 L.Ed.2d 41 (1988); Coates v. Cincinnati, 402 U.S. 611, 615, 91 S.Ct. 1686, 29 L.Ed.2d 214 (1971);
Bachellar v. Maryland, 397 U.S. 564, 567, 90 S.Ct. 1312, 25 L.Ed.2d 570 (1970); Tinker v. Des Moines
Independent Community School Dist., 393 U.S. 503, 509-514, 89 S.Ct. 733, 21 L.Ed.2d 731 (1969); Cox v.
Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536, 551, 85 S.Ct. 453, 13 L.Ed.2d 471 (1965); Edwards v. South Carolina, 372 U.S.

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 351
229, 237-238, 83 S.Ct. 680, 9 L.Ed.2d 697 (1963); Terminiello v. Chicago, 337 U.S. 1, 4-5, 69 S.Ct. 894,
93 L.Ed. 1131 (1949); Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 311, 60 S.Ct. 900, 84 L.Ed. 1213 (1940);
Schneider v. State (Town of Irvington), 308 U.S. 147, 161, 60 S.Ct. 146, 84 L.Ed. 155 (1939); De Jonge v.
Oregon, 299 U.S. 353, 365, 57 S.Ct. 255, 81 L.Ed. 278 (1937).

For this reason, the disparagement clause cannot be saved by analyzing it as a type of government
program in which some content- and speaker-based restrictions are permitted.[16]

IV

Having concluded that the disparagement clause cannot be sustained under our government-speech
or subsidy cases or under the Government's proposed "government-program" doctrine, we must
confront a dispute between the parties on the question whether trademarks are commercial speech
and are thus subject to the relaxed scrutiny outlined in Central Hudson Gas & Elec. Corp. v. Public Serv.
Comm'n of N. Y., 447 U.S. 557, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980). The Government and amici
supporting its position argue that all trademarks are commercial speech. They note that the central
purposes of trademarks are commercial and that federal law regulates trademarks to promote fair
and orderly interstate commerce. Tam and his amici, on the other hand, contend that many, if not all,
trademarks have an expressive component. In other words, these trademarks do not simply identify
the source of a product or service but go on to say something more, either about the product or service
or some broader issue. The trademark in this case illustrates this point. The name "The Slants" not
only identifies the band but expresses a view about social issues.

We need not resolve this debate between the parties because the disparagement clause cannot
withstand even Central Hudson review.[17] Under Central Hudson, a restriction of speech must serve
"a substantial interest," and it must be "narrowly drawn." Id., at 564-565, 100 S.Ct. 2343 (internal
quotation marks omitted). This means, among other things, that "[t]he regulatory technique may
extend only as far as the interest it serves." Id., at 565, 100 S.Ct. 2343. The disparagement clause fails
this requirement.

It is claimed that the disparagement clause serves two interests. The first is phrased in a variety of
ways in the briefs. Echoing language in one of the opinions below, the Government asserts an interest
in preventing " `underrepresented groups' " from being " `bombarded with demeaning messages in
commercial advertising.' " Brief for Petitioner 48 (quoting 808 F.3d, at 1364 (Dyk, J., concurring in
part and dissenting in part)). An amicus supporting the Government refers to "encouraging racial
tolerance and protecting the privacy and welfare of individuals." Brief for Native American
Organizations as Amici Curiae 21. But no matter how the point is phrased, its unmistakable thrust is
this: The Government has an interest in preventing speech expressing ideas that offend. And, as we
have explained, that idea strikes at the heart of the First Amendment. Speech that demeans on the
basis of race, ethnicity, gender, religion, age, disability, or any other similar ground is hateful; but the
proudest boast of our free speech jurisprudence is that we protect the freedom to express "the thought
that we hate." United States v. Schwimmer, 279 U.S. 644, 655, 49 S.Ct. 448, 73 L.Ed. 889 (1929) (Holmes,
J., dissenting).

The second interest asserted is protecting the orderly flow of commerce. See 808 F.3d, at 1379-1381
(Reyna, J., dissenting); Brief for Petitioner 49; Brief for Native American Organizations as Amicus
Curiae 18-21. Commerce, we are told, is disrupted by trademarks that "involv[e] disparagement
of race, gender, ethnicity, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, and similar demographic

352 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
classification." 808 F.3d, at 1380-1381 (opinion of Reyna, J.). Such trademarks are analogized to
discriminatory conduct, which has been recognized to have an adverse effect on commerce. See ibid.;
Brief for Petitioner 49; Brief for Native American Organizations as Amici Curiae 18-20.

A simple answer to this argument is that the disparagement clause is not "narrowly drawn" to
drive out trademarks that support invidious discrimination. The clause reaches any trademark that
disparages any person, group, or institution. It applies to trademarks like the following: "Down with
racists," "Down with sexists," "Down with homophobes." It is not an anti-discrimination clause; it is a
happy-talk clause. In this way, it goes much further than is necessary to serve the interest asserted.

The clause is far too broad in other ways as well. The clause protects every person living or dead as
well as every institution. Is it conceivable that commerce would be disrupted by a trademark saying:
"James Buchanan was a disastrous president" or "Slavery is an evil institution"?

There is also a deeper problem with the argument that commercial speech may be cleansed of any
expression likely to cause offense. The commercial market is well stocked with merchandise that
disparages prominent figures and groups, and the line between commercial and non-commercial
speech is not always clear, as this case illustrates. If affixing the commercial label permits the
suppression of any speech that may lead to political or social "volatility," free speech would be
endangered.

* * *

For these reasons, we hold that the disparagement clause violates the Free Speech Clause of the First
Amendment. The judgment of the Federal Circuit is affirmed.

It is so ordered.

Justice GORSUCH took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

Justice KENNEDY, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

[Concurrence omitted]

Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

[Concurrence omitted]
[1] In the opinion below, the Federal Circuit opined that although "Section 43(a) allows for a federal
suit to protect an unregistered trademark," "it is not at all clear" that respondent could bring suit under
 43(a) because "there is no authority extending  43(a) to marks denied under  2(a)'s disparagement
provision." In re Tam, 808 F.3d 1321, 1344-1345, n. 11 (en banc), as corrected (Feb. 11, 2016). When
drawing this conclusion, the Federal Circuit relied in part on our statement in Two Pesos that "the
general principles qualifying a mark for registration under  2 of the Lanham Act are for the most
part applicable in determining whether an unregistered mark is entitled to protection under  43(a)."
505 U.S., at 768, 112 S.Ct. 2753. We need not decide today whether respondent could bring suit under
 43(a) if his application for federal registration had been lawfully denied under the disparagement
clause

                                                                   21. PRIORITY, REGISTRATION AND INCONTESTABILITY 353
[2] The disparagement clause also prevents a trademark from being registered on the supplemental
register.  1091(a).
[3] By "composite," we assume the PTO means component.
[4] Tam advances a convoluted textual argument that goes as follows. The definition of a "person" in
15 U.S.C.  1127 does not include a "non-juristic person," i.e., a group that cannot sue or be sued in its
own right. Brief for Respondent 46-47. Such groups consist of multiple natural persons. Therefore,
the members of such groups are not "persons" under the disparagement clause. Id., at 46-48.

This argument leads to the absurd result that no person is a "person" within the meaning of the
disparagement clause. This is so because every person is a member of a "non-juristic" group, e.g.,
right-handers, left-handers, women, men, people born on odd-numbered days, people born on even-
numbered days.
[5] The PTO has acknowledged that the guidelines "for determining whether a mark is scandalous
or disparaging are somewhat vague and the determination of whether a mark is scandalous or
disparaging is necessarily a highly subjective one." In re In Over Our Heads, Inc., 16 USPQ 2d 1653,
1654 (T.T.A.B.1990) (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted). The PTO has similarly observed
that whether a mark is disparaging "is highly subjective and, thus, general rules are difficult to
postulate." Harjo v. Pro-Football Inc., 50 USPQ 2d 1705, 1737 (T.T.A.B.1999), rev'd, 284 F.Supp.2d 96
(D.D.C.2003), rev'd and remanded in part, 415 F.3d 44 (C.A.D.C.2005) (per curiam ).
[6] See, e.g., App. to Brief for Pro-Football, Inc., as Amicus Curiae.
[7] See, e.g., D. Nelson, The Posters That Won the War (1991).
[8] Ibid.
[9] Compare "Abolish Abortion," Registration No. 4,935,774 (Apr. 12, 2016), with "I Stand With
Planned Parenthood," Registration No. 5,073,573 (Nov. 1, 2016); compare "Capitalism Is Not Moral,
Not Fair, Not Freedom," Registration No. 4,696,419 (Mar. 3, 2015), with "Capitalism Ensuring
Innovation," Registration No. 3,966,092 (May 24, 2011); compare "Global Warming Is Good,"
Registration No. 4,776,235 (July 21, 2015), with "A Solution to Global Warming," Registration No.
3,875,271 (Nov. 10, 2010).
[10] "make.believe," Registration No. 4,342,903 (May 28, 2013).
[11] "Think Different," Registration No. 2,707,257 (Apr. 15, 2003).
[12] "Just Do It," Registration No. 1,875,307 (Jan. 25, 1995).
[13] "Have It Your Way," Registration No. 0,961,016 (June 12, 1973).
[14] "EndTime Ministries," Registration No. 4,746,225 (June 2, 2015).
[15] While these cases resemble subsidy cases insofar as the free speech rights of unions and their
members are concerned, arrangements like those in these cases also implicate the free speech rights
of non-union members. Our decision here has no bearing on that issue.
[16] We leave open the question whether this is the appropriate framework for analyzing free speech
challenges to provisions of the Lanham Act.
[17] As with the framework discussed in Part III-C of this opinion, we leave open the question
whether Central Hudson provides the appropriate test for deciding free speech challenges to provisions
of the Lanham Act. And nothing in our decision should be read to speak to the validity of state
unfair competition provisions or product libel laws that are not before us and differ from  1052(d)'s
disparagement clause.

354 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                                     22. PERMISSIBLE USES

   Learning Objectives: Unit 22

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain the "classic" fair use defense.
           Explain nominative use.
           Explain the policy issues at the intersection of the First Amendment and trademark rights.
           Explain different approaches to resolving these tensions and the consequences of those
              approaches.

"Classic" or "descriptive" fair use is a statutorily-established defense to trademark infringement. We
will explore this defense in the context of Zatarains v. Oak Grove Smokehouse (5th Cir. 1983).
In addition to descriptive fair use, other uses of trademarks are sometimes described as "fair" or
"permissible" uses, notwithstanding the outcome of a likelihood of confusion analysis. Nominative
use--the use of a mark to refer to the actual mark owner rather than the user, as in comparative
advertising--is one such form. We will discuss in class different approaches that courts have taken to
nominative use.
A more difficult question involves the intersection between First Amendment free speech principles
and trademark rights. We will examine this issue through the lens of two Circuits: the the 8th Circuit
decision of Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. Balducci Publications (8th Cir. 1994) and the 9th Circuit decision of
Mattel v. MCA Records (9th Cir. 2002).

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 355
MATTEL INC. V. MCA RECORDS, INC.

                                             Mattel Inc. v. MCA Records, Inc.

                                                 296 F.3d 894 (9th Cir. 2002)

KOZINSKI, Circuit Judge:

If this were a sci-fi melodrama, it might be called Speech-Zilla meets Trademark Kong.

I

Barbie was born in Germany in the 1950s as an adult collector's item. Over the years, Mattel
transformed her from a doll that resembled a "German street walker," as she originally appeared, into
a glamorous, long-legged blonde. Barbie has been labeled both the ideal American woman and a
bimbo. She has survived attacks both psychic (from feminists critical of her fictitious figure) and
physical (more than 500 professional makeovers). She remains a symbol of American girlhood, a
public figure who graces the aisles of toy stores throughout the country and beyond. With Barbie,
Mattel created not just a toy but a cultural icon.

With fame often comes unwanted attention. Aqua is a Danish band that has, as yet, only dreamed of
attaining Barbie-like status. In 1997, Aqua produced the song Barbie Girl on the album Aquarium.
In the song, one bandmember impersonates Barbie, singing in a high-pitched, doll-like voice; another
bandmember, calling himself Ken, entices Barbie to "go party." (The lyrics are in the Appendix.)
Barbie Girl singles sold well and, to Mattel's dismay, the song made it onto Top 40 music charts.

Mattel brought this lawsuit against the music companies who produced, marketed and sold Barbie
Girl: MCA Records, Inc., Universal Music International Ltd., Universal Music A/S, Universal Music
& Video Distribution, Inc. and MCA Music Scandinavia AB (collectively, "MCA"). MCA in turn
challenged the district court's jurisdiction under the Lanham Act and its personal jurisdiction over
the foreign defendants, Universal Music International Ltd., Universal Music A/S and MCA Music
Scandinavia AB (hereinafter "foreign defendants"); MCA also brought a defamation claim against
Mattel for statements Mattel made about MCA while this lawsuit was pending. The district court
concluded it had jurisdiction over the foreign defendants and under the Lanham Act, and granted
MCA's motion for summary judgment on Mattel's federal and state-law claims for trademark
infringement and dilution. The district court also granted Mattel's motion for summary judgment
on MCA's defamation claim.

Mattel appeals the district court's ruling that Barbie Girl is a parody of Barbie and a nominative fair
use; that MCA's use of the term Barbie is not likely to confuse consumers as to Mattel's affiliation
with Barbie Girl or dilute the Barbie mark; and that Mattel cannot assert an unfair competition claim
under the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property. MCA cross-appeals the grant
of summary judgment on its defamation claim as well as the district court's jurisdictional holdings.

356 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
II

A. All three foreign defendants are affiliated members of Universal Music Group and have an
active relationship with each other and with domestic members of the Group. Defendants entered
into cross-licensing agreements and developed a coordinated plan to distribute the Barbie Girl
song in the United States (including California), and sent promotional copies of the Barbie Girl
single and the Aquarium album to the United States (including California). This conduct was
expressly aimed at, and allegedly caused harm in, California, Mattel's principal place of business.

  See Panavision Int'l, L.P. v. Toeppen, 141 F.3d 1316, 1321 (9th Cir.1998). Mattel's trademark
claims would not have arisen "but for" the conduct foreign defendants purposefully directed toward
California, and jurisdiction over the foreign defendants, who are represented by the same counsel
and closely associated with the domestic defendants, is reasonable. See id. at 1321-22. The district
court did not err in asserting specific personal jurisdiction over the foreign defendants.

B. Sales of the Aquarium album worldwide had a sufficient effect on American foreign commerce,
and Mattel suffered monetary injury in the United States from those sales. See Ocean Garden, Inc.
v. Marktrade Co., 953 F.2d 500, 503 (9th Cir.1991). Moreover, Mattel's claim is more closely tied
to interests of American foreign commerce than it is to the commercial interests of other nations:
Mattel's principal place of business is in California, the foreign defendants are closely related to the
domestic defendants, and Mattel sought relief only for defendants' sales in the United States. See
Star-Kist Foods, Inc. v. P.J. Rhodes & Co., 769 F.2d 1393, 1395-96 (9th Cir.1985). The district court
properly exercised extraterritorial jurisdiction under the Lanham Act.

III

A. A trademark is a word, phrase or symbol that is used to identify a manufacturer or sponsor of a
good or the provider of a service. See New Kids on the Block v. News Am. Publ'g, Inc., 971 F.2d 302,
305 (9th Cir.1992). It's the owner's way of preventing others from duping consumers into buying
a product they mistakenly believe is sponsored by the trademark owner. A trademark "inform[s]
people that trademarked products come from the same source." Id. at 305 n. 2. Limited to this core
purpose-avoiding confusion in the marketplace-a trademark owner's property rights play well with
the First Amendment. "Whatever first amendment rights you may have in calling the brew you make
in your bathtub `Pepsi' are easily outweighed by the buyer's interest in not being fooled into buying
it." Trademarks Unplugged, 68 N.Y.U. L.Rev. 960, 973 (1993).

The problem arises when trademarks transcend their identifying purpose. Some trademarks enter
our public discourse and become an integral part of our vocabulary. How else do you say that
something's "the Rolls Royce of its class"? What else is a quick fix, but a Band-Aid? Does the average
consumer know to ask for aspirin as "acetyl salicylic acid"? See Bayer Co. v. United Drug Co., 272
F. 505, 510 (S.D.N.Y.1921). Trademarks often fill in gaps in our vocabulary and add a contemporary
flavor to our expressions. Once imbued with such expressive value, the trademark becomes a word
in our language and assumes a role outside the bounds of trademark law.

Our likelihood-of-confusion test, see AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341, 348-49 (9th
Cir.1979), generally strikes a comfortable balance between the trademark owner's property rights and
the public's expressive interests. But when a trademark owner asserts a right to control how we
express ourselves-when we'd find it difficult to describe the product any other way (as in the case
of aspirin), or when the mark (like Rolls Royce) has taken on an expressive meaning apart from its

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 357
source-identifying function-applying the traditional test fails to account for the full weight of the
public's interest in free expression.

The First Amendment may offer little protection for a competitor who labels its commercial good
with a confusingly similar mark, but "[t]rademark rights do not entitle the owner to quash an
unauthorized use of the mark by another who is communicating ideas or expressing points of view."

  L.L. Bean, Inc. v. Drake Publishers, Inc., 811 F.2d 26, 29 (1st Cir.1987). Were we to ignore the
expressive value that some marks assume, trademark rights would grow to encroach upon the zone
protected by the First Amendment. See Yankee Publ'g, Inc. v. News Am. Publ'g, Inc., 809 F.Supp. 267,
276 (S.D.N.Y.1992) ("[W]hen unauthorized use of another's mark is part of a communicative message
and not a source identifier, the First Amendment is implicated in opposition to the trademark right.").

  Simply put, the trademark owner does not have the right to control public discourse whenever the
public imbues his mark with a meaning beyond its source-identifying function. See Anti-Monopoly,
Inc. v. Gen. Mills Fun Group, 611 F.2d 296, 301 (9th Cir.1979) ("It is the source-denoting function
which trademark laws protect, and nothing more.").

B. There is no doubt that MCA uses Mattel's mark: Barbie is one half of Barbie Girl. But Barbie
Girl is the title of a song about Barbie and Ken, a reference that-at least today-can only be to Mattel's
famous couple. We expect a title to describe the underlying work, not to identify the producer, and
Barbie Girl does just that.

The Barbie Girl title presages a song about Barbie, or at least a girl like Barbie. The title conveys a
message to consumers about what they can expect to discover in the song itself; it's a quick glimpse of
Aqua's take on their own song. The lyrics confirm this: The female singer, who calls herself Barbie,
is "a Barbie girl, in [her] Barbie world." She tells her male counterpart (named Ken), "Life in plastic,
it's fantastic. You can brush my hair, undress me everywhere/Imagination, life is your creation."
And off they go to "party." The song pokes fun at Barbie and the values that Aqua contends she
represents. See Cliffs Notes, Inc. v. Bantam Doubleday Dell Publ'g Group, 886 F.2d 490, 495-96 (2d
Cir.1989). The female singer explains, "I'm a blond bimbo girl, in a fantasy world/Dress me up, make
it tight, I'm your dolly."

The song does not rely on the Barbie mark to poke fun at another subject but targets Barbie herself.
  See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 580, 114 S.Ct. 1164, 127 L.Ed.2d 500 (1994);

see also Dr. Seuss Ents., L.P. v. Penguin Books USA, Inc., 109 F.3d 1394, 1400 (9th Cir.1997). This
case is therefore distinguishable from Dr. Seuss, where we held that the book The Cat NOT in the
Hat! borrowed Dr. Seuss's trademarks and lyrics to get attention rather than to mock The Cat in the
Hat! The defendant's use of the Dr. Seuss trademarks and copyrighted works had "no critical bearing
on the substance or style of" The Cat in the Hat!, and therefore could not claim First Amendment
protection. Id. at 1401. Dr. Seuss recognized that, where an artistic work targets the original and
does not merely borrow another's property to get attention, First Amendment interests weigh more
heavily in the balance. See id. at 1400-02; see also Harley-Davidson, Inc. v. Grottanelli, 164 F.3d 806,
812-13 (2d Cir.1999) (a parodist whose expressive work aims its parodic commentary at a trademark
is given considerable leeway, but a claimed parodic use that makes no comment on the mark is not a
permitted trademark parody use).

The Second Circuit has held that "in general the [Lanham] Act should be construed to apply to artistic
works only where the public interest in avoiding consumer confusion outweighs the public interest in
free expression." Rogers v. Grimaldi, 875 F.2d 994, 999 (2d Cir.1989); see also Cliffs Notes, 886 F.2d

358 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
at 494 (quoting Rogers, 875 F.2d at 999). Rogers considered a challenge by the actress Ginger Rogers
to the film Ginger and Fred. The movie told the story of two Italian cabaret performers who made
a living by imitating Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire. Rogers argued that the film's title created the
false impression that she was associated with it.

At first glance, Rogers certainly had a point. Ginger was her name, and Fred was her dancing
partner. If a pair of dancing shoes had been labeled Ginger and Fred, a dancer might have suspected
that Rogers was associated with the shoes (or at least one of them), just as Michael Jordan has endorsed
Nike sneakers that claim to make you fly through the air. But Ginger and Fred was not a brand of
shoe; it was the title of a movie and, for the reasons explained by the Second Circuit, deserved to be
treated differently.

A title is designed to catch the eye and to promote the value of the underlying work. Consumers
expect a title to communicate a message about the book or movie, but they do not expect it to
identify the publisher or producer. See Application of Cooper, 45 C.C.P.A. 923, 254 F.2d 611,
615-16 (C.C.P.A.1958) (A "title  identifies a specific literary work,  and is not associated in the
public mind with the  manufacturer." (internal quotation marks omitted)). If we see a painting
titled "Campbell's Chicken Noodle Soup," we're unlikely to believe that Campbell's has branched into
the art business. Nor, upon hearing Janis Joplin croon "Oh Lord, won't you buy me a Mercedes-
Benz?," would we suspect that she and the carmaker had entered into a joint venture. A title tells us
something about the underlying work but seldom speaks to its origin:

Though consumers frequently look to the title of a work to determine what it is about, they do not
regard titles of artistic works in the same way as the names of ordinary commercial products. Since
consumers expect an ordinary product to be what the name says it is, we apply the Lanham Act with
some rigor to prohibit names that misdescribe such goods. But most consumers are well aware that
they cannot judge a book solely by its title any more than by its cover.

Rogers, 875 F.2d at 1000 (citations omitted).

Rogers concluded that literary titles do not violate the Lanham Act "unless the title has no artistic
relevance to the underlying work whatsoever, or, if it has some artistic relevance, unless the title
explicitly misleads as to the source or the content of the work." Id. at 999 (footnote omitted). We
agree with the Second Circuit's analysis and adopt the Rogers standard as our own.

Applying Rogers to our case, we conclude that MCA's use of Barbie is not an infringement of Mattel's
trademark. Under the first prong of Rogers, the use of Barbie in the song title clearly is relevant to
the underlying work, namely, the song itself. As noted, the song is about Barbie and the values Aqua
claims she represents. The song title does not explicitly mislead as to the source of the work; it does
not, explicitly or otherwise, suggest that it was produced by Mattel. The only indication that Mattel
might be associated with the song is the use of Barbie in the title; if this were enough to satisfy this
prong of the Rogers test, it would render Rogers a nullity. We therefore agree with the district court
that MCA was entitled to summary judgment on this ground. We need not consider whether the
district court was correct in holding that MCA was also entitled to summary judgment because its use
of Barbie was a nominative fair use.

IV

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 359
[The court rejects Mattel's argument based on the version of trademark dilution under the Lanham
Act that was in effect at the time.]

V

[The court rejects Mattel's argument based on the Paris Convention]

VI

After Mattel filed suit, Mattel and MCA employees traded barbs in the press. When an MCA
spokeswoman noted that each album included a disclaimer saying that Barbie Girl was a "social
commentary [that was] not created or approved by the makers of the doll," a Mattel representative
responded by saying, "That's unacceptable It's akin to a bank robber handing a note of apology to
a teller during a heist. [It n]either diminishes the severity of the crime, nor does it make it legal." He
later characterized the song as a "theft" of "another company's property."

MCA filed a counterclaim for defamation based on the Mattel representative's use of the words "bank
robber," "heist," "crime" and "theft." But all of these are variants of the invective most often hurled
at accused infringers, namely "piracy." No one hearing this accusation understands intellectual
property owners to be saying that infringers are nautical cutthroats with eyepatches and peg legs who
board galleons to plunder cargo. In context, all these terms are nonactionable "rhetorical hyperbole,"
Gilbrook v. City of Westminster, 177 F.3d 839, 863 (9th Cir.1999). The parties are advised to chill.

AFFIRMED.

APPENDIX

"Barbie Girl" by Aqua

-Hiya Barbie!

-Hi Ken!

You wanna go for a ride?

-Sure, Ken!

-Jump in!

-Ha ha ha ha!

(CHORUS:)

I'm a Barbie girl, in my Barbie world

Life in plastic, it's fantastic

You can brush my hair, undress me everywhere

Imagination, life is your creation

Come on Barbie, let's go party!

360 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
(CHORUS)
I'm a blonde bimbo girl, in a fantasy world
Dress me up, make it tight, I'm your dolly
You're my doll, rock and roll, feel the glamour in pink
Kiss me here, touch me there, hanky-panky
You can touch, you can play
If you say "I'm always yours," ooh ooh
(CHORUS)
(BRIDGE:)
Come on, Barbie, let's go party, ah ah ah yeah
Come on, Barbie, let's go party, ooh ooh, ooh ooh
Come on, Barbie, let's go party, ah ah ah yeah
Come on, Barbie, let's go party, ooh ooh, ooh ooh
Make me walk, make me talk, do whatever you please
I can act like a star, I can beg on my knees
Come jump in, be my friend, let us do it again
Hit the town, fool around, let's go party
You can touch, you can play
You can say "I'm always yours"
You can touch, you can play
You can say "I'm always yours"
(BRIDGE)
(CHORUS x2)(BRIDGE)
-Oh, I'm having so much fun!
-Well, Barbie, we're just getting started!
-Oh, I love you Ken!

                                                         22. PERMISSIBLE USES 361
JACK DANIEL'S V. VIP PRODUCTS

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read these cases, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is descriptive fair use?
           What are the policy issues underlying descriptive fair use?
           Why have descriptive fair use if there are already restrictions on descriptive matter serving as a
              trademark?
           Why does the First Amendment protect speech, even when it is not political speech?
           What tensions are raised by the intersection of First Amendment free speech principles and
              trademark rights?
           How are those tensions addressed in the 8th and 9th Circuits?

                                 Jack Daniel's Properties, Inc. v. VIP Products LLC

                                                                 2023
Justice KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.

This case is about dog toys and whiskey, two items seldom appearing in the same sentence.
Respondent VIP Products makes a squeaky, chewable dog toy designed to look like a bottle of Jack
Daniel's whiskey. Though not entirely. On the toy, for example, the words "Jack Daniel's" become
"Bad Spaniels." And the descriptive phrase "Old No. 7 Brand Tennessee Sour Mash Whiskey" turns
into "The Old No. 2 On Your Tennessee Carpet." The jokes did not impress petitioner Jack Daniel's
Properties. It owns trademarks in the distinctive Jack Daniel's bottle and in many of the words and
graphics on the label. And it believed Bad Spaniels had both infringed and diluted those trademarks.
Bad Spaniels had infringed the marks, the argument ran, by leading consumers to think that Jack
Daniel's had created, or was otherwise responsible for, the dog toy. And Bad Spaniels had diluted the
marks, the argument went on, by associating the famed whiskey with, well, dog excrement.

The Court of Appeals, in the decision we review, saw things differently. Though the federal trademark
statute makes infringement turn on the likelihood of consumer confusion, the Court of Appeals never
got to that issue. On the court's view, the First Amendment compels a stringent threshold test when an
infringement suit challenges a so-called expressive work-here (so said the court), the Bad Spaniels toy.
And that test knocked out Jack Daniel's claim, whatever the likelihood of confusion. Likewise, Jack's
dilution claim failed-though on that issue the problem was statutory. The trademark law provides
that the "noncommercial" use of a mark cannot count as dilution. 15 U. S. C. 1125(c)(3)(C). The Bad

362 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Spaniels marks, the court held, fell within that exemption because the toy communicated a message-a
kind of parody-about Jack Daniel's.

Today, we reject both conclusions. The infringement issue is the more substantial. In addressing it,
we do not decide whether the threshold inquiry applied in the Court of Appeals is ever warranted.
We hold only that it is not appropriate when the accused infringer has used a trademark to designate
the source of its own goods-in other words, has used a trademark as a trademark. That kind of use
falls within the heartland of trademark law, and does not receive special First Amendment protection.
The dilution issue is more simply addressed. The use of a mark does not count as noncommercial just
because it parodies, or otherwise comments on, another's products.

I

A

   Start at square 1, with what a trademark is and does. The Lanham Act, the core federal trademark
statute, defines a trademark as follows: "[A]ny word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination
thereof " that a person uses "to identify and distinguish his or her goods . . . from those manufactured
or sold by others and to indicate the source of the goods." 1127. The first part of that definition,
identifying the kind of things covered, is broad: It encompasses words (think "Google"), graphic
designs (Nike's swoosh), and so-called trade dress, the overall appearance of a product and its
packaging (a Hershey's Kiss, in its silver wrapper). See Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Samara Brothers, Inc., 529
U. S. 205, 209-210 (2000). The second part of the definition describes every trademark's "primary"
function: "to identify the origin or ownership of the article to which it is affixed." Hanover Star Milling
Co. v. Metcalf, 240 U. S. 403, 412 (1916). Trademarks can of course do other things: catch a consumer's
eye, appeal to his fancies, and convey every manner of message. But whatever else it may do, a
trademark is not a trademark unless it identifies a product's source (this is a Nike) and distinguishes
that source from others (not any other sneaker brand). See generally 1 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and
Unfair Competition 3:1 (5th ed. 2023). In other words, a mark tells the public who is responsible for
a product.

In serving that function, trademarks benefit consumers and producers alike. A source-identifying
mark enables customers to select "the goods and services that they wish to purchase, as well as
those they want to avoid." Matal v. Tam, 582 U. S. 218, 224 (2017). The mark "quickly and easily
assures a potential customer that this item-the item with this mark-is made by the same producer
as other similarly marked items that he or she liked (or disliked) in the past." Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson
Products Co., 514 U. S. 159, 164 (1995). And because that is so, the producer of a quality product may
derive significant value from its marks. They ensure that the producer itself-and not some "imitating
competitor"-will reap the financial rewards associated with the product's good reputation. Ibid.

To help protect marks, the Lanham Act sets up a voluntary registration system. Any mark owner may
apply to the Patent and Trademark Office to get its mark placed on a federal register. Consistent with
trademark law's basic purpose, the lead criterion for registration is that the mark "in fact serve as
a `trademark' to identify and distinguish goods." 3 McCarthy 19:10 (listing the principal register's
eligibility standards). If it does, and the statute's other criteria also are met, the registering trademark
owner receives certain benefits, useful in infringement litigation. See, e.g., Iancu v. Brunetti, 588 U. S.
___, ___ (2019) (slip op., at 2) (noting that "registration constitutes `prima facie evidence' of the mark's

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 363
validity"). But the owner of even an unregistered trademark can "use [the mark] in commerce and
enforce it against infringers." Ibid.

The Lanham Act also creates a federal cause of action for trademark infringement. In the typical
case, the owner of a mark sues someone using a mark that closely resembles its own. The court must
decide whether the defendant's use is "likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive."
㎣1114(1)(A), 1125(a)(1)(A). The "keystone" in that statutory standard is "likelihood of confusion." See
4 McCarthy 23:1. And the single type of confusion most commonly in trademark law's sights is
confusion "about the source of a product or service." Moseley v. V Secret Catalogue, Inc., 537 U. S. 418,
428 (2003); see 4 McCarthy 23:5. Confusion as to source is the bte noire of trademark law-the thing
that stands directly opposed to the law's twin goals of facilitating consumers' choice and protecting
producers' good will.

Finally, the Lanham Act creates a cause of action for the dilution of famous marks, which can succeed
without likelihood of confusion. See 1125(c); Moseley, 537 U. S., at 431. A famous mark is one "widely
recognized" by the public as "designati[ng the] source" of the mark owner's goods. 1125(c)(2)(A).
Dilution of such a mark can occur "by tarnishment" (as well as by "blurring," not relevant here).
1125(c)(1). As the statute describes the idea, an "association arising from the similarity between"
two marks-one of them famous-may "harm[ ] the reputation of the famous mark," and thus make
the other mark's owner liable. 1125(c)(2)(C). But there are "[e]xclusions"-categories of activity not
"actionable as dilution." 1125(c)(3). One exclusion protects any "noncommercial use of a mark."
1125(c)(3)(C). Another protects a "fair use" of a mark "in connection with . . . parodying, criticizing,
or commenting upon the famous mark owner or [its] goods." 1125(c)(3)(A)(ii). The fair-use exclusion,
though, comes with a caveat. A defendant cannot get its benefit-even if engaging in parody, criticism,
or commentary-when using the similar-looking mark "as a designation of source for the [defendant's]
own goods." 1125(c)(3)(A). In other words, the exclusion does not apply if the defendant uses the
similar mark as a mark.

B

   A bottle of Jack Daniel's-no, Jack Daniel's Old No. 7 Tennessee Sour Mash Whiskey-boasts a fair
number of trademarks. Recall what the bottle looks like (or better yet, retrieve a bottle from wherever
you keep liquor; it's probably there):

"Jack Daniel's" is a registered trademark, as is "Old No. 7." So too the arched Jack Daniel's logo. And
the stylized label with filigree (i.e., twirling white lines). Finally, what might be thought of as the
platform for all those marks-the whiskey's distinctive square bottle-is itself registered.

VIP is a dog toy company, making and selling a product line of chewable rubber toys that it calls "Silly
Squeakers." (Yes, they squeak when bitten.) Most of the toys in the line are designed to look like-and
to parody-popular beverage brands. There are, to take a sampling, Dos Perros (cf. Dos Equis), Smella
Arpaw (cf. Stella Artois), and Doggie Walker (cf. Johnnie Walker). VIP has registered trademarks in all
those names, as in the umbrella term "Silly Squeakers."

In 2014, VIP added the Bad Spaniels toy to the line. VIP did not apply to register the name, or any
other feature of, Bad Spaniels. But according to its complaint (further addressed below), VIP both
"own[s]" and "use[s]" the " `Bad Spaniels' trademark and trade dress." App. 3, 11; see infra, at 8, 17. And
Bad Spaniels' trade dress, like the dress of many Silly Squeakers toys, is designed to evoke a distinctive

364 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
beverage bottle-with-label. Even if you didn't already know, you'd probably not have much trouble
identifying which one.

Bad Spaniels is about the same size and shape as an ordinary bottle of Jack Daniel's. The faux bottle,
like the original, has a black label with stylized white text and a white filigreed border. The words "Bad
Spaniels" replace "Jack Daniel's" in a like font and arch. Above the arch is an image of a spaniel. (This
is a dog toy, after all.) Below the arch, "The Old No. 2 On Your Tennessee Carpet" replaces "Old No.
7 Tennessee Sour Mash Whiskey" in similar graphic form. The small print at the bottom substitutes
"43% poo by vol." and "100% smelly" for "40% alc. by vol. (80 proof )."

The toy is packaged for sale with a cardboard hangtag (so it can be hung on store shelves). Here is the
back of the hangtag:

At the bottom is a disclaimer: "This product is not affiliated with Jack Daniel Distillery." In the middle
are some warnings and guarantees. And at the top, most relevant here, are two product logos-on the
left for the Silly Squeakers line, and on the right for the Bad Spaniels toy.

Soon after Bad Spaniels hit the market, Jack Daniel's sent VIP a letter demanding that it stop selling
the product. VIP responded by bringing this suit, seeking a declaratory judgment that Bad Spaniels
neither infringed nor diluted Jack Daniel's trademarks. The complaint alleged, among other things,
that VIP is "the owner of all rights in its `Bad Spaniels' trademark and trade dress for its durable rubber
squeaky novelty dog toy." App. 3; see supra, at 6. Jack Daniel's counterclaimed under the Lanham Act
for both trademark infringement and trademark dilution by tarnishment.

VIP moved for summary judgment on both claims. First, VIP argued that Jack Daniel's infringement
claim failed under a threshold test derived from the First Amendment to protect "expressive
works"-like (VIP said) the Bad Spaniels toy. When those works are involved, VIP contended, the so-
called Rogers test requires dismissal of an infringement claim at the outset unless the complainant can
show one of two things: that the challenged use of a mark "has no artistic relevance to the underlying
work" or that it "explicitly misleads as to the source or the content of the work." Rogers v. Grimaldi,
875 F. 2d 994, 999 (CA2 1989) (Newman, J.). Because Jack Daniel's could make neither showing, VIP
argued, the likelihood-of-confusion issue became irrelevant. Second, VIP urged that Jack Daniel's
could not succeed on a dilution claim because Bad Spaniels was a "parody[ ]" of Jack Daniel's, and
therefore made "fair use" of its famous marks. 1125(c)(3)(A)(ii).

The District Court rejected both contentions for a common reason: because VIP had used the cribbed
Jack Daniel's features as trademarks-that is, to identify the source of its own products. In the court's
view, when "another's trademark is used for source identification"-as the court thought was true
here-the threshold Rogers test does not apply. App. to Pet. for Cert. 89a. Instead, the suit must address
the "standard" infringement question: whether the use is "likely to cause consumer confusion." Ibid.
And likewise, VIP could not invoke the dilution provision's fair-use exclusion. Parodies fall within
that exclusion, the court explained, only when the uses they make of famous marks do not serve as "a
designation of source for the [alleged diluter's] own goods." Id., at 104a (quoting 1125(c)(3)(A)).

The case thus proceeded to a bench trial, where Jack Daniel's prevailed. The District Court found,
based largely on survey evidence, that consumers were likely to be confused about the source of the
Bad Spaniels toy. See 291 F. Supp. 3d 891, 906-911 (D Ariz. 2018). And the court thought that the toy,
by creating "negative associations" with "canine excrement," would cause Jack Daniel's "reputational
harm." Id., at 903, 905.

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 365
But the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, ruling that the District Court had gotten
the pretrial legal issues wrong. In the Ninth Circuit's view, the infringement claim was subject to
the threshold Rogers test because Bad Spaniels is an "expressive work": Although just a dog toy, and
"surely not the equivalent of the Mona Lisa," it "communicates a humorous message." 953 F. 3d 1170,
1175 (2020) (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court of Appeals therefore returned the case to
the District Court to decide whether Jack Daniel's could satisfy either of Rogers` two prongs. And the
Ninth Circuit awarded judgment on the dilution claim to VIP. The court did not address the statutory
exclusion for parody and other fair use, as the District Court had. Instead, the Court of Appeals held
that the exclusion for "noncommercial use" shielded VIP from liability. 1125(c)(3)(C). The "use of a
mark may be `noncommercial,' " the court reasoned, "even if used to sell a product." 953 F. 3d, at 1176
(internal quotation marks omitted). And here it was so, the court found, because it "parodies" and
"comments humorously" on Jack Daniel's. Id., at 1175; see id., at 1176.

On remand, the District Court found that Jack Daniel's could not satisfy either prong of Rogers, and
so granted summary judgment to VIP on infringement. Jack Daniel's appealed, and the Ninth Circuit
summarily affirmed.

We then granted certiorari to consider the Court of Appeals' rulings on both infringement and
dilution. 598 U. S. ___ (2022).

II

   Our first and more substantial question concerns Jack Daniel's infringement claim: Should the
company have had to satisfy the Rogers threshold test before the case could proceed to the Lanham
Act's likelihood-of-confusion inquiry?1 The parties address that issue in the broadest possible way,
either attacking or defending Rogers in all its possible applications. Today, we choose a narrower path.
Without deciding whether Rogers has merit in other contexts, we hold that it does not when an alleged
infringer uses a trademark in the way the Lanham Act most cares about: as a designation of source for
the infringer's own goods. See 1127; supra, at 2-3. VIP used the marks derived from Jack Daniel's in
that way, so the infringement claim here rises or falls on likelihood of confusion. But that inquiry is
not blind to the expressive aspect of the Bad Spaniels toy that the Ninth Circuit highlighted. Beyond
source designation, VIP uses the marks at issue in an effort to "parody" or "make fun" of Jack Daniel's.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 58, 66. And that kind of message matters in assessing confusion because consumers
are not so likely to think that the maker of a mocked product is itself doing the mocking.

A

    To see why the Rogers test does not apply here, first consider the case from which it emerged.
The defendants there had produced and distributed a film by Federico Fellini titled "Ginger and
Fred" about two fictional Italian cabaret dancers (Pippo and Amelia) who imitated Ginger Rogers
and Fred Astaire. When the film was released in the United States, Ginger Rogers objected under
the Lanham Act to the use of her name. The Second Circuit rejected the claim. It reasoned that the
titles of "artistic works," like the works themselves, have an "expressive element" implicating "First
Amendment values." 875 F. 2d, at 998. And at the same time, such names posed only a "slight risk" of
confusing consumers about either "the source or the content of the work." Id., at 999-1000. So, the
court concluded, a threshold filter was appropriate. When a title "with at least some artistic relevance"
was not "explicitly misleading as to source or content," the claim could not go forward. Ibid. But the
court made clear that it was not announcing a general rule. In the typical case, the court thought, the

366 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
name of a product was more likely to indicate its source, and to be taken by consumers in just that
way. See id., at 1000.

Over the decades, the lower courts adopting Rogers have confined it to similar cases, in which a
trademark is used not to designate a work's source, but solely to perform some other expressive
function. So, for example, when the toymaker Mattel sued a band over the song "Barbie Girl"-with
lyrics including "Life in plastic, it's fantastic" and "I'm a blond bimbo girl, in a fantasy world"-the
Ninth Circuit applied Rogers. Mattel, Inc. v. MCA Records, Inc., 296 F. 3d 894, 901 (2002). That was
because, the court reasoned, the band's use of the Barbie name was "not [as] a source identifier": The
use did not "speak[ ] to [the song's] origin." Id., at 900, 902; see id., at 902 (a consumer would no more
think that the song was "produced by Mattel" than would, "upon hearing Janis Joplin croon `Oh Lord,
won't you buy me a Mercedes Benz?,' . . . suspect that she and the carmaker had entered into a joint
venture"). Similarly, the Eleventh Circuit dismissed a suit under Rogers when a sports artist depicted
the Crimson Tide's trademarked football uniforms solely to "memorialize" a notable event in "football
history." University of Ala. Bd. of Trustees v. New Life Art, Inc., 683 F. 3d 1266, 1279 (2012). And when
Louis Vuitton sued because a character in the film The Hangover: Part II described his luggage as a
"Louis Vuitton" (though pronouncing it Lewis), a district court dismissed the complaint under Rogers.
See Louis Vuitton Mallatier S. A. v. Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc., 868 F. Supp. 2d 172 (SDNY 2012). All
parties agreed that the film was not using the Louis Vuitton mark as its "own identifying trademark."
Id., at 180 (internal quotation marks omitted). When that is so, the court reasoned, "confusion will
usually be unlikely," and the "interest in free expression" counsels in favor of avoiding the standard
Lanham Act test. Ibid.

The same courts, though, routinely conduct likelihood-of-confusion analysis, without mentioning
Rogers, when trademarks are used as trademarks-i.e., to designate source. See, e.g., JL Beverage Co., LLC
v. Jim Beam Brands Co., 828 F. 3d 1098, 1102-1103, 1106 (CA9 2016); PlayNation Play Systems, Inc. v.
Velex Corp., 924 F. 3d 1159, 1164-1165 (CA11 2019). And the Second Circuit-Rogers` home court-has
made especially clear that Rogers does not apply in that context. For example, that court held that an
offshoot political group's use of the trademark "United We Stand America" got no Rogers help because
the use was as a source identifier. See United We Stand Am., Inc. v. United We Stand, Am. New York,
Inc., 128 F. 3d 86, 93 (1997). True, that slogan had expressive content. But the defendant group, the
court reasoned, was using it "as a mark," to suggest the "same source identification" as the original
"political movement." Ibid. And similarly, the Second Circuit (indeed, the judge who authored Rogers)
rejected a motorcycle mechanic's view that his modified version of Harley Davidson's bar-and-shield
logo was an expressive parody entitled to Rogers` protection. See Harley-Davidson, Inc. v. Grottanelli,
164 F. 3d 806, 812-813 (1999). The court acknowledged that the mechanic's adapted logo conveyed a
"somewhat humorous[ ]" message. Id., at 813. But his use of the logo was a quintessential "trademark
use": to brand his "repair and parts business"-through signage, a newsletter, and T-shirts-with images
"similar" to Harley-Davidson's. Id., at 809, 812-813.

The point is that whatever you make of Rogers-and again, we take no position on that issue-it has
always been a cabined doctrine. If we put this case to the side, the Rogers test has applied only to
cases involving "non-trademark uses"-or otherwise said, cases in which "the defendant has used the
mark" at issue in a "non-source-identifying way." S. Dogan & M. Lemley, Grounding Trademark Law
Through Trademark Use, 92 Iowa L. Rev. 1669, 1684 (2007); see id., at 1683-1684, and n. 58. The test
has not insulated from ordinary trademark scrutiny the use of trademarks as trademarks, "to identify
or brand [a defendant's] goods or services." Id., at 1683.

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 367
We offer as one last example of that limitation a case with a striking resemblance to this one. It
too involved dog products, though perfumes rather than toys. Yes, the defendant sold "a line of pet
perfumes whose names parody elegant brands sold for human consumption." Tommy Hilfiger Licensing,
Inc. v. Nature Labs, LLC, 221 F. Supp. 2d 410, 412 (SDNY 2002) (Mukasey, J.). The product at issue
was named Timmy Holedigger-which Tommy Hilfiger didn't much like. The defendant asked for
application of Rogers. The court declined it, relying on Harley-Davidson. See 221 F. Supp. 2d, at 414.
Rogers, the court explained, kicks in when a suit involves solely "nontrademark uses of [a] mark-that
is, where the trademark is not being used to indicate the source or origin" of a product, but only to
convey a different kind of message. 221 F. Supp. 2d, at 414. When, instead, the use is "at least in part"
for "source identification"-when the defendant may be "trading on the good will of the trademark
owner to market its own goods"-Rogers has no proper role. 221 F. Supp. 2d, at 414-415. And that is so,
the court continued, even if the defendant is also "making an expressive comment," including a parody
of a different product. Id., at 415. The defendant is still "mak[ing] trademark use of another's mark,"
and must meet an infringement claim on the usual battleground of "likelihood of confusion." Id., at
416.

That conclusion fits trademark law, and reflects its primary mission. From its definition of
"trademark" onward, the Lanham Act views marks as source identifiers-as things that function to
"indicate the source" of goods, and so to "distinguish" them from ones "manufactured or sold by
others." 1127; see supra, at 2-3. The cardinal sin under the law, as described earlier, is to undermine
that function. See supra, at 3. It is to confuse consumers about source-to make (some of ) them think
that one producer's products are another's. And that kind of confusion is most likely to arise when
someone uses another's trademark as a trademark-meaning, again, as a source identifier-rather than
for some other expressive function. To adapt one of the cases noted above: Suppose a filmmaker uses
a Louis Vuitton suitcase to convey something about a character (he is the kind of person who wants to
be seen with the product but doesn't know how to pronounce its name). See supra, at 12. Now think
about a different scenario: A luggage manufacturer uses an ever-so-slightly modified LV logo to make
inroads in the suitcase market. The greater likelihood of confusion inheres in the latter use, because
it is the one conveying information (or misinformation) about who is responsible for a product.
That kind of use "implicate[s] the core concerns of trademark law" and creates "the paradigmatic
infringement case." G. Dinwoodie & M. Janis, Confusion Over Use: Contextualism in Trademark Law,
92 Iowa L. Rev. 1597, 1636 (2007). So the Rogers test-which offers an escape from the likelihood-of-
confusion inquiry and a shortcut to dismissal-has no proper application.2

Nor does that result change because the use of a mark has other expressive content-i.e., because it
conveys some message on top of source. Here is where we most dramatically part ways with the
Ninth Circuit, which thought that because Bad Spaniels "communicates a humorous message," it is
automatically entitled to Rogers` protection. 953 F. 3d, at 1175 (internal quotation marks omitted).
On that view, Rogers might take over much of the world. For trademarks are often expressive, in any
number of ways. Consider how one liqueur brand's trade dress (beyond identifying source) tells a
story, with a bottle in the shape of a friar's habit connoting the product's olden monastic roots:

Or take a band name that "not only identifies the band but expresses a view about social issues."
Tam, 582 U. S., at 245 (opinion of Alito, J.) (discussing "The Slants"). Or note how a mark can both
function as a mark and have parodic content-as the court found in the Hilfiger/Holedigger litigation.
See supra, at 13-14. The examples could go on and on. As a leading treatise puts the point, the Ninth
Circuit's expansion of Rogers "potentially encompasses just about everything" because names, phrases,
symbols, designs, and their varied combinations often "contain some `expressive' message" unrelated

368 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
to source. 6 McCarthy 31:144.50. That message may well be relevant in assessing the likelihood of
confusion between two marks, as we address below. See infra, at 18-19. But few cases would even
get to the likelihood-of-confusion inquiry if all expressive content triggered the Rogers filter. In that
event, the Rogers exception would become the general rule, in conflict with courts' longstanding view
of trademark law.

The Ninth Circuit was mistaken to believe that the First Amendment demanded such a result. The
court thought that trademark law would otherwise "fail[ ] to account for the full weight of the public's
interest in free expression." 953 F. 3d, at 1174. But as the Mattel (i.e., Barbie) court noted, when a
challenged trademark use functions as "source-identifying," trademark rights "play well with the First
Amendment": "Whatever first amendment rights you may have in calling the brew you make in your
bathtub `Pepsi' " are "outweighed by the buyer's interest in not being fooled into buying it." 296
F. 3d, at 900. Or in less colorful terms: "[T]o the extent a trademark is confusing" as to a product's
source "the law can protect consumers and trademark owners." Tam, 582 U. S., at 252 (Kennedy,
J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); see Friedman v. Rogers, 440 U. S. 1, 15 (1979)
(rejecting a First Amendment challenge to a law restricting trade names because of the "substantial"
interest in "protecting the public from [their] deceptive and misleading use"). Or yet again, in an
especially clear rendering: "[T]he trademark law generally prevails over the First Amendment" when
"another's trademark (or a confusingly similar mark) is used without permission" as a means of
"source identification." Yankee Publishing Inc. v. News Am. Publishing Inc., 809 F. Supp. 267, 276 (SDNY
1992) (Leval, J.) (emphasis deleted). So for those uses, the First Amendment does not demand a
threshold inquiry like the Rogers test. When a mark is used as a mark (except, potentially, in rare
situations), the likelihood-of-confusion inquiry does enough work to account for the interest in free
expression.

B

   Here, the District Court correctly held that "VIP uses its Bad Spaniels trademark and trade dress
as source identifiers of its dog toy." See App. to Pet. for Cert. 105a. In fact, VIP conceded that point
below. In its complaint, VIP alleged that it both "own[s] and "use[s]" the " `Bad Spaniels' trademark and
trade dress for its durable rubber squeaky novelty dog toy." App. 3, 11. The company thus represented
in this very suit that the mark and dress, although not registered, are used to "identify and distinguish
[VIP's] goods" and to "indicate [their] source." 1127. (Registration of marks, you'll recall, is optional.
See supra, at 3-4.)

In this Court, VIP says the complaint was a mere "form allegation"-a matter of "rote." Tr. of Oral
Arg. 73. But even if we knew what that meant, VIP has said and done more in the same direction.
First, there is the way the product is marketed. On the hangtag, the Bad Spaniels logo sits opposite
the concededly trademarked Silly Squeakers logo, with both appearing to serve the same source-
identifying function. See supra, at 7. And second, there is VIP's practice as to other products in
the Silly Squeakers line. The company has consistently argued in court that it owns, though has
never registered, the trademark and trade dress in dog toys like "Jose Perro" (cf. Jose Cuervo) and
"HeinieSniff `n" (cf. Heineken).3 And it has chosen to register the names of still other dog toys,
including Dos Perros (#6176781), Smella Arpaw (#6262975), and Doggie Walker (#6213816). See
supra, at 6. Put all that together, and more than "form" or "rote" emerges: VIP's conduct is its own
admission that it is using the Bad Spaniels (ne Jack Daniel's) trademarks as trademarks, to identify
product source.

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 369
Because that is so, the only question in this suit going forward is whether the Bad Spaniels marks are
likely to cause confusion. There is no threshold test working to kick out all cases involving "expressive
works." But a trademark's expressive message-particularly a parodic one, as VIP asserts-may
properly figure in assessing the likelihood of confusion. See, e.g., Louis Vuitton Malletier S. A. v. Haute
Diggity Dog, LLC, 507 F. 3d 252, 265 (CA4 2007) (Parody "influences the way in which the [likelihood-
of-confusion] factors are applied"); Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 17-22 (same). A parody
must "conjure up" "enough of [an] original to make the object of its critical wit recognizable." Campbell
v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U. S. 569, 588 (1994) (internal quotation marks omitted). Yet to succeed,
the parody must also create contrasts, so that its message of ridicule or pointed humor comes clear.
And once that is done (if that is done), a parody is not often likely to create confusion. Self-deprecation
is one thing; self-mockery far less ordinary. So although VIP's effort to ridicule Jack Daniel's does not
justify use of the Rogers test, it may make a difference in the standard trademark analysis. Consistent
with our ordinary practice, we remand that issue to the courts below. See Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U. S.
709, 718, n. 7 (2005) (noting that this Court is generally "a court of review, not of first view").

III

   Our second question, more easily dispatched, concerns Jack Daniel's claim of dilution by
tarnishment (for the linkage of its whiskey to less savory substances). Recall that the Ninth Circuit
dismissed that claim based on one of the Lanham Act's "[e]xclusions" from dilution liability-for "[a]ny
noncommercial use of a mark." 1125(c)(3)(C); see supra, at 9. On the court's view, the "use of a
mark may be `noncommercial' even if used to sell a product." 953 F. 3d, at 1176 (internal quotation
marks omitted). And VIP's use is so, the court continued, because it "parodies" and "convey[s] a
humorous message" about Jack Daniel's. Id., at 1175-1176. We need not express a view on the first
step of that reasoning because we think the second step wrong. However wide the scope of the
"noncommercial use" exclusion, it cannot include, as the Ninth Circuit thought, every parody or
humorous commentary.

To begin to see why, consider the scope of another of the Lanham Act's exclusions-this one for "[a]ny
fair use." As described earlier, the "fair use" exclusion specifically covers uses "parodying, criticizing,
or commenting upon" a famous mark owner. 1125(c)(3)(A)(ii); see supra, at 5. But not in every
circumstance. Critically, the fair-use exclusion has its own exclusion: It does not apply when the use
is "as a designation of source for the person's own goods or services." 1125(c)(3)(A). In that event,
no parody, criticism, or commentary will rescue the alleged dilutor. It will be subject to liability
regardless.

The problem with the Ninth Circuit's approach is that it reverses that statutorily directed result, as
this case illustrates. Given the fair-use provision's carve-out, parody (and criticism and commentary,
humorous or otherwise) is exempt from liability only if not used to designate source. Whereas on the
Ninth Circuit's view, parody (and so forth) is exempt always-regardless whether it designates source.
The expansive view of the "noncommercial use" exclusion effectively nullifies Congress's express
limit on the fair-use exclusion for parody, etc. Just consider how the Ninth Circuit's construction
played out here. The District Court had rightly concluded that because VIP used the challenged marks
as source identifiers, it could not benefit from the fair-use exclusion for parody. See App. to Pet. for
Cert. 105a; supra, at 8-9, 17-18. The Ninth Circuit took no issue with that ruling. But it shielded
VIP's parodic uses anyway. In doing so, the court negated Congress's judgment about when-and when
not-parody (and criticism and commentary) is excluded from dilution liability.

370 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
IV

   Today's opinion is narrow. We do not decide whether the Rogers test is ever appropriate, or how far
the "noncommercial use" exclusion goes. On infringement, we hold only that Rogers does not apply
when the challenged use of a mark is as a mark. On dilution, we hold only that the noncommercial
exclusion does not shield parody or other commentary when its use of a mark is similarly source-
identifying. It is no coincidence that both our holdings turn on whether the use of a mark is serving
a source-designation function. The Lanham Act makes that fact crucial, in its effort to ensure that
consumers can tell where goods come from.

For the reasons stated, we vacate the judgment below and remand for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.

It is so ordered.

Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice ALITO joins, concurring.

I join the Court's opinion in full. I write separately to emphasize that in the context of parodies
and potentially other uses implicating First Amendment concerns, courts should treat the results of
surveys with particular caution. As petitioner did here, plaintiffs in trademark infringement cases
often commission surveys that purport to show that consumers are likely to be confused by an
allegedly infringing product. Like any other evidence, surveys should be understood as merely one
piece of the multifaceted likelihood of confusion analysis. See, e.g., Uncommon, LLC v. Spigen, Inc.,
926 F. 3d 409, 425 (CA7 2019). Courts should also carefully assess the methodology and
representativeness of surveys, as many lower courts already do. See, e.g., Water Pik, Inc. v. Med-Systems,
Inc., 726 F. 3d 1136, 1144-1150 (CA10 2013); Starbucks Corp. v. Wolfe's Borough Coffee, Inc., 588 F. 3d
97, 117 (CA2 2009).

When an alleged trademark infringement involves a parody, however, there is particular risk in giving
uncritical or undue weight to surveys. Survey answers may reflect a mistaken belief among some
survey respondents that all parodies require permission from the owner of the parodied mark. Some
of the answers to the survey in this case illustrate this potential. See App. 81-82, n. 25 (" `I'm sure
the dog toy company that made this toy had to get [ Jack Daniel's] permission and legal rights to
essentially copy the[ir] product in dog toy form' "); ibid. (" `The bottle is mimicked after the Jack Daniel
BBQ sauce. So they would hold the patent therefore you would have to ask permission to use the
image' "); see also Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. Balducci Publications, 28 F. 3d 769, 772-773, 775 (CA8 1994)
(describing a similar situation). Plaintiffs can point to this misunderstanding of the legal framework
as evidence of consumer confusion. Cleverly designed surveys could also prompt such confusion
by making consumers think about complex legal questions around permission that would not have
arisen organically out in the world.

Allowing such survey results to drive the infringement analysis would risk silencing a great many
parodies, even ones that by other metrics are unlikely to result in the confusion about sourcing that
is the core concern of the Lanham Act. See ante, at 4, 10, 14. Well-heeled brands with the resources to
commission surveys would be handed an effective veto over mockery. After all, "[n]o one likes to be
the butt of a joke, not even a trademark." 6 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition 31:153

                                                                                                                    22. PERMISSIBLE USES 371
(5th ed. 2023). This would upset the Lanham Act's careful balancing of "the needs of merchants
for identification as the provider of goods with the needs of society for free communication and
discussion." P. Leval, Trademark: Champion of Free Speech, 27 Colum. J. L. & Arts 187, 210 (2004).
Courts should thus ensure surveys do not completely displace other likelihood-of-confusion factors,
which may more accurately track the experiences of actual consumers in the marketplace. Courts
should also be attentive to ways in which surveys may artificially prompt such confusion about the
law or fail to sufficiently control for it.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice BARRETT join, concurring. I am
pleased to join the Court's opinion. I write separately only to underscore that lower courts should
handle Rogers v. Grimaldi, 875 F. 2d 994 (CA2 1989), with care. Today, the Court rightly concludes
that, even taken on its own terms, Rogers does not apply to cases like the one before us. But in doing
so, we necessarily leave much about Rogers unaddressed. For example, it is not entirely clear where
the Rogers test comes from-is it commanded by the First Amendment, or is it merely gloss on the
Lanham Act, perhaps inspired by constitutional-avoidance doctrine? Id., at 998. For another thing, it
is not obvious that Rogers is correct in all its particulars-certainly, the Solicitor General raises serious
questions about the decision. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 23-28. All this remains for
resolution another day, ante, at 13, and lower courts should be attuned to that fact.

372 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                                  23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY

   Learning Objectives: Unit 23

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain the concept of a right of publicity.
           Explain the policy issues involved in right of publicity claims and how they differ from those
              involved with trademarks.
           Explain the injunctive relief and its requirements.
           Explain the types of monetary remedies available to a successful rights holder and their
              requirements.

Rights of publicity share many characteristics with trademark rights, as they involve something that
identifies a person--whether it is the image of the person, their voice, or a especially distinguishing
characteristic that can be used to reference the person. Sometimes, rights of publicity can be relatively
straightforward, such as the question of whether a famous professional athlete endorse a particular
brand of athletic gear. Othertimes, as this case illustrates, rights of publicity can raise more
challenging and complex issues.

                                                                                                              23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY 373
ZACCHINI V. SCRIPPS-HOWARD BROADCASTING CO. (1977)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co., ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the right of publicity?
           What are the policy issues involved in a right of publicity?
           How might you address tensions between the First Amendment and rights of publicity in the
              context of the following? Assume that the subject has not given any permission to the user:
                       A video game in which players can play teams with their favorite college football players;
                       A movie about an Iraq war veteran's experiences in Iraq;
                       A supermarket advertisement in Sports Illustrated congratulating a famous basketball
                         player on his induction into the basketball hall of fame;
                       A Twitter message from a cinnamon roll chain eulogizing a famous actor and referencing
                         her famous hairstyle.

                                    Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co.
                                                       433 U.S. 562 (1977)

    1. JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.
Petitioner, Hugo Zacchini, is an entertainer. He performs a "human cannonball" act in which he is
shot from a cannon into a net some 200 feet away. Each performance occupies some 15 seconds.
In August and September 1972, petitioner was engaged to perform his act on a regular basis at the
Geauga County Fair in Burton, Ohio. He performed in a fenced area, surrounded by grandstands, at
the fair-grounds. Members of the public attending the fair were not charged a separate admission fee
to observe his act.
On August 30, a freelance reporter for Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co., the operator of a
television broadcasting station and respondent in this case, attended the fair. He carried a small movie
camera. Petitioner noticed the reporter and asked him not to film the performance. The reporter did
not do so on that day; but on the instructions of the producer of respondent's daily newscast, he
returned the following day and videotaped the entire act. This film clip, approximately 15 seconds in
length, was shown on the 11 o'clock news program that night, together with favorable commentary.[1]
Petitioner then brought this action for damages, alleging that he is "engaged in the entertainment
business," that the act he performs is one "invented by his father and . . . performed only by his family

374 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
for the last fifty years," that respondent "showed and commercialized the film of his act without his
consent," and that such conduct was an "unlawful appropriation of plaintiff's professional property."
App. 4-5. Respondent answered and moved for summary judgment, which was granted by the trial
court.

The Court of Appeals of Ohio reversed. The majority held that petitioner's complaint stated a cause
of action for conversion and for infringement of a common-law copyright, and one judge concurred
in the judgment on the ground that the complaint stated a cause of action for appropriation of
petitioner's "right of publicity" in the film of his act. All three judges agreed that the First Amendment
did not privilege the press to show the entire performance on a news program without compensating
petitioner for any financial injury he could prove at trial.

Like the concurring judge in the Court of Appeals, the Supreme Court of Ohio rested petitioner's
cause of action under state law on his "right to publicity value of his performance." 47 Ohio St. 2d
224, 351 N. E. 2d 454, 455 (1976). The opinion syllabus, to which we are to look for the rule of law
used to decide the case, declared first that one may not use for his own benefit the name or likeness
of another, whether or not the use or benefit is a commercial one, and second that respondent would
be liable for the appropriation, over petitioner's objection and in the absence of license or privilege, of
petitioner's right to the publicity value of his performance. Ibid. The court nevertheless gave judgment
for respondent because, in the words of the syllabus:

"A TV station has a privilege to report in its newscasts matters of legitimate public interest which
would otherwise be protected by an individual's right of publicity, unless the actual intent of the TV
station was to appropriate the benefit of the publicity for some non-privileged private use, or unless
the actual intent was to injure the individual." Ibid.

We granted certiorari, 429 U. S. 1037 (1977), to consider an issue unresolved by this Court: whether
the First and Fourteenth Amendments immunized respondent from damages for its alleged
infringement of petitioner's state-law "right of publicity." Pet. for Cert. 2. Insofar as the Ohio Supreme
Court held that the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution required
judgment for respondent, we reverse the judgment of that court.

I

If the judgment below rested on an independent and adequate state ground, the writ of certiorari
should be dismissed as improvidently granted, Wilson v. Loew's Inc., 355 U. S. 597 (1958), for "[o]ur
only power over state judgments is to correct them to the extent that they incorrectly adjudge federal
rights. And our power is to correct wrong judgments, not to revise opinions. We are not permitted
to render an advisory opinion, and if the same judgment would be rendered by the state court after
we corrected its views of federal laws, our review could amount to nothing more than an advisory
opinion." Herb v. Pitcairn, 324 U. S. 117, 125-126 (1945). We are confident, however, that the judgment
below did not rest on an adequate and independent state ground and that we have jurisdiction to
decide the federal issue presented in this case.

There is no doubt that petitioner's complaint was grounded in state law and that the right of publicity
which petitioner was held to possess was a right arising under Ohio law. It is also clear that
respondent's claim of constitutional privilege was sustained. The source of this privilege was not
identified in the syllabus. It is clear enough from the opinion of the Ohio Supreme Court, which
we are permitted to consult for understanding of the syllabus, Perkins v. Benguet Consolidated

                                                                                                              23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY 375
Mining Co., 342 U. S. 437, 441-443 (1952), that in adjudicating the crucial question of whether
respondent had a privilege to film and televise petitioner's performance, the court placed principal
reliance on Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U. S. 374 (1967), a case involving First Amendment limitations
on state tort actions. It construed the principle of that case, along with that of New York
Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254 (1964), to be that "the press has a privilege to report matters of
legitimate public interest even though such reports might intrude on matters otherwise private," and
concluded, therefore, that the press is also "privileged when an individual seeks to publicly exploit his
talents while keeping the benefits private." 47 Ohio St. 2d, at 234, 351 N. E. 2d, at 461. The privilege
thus exists in cases "where appropriation of a right of publicity is claimed." The court's opinion also
referred to Draft 21 of the relevant portion of Restatement (Second) of Torts (1975), which was
understood to make room for reasonable press appropriations by limiting the reach of the right of
privacy rather than by creating a privileged invasion. The court preferred the notion of privilege over
the Restatement's formulation, however, reasoning that "since the gravamen of the issue in this case
is not whether the degree of intrusion is reasonable, but whether First Amendment principles require
that the right of privacy give way to the public right to be informed of matters of public interest and
concern, the concept of privilege seems the more useful and appropriate one." 47 Ohio St. 2d, at 234
n. 5, 351 N. E. 2d, at 461 n. 5. (Emphasis added.)

Had the Ohio court rested its decision on both state and federal grounds, either of which would
have been dispositive, we would have had no jurisdiction. Fox Film Corp.v. Muller, 296 U. S. 207
(1935); Enterprise Irrigation Dist. v. Farmers Mutual CanalCo., 243 U. S. 157, 164 (1917). But the opinion,
like the syllabus, did not mention the Ohio Constitution, citing instead this Court's First Amendment
cases as controlling. It appears to us that the decision rested solely on federal grounds. That the Ohio
court might have, but did not, invoke state law does not foreclose jurisdiction here. Steele v.Louisville &
Nashville R. Co., 323 U. S. 192, 197 n. 1 (1944); Indiana ex rel. Anderson v. Brand, 303 U. S. 95, 98 (1938).

Even if the judgment in favor of respondent must nevertheless be understood as ultimately resting
on Ohio law, it appears that at the very least the Ohio court felt compelled by what it understood
to be federal constitutional considerations to construe and apply its own law in the manner it did.
In this event, we have jurisdiction and should decide the federal issue; for if the state court erred in
its understanding of our cases and of the First and Fourteenth Amendments, we should so declare,
leaving the state court free to decide the privilege issue solely as a matter of Ohio law. Perkins v.
Benguet Consolidated Mining Co., supra. If the Supreme Court of Ohio "held as it did because it felt
under compulsion of federal law as enunciated by this Court so to hold, it should be relieved of that
compulsion. It should be freed to decide . . . these suits according to its own local law." Missouri ex rel.
Southern R. Co. v. Mayfield, 340 U. S. 1, 5 (1950).

II

The Ohio Supreme Court held that respondent is constitutionally privileged to include in its
newscasts matters of public interest that would otherwise be protected by the right of publicity,
absent an intent to injure or to appropriate for some nonprivileged purpose. If under this standard
respondent had merely reported that petitioner was performing at the fair and described or
commented on his act, with or without showing his picture on television, we would have a very
different case. But petitioner is not contending that his appearance at the fair and his performance
could not be reported by the press as newsworthy items. His complaint is that respondent filmed his
entire act and displayed that film on television for the public to see and enjoy. This, he claimed, was
an appropriation of his professional property. The Ohio Supreme Court agreed that petitioner had

376 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
"a right of publicity" that gave him "personal control over commercial display and exploitation of his
personality and the exercise of his talents."4 This right of "exclusive control over the publicity given
to his performances" was said to be such a "valuable part of the benefit which may be attained by his
talents and efforts" that it was entitled to legal protection. It was also observed, or at least expressly
assumed, that petitioner had not abandoned his rights by performing under the circumstances present
at the Geauga County Fair Grounds.

The Ohio Supreme Court nevertheless held that the challenged invasion was privileged, saying that
the press "must be accorded broad latitude in its choice of how much it presents of each story or
incident, and of the emphasis to be given to such presentation. No fixed standard which would bar
the press from reporting or depicting either an entire occurrence or an entire discrete part of a public
performance can be formulated which would not unduly restrict the `breathing room' in reporting
which freedom of the press requires." 47 Ohio St. 2d, at 235, 351 N. E. 2d, at 461. Under this view,
respondent was thus constitutionally free to film and display petitioner's entire act.

The Ohio Supreme Court relied heavily on Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U. S. 374 (1967), but that case does
not mandate a media privilege to televise a performer's entire act without his consent. Involved
in Time, Inc. v. Hill was a claim under the New York "Right of Privacy" statute6 that Life Magazine,
in the course of reviewing a new play, had connected the play with a long-past incident involving
petitioner and his family and had falsely described their experience and conduct at that time. The
complaint sought damages for humiliation and suffering flowing from these non-defamatory
falsehoods that allegedly invaded Hill's privacy. The Court held, however, that the opening of a new
play linked to an actual incident was a matter of public interest and that Hill could not recover without
showing that the Life report was knowingly false or was published with reckless disregard for the
truth--the same rigorous standard that had been applied in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S.
254 (1964).

Time, Inc. v. Hill, which was hotly contested and decided by a divided Court, involved an entirely
different tort from the "right of publicity" recognized by the Ohio Supreme Court. As the opinion
reveals in Time, Inc. v. Hill, the Court was steeped in the literature of privacy law and was aware of
the developing distinctions and nuances in this branch of the law. The Court, for example, cited W.
Prosser, Law of Torts 831-832 (3d ed. 1964), and the same author's well-known article, Privacy, 48
Calif. L. Rev. 383 (1960), both of which divided privacy into four distinct branches.7 The Court was
aware that it was adjudicating a "false light" privacy case involving a matter of public interest, not a
case involving "intrusion," 385 U. S., at 384-385, n. 9, "appropriation" of a name or likeness for the
purposes of trade, id., at 381, or "private details" about a non-newsworthy person or event, id., at 383
n. 7. It is also abundantly clear that Time, Inc. v. Hill did not involve a performer, a person with a name
having commercial value, or any claim to a "right of publicity." This discrete kind of "appropriation"
case was plainly identified in the literature cited by the Court and had been adjudicated in the
reported cases.9

The differences between these two torts are important. First, the State's interests in providing a cause
of action in each instance are different. "The interest protected" in permitting recovery for placing
the plaintiff in a false light "is clearly that of reputation, with the same overtones of mental distress as
in defamation." Prosser, supra, 48 Calif. L. Rev., at 400. By contrast, the State's interest in permitting
a "right of publicity" is in protecting the proprietary interest of the individual in his act in part to
encourage such entertainment. As we later note, the State's interest is closely analogous to the goals of
patent and copyright law, focusing on the right of the individual to reap the reward of his endeavors

                                                                                                              23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY 377
and having little to do with protecting feelings or reputation. Second, the two torts differ in the degree
to which they intrude on dissemination of information to the public. In "false light" cases the only way
to protect the interests involved is to attempt to minimize publication of the damaging matter, while
in "right of publicity" cases the only question is who gets to do the publishing. An entertainer such
as petitioner usually has no objection to the widespread publication of his act as long as he gets the
commercial benefit of such publication. Indeed, in the present case petitioner did not seek to enjoin
the broadcast of his act; he simply sought compensation for the broadcast in the form of damages.

Nor does it appear that our later cases, such as Rosenbloom v. Metromedia, Inc., 403 U. S. 29
(1971); Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323 (1974); and Time, Inc. v. Firestone, 424 U. S. 448
(1976), require or furnish substantial support for the Ohio court's privilege ruling. These cases,
like New York Times, emphasize the protection extended to the press by the First Amendment in
defamation cases, particularly when suit is brought by a public official or a public figure. None of
them involve an alleged appropriation by the press of a right of publicity existing under state law.

Moreover, Time, Inc. v. Hill, New York Times, Metromedia, Gertz, and Firestone all involved the reporting
of events; in none of them was there an attempt to broadcast or publish an entire act for which
the performer ordinarily gets paid. It is evident, and there is no claim here to the contrary, that
petitioner's state-law right of publicity would not serve to prevent respondent from reporting the
newsworthy facts about petitioner's act. Wherever the line in particular situations is to be drawn
between media reports that are protected and those that are not, we are quite sure that the First
and Fourteenth Amendments do not immunize the media when they broadcast a performer's entire
act without his consent. The Constitution no more prevents a State from requiring respondent to
compensate petitioner for broadcasting his act on television than it would privilege respondent to
film and broadcast a copyrighted dramatic work without liability to the copyright owner, Copyrights
Act, 17 U. S. C. App.  101 et seq. (1976 ed.); cf. Kalem Co. v. Harper Bros., 222 U. S. 55 (1911); Manners
v. Morosco, 252 U. S. 317 (1920), or to film and broadcast a prize fight, Ettore v. Philco
Television Broadcasting Corp., 229 F. 2d 481 (CA3), cert. denied, 351 U. S. 926 (1956); or a baseball
game, Pittsburgh Athletic Co. v. KQV Broadcasting Co., 24 F. Supp. 490 (WD Pa. 1938), where the
promoters or the participants had other plans for publicizing the event. There are ample reasons for
reaching this conclusion.

The broadcast of a film of petitioner's entire act poses a substantial threat to the economic value of
that performance. As the Ohio court recognized, this act is the product of petitioner's own talents
and energy, the end result of much time, effort, and expense. Much of its economic value lies in the
"right of exclusive control over the publicity given to his performance"; if the public can see the act
free on television, it will be less willing to pay to see it at the fair. The effect of a public broadcast of
the performance is similar to preventing petitioner from charging an admission fee. "The rationale
for [protecting the right of publicity] is the straightforward one of preventing unjust enrichment by
the theft of good will. No social purpose is served by having the defendant get free some aspect of
the plaintiff that would have market value and for which he would normally pay." Kalven, Privacy in
Tort Law--Were Warren and Brandeis Wrong?, 31 Law & Contemp. Prob. 326, 331 (1966). Moreover,
the broadcast of petitioner's entire performance, unlike the unauthorized use of another's name
for purposes of trade or the incidental use of a name or picture by the press, goes to the heart of
petitioner's ability to earn a living as an entertainer. Thus, in this case, Ohio has recognized what may
be the strongest case for a "right of publicity"--involving, not the appropriation of an entertainer's
reputation to enhance the attractiveness of a commercial product, but the appropriation of the very
activity by which the entertainer acquired his reputation in the first place.

378 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Of course, Ohio's decision to protect petitioner's right of publicity here rests on more than a desire
to compensate the performer for the time and effort invested in his act; the protection provides an
economic incentive for him to make the investment required to produce a performance of interest
to the public. This same consideration underlies the patent and copyright laws long enforced by this
Court. As the Court stated in Mazer v. Stein, 347 U. S. 201, 219 (1954):

"The economic philosophy behind the clause empowering Congress to grant patents and copyrights
is the conviction that encouragement of individual effort by personal gain is the best way to advance
public welfare through the talents of authors and inventors in `Science and useful Arts.' Sacrificial days
devoted to such creative activities deserve rewards commensurate with the services rendered." These
laws perhaps regard the "reward to the owner [as] a secondary consideration," United
States v. Paramount Pictures, 334 U. S. 131, 158 (1948), but they were "intended definitely to grant
valuable, enforceable rights" in order to afford greater encouragement to the production of works of
benefit to the public. Washingtonian Publishing Co. v. Pearson, 306 U. S. 30, 36 (1939). The Constitution
does not prevent Ohio from making a similar choice here in deciding to protect the entertainer's
incentive in order to encourage the production of this type of work. Cf. Goldstein v. California, 412 U.
S. 546 (1973); Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U. S. 470 (1974).

There is no doubt that entertainment, as well as news, enjoys First Amendment protection. It is also
true that entertainment itself can be important news. Time, Inc. v. Hill. But it is important to note that
neither the public nor respondent will be deprived of the benefit of petitioner's performance as long
as his commercial stake in his act is appropriately recognized. Petitioner does not seek to enjoin the
broadcast of his performance; he simply wants to be paid for it. Nor do we think that a state-law
damages remedy against respondent would represent a species of liability without fault contrary to
the letter or spirit of Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323 (1974). Respondent knew that petitioner
objected to televising his act but nevertheless displayed the entire film.

We conclude that although the State of Ohio may as a matter of its own law privilege the press in the
circumstances of this case, the First and Fourteenth Amendments do not require it to do so.

Reversed.

    1. JUSTICE POWELL, with whom MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN and MR. JUSTICE MARSHALL
         join, dissenting.

Disclaiming any attempt to do more than decide the narrow case before us, the Court reverses
the decision of the Supreme Court of Ohio based on repeated incantation of a single formula: "a
performer's entire act." The holding today is summed up in one sentence:

"Wherever the line in particular situations is to be drawn between media reports that are protected
and those that are not, we are quite sure that the First and Fourteenth Amendments do not immunize
the media when they broadcast a performer's entire act without his consent." Ante, at 574-575.

I doubt that this formula provides a standard clear enough even for resolution of this case.1 In any
event, I am not persuaded that the Court's opinion is appropriately sensitive to the First Amendment
values at stake, and I therefore dissent.

Although the Court would draw no distinction, ante, at 575, I do not view respondent's action as
comparable to unauthorized commercial broadcasts of sporting events, theatrical performances, and

                                                                                                              23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY 379
the like where the broadcaster keeps the profits. There is no suggestion here that respondent made
any such use of the film. Instead, it simply reported on what petitioner concedes to be a newsworthy
event, in a way hardly surprising for a television station--by means of film coverage. The report was
part of an ordinary daily news program, consuming a total of 15 seconds. It is a routine example of
the press' fulfilling the informing function so vital to our system.

The Court's holding that the station's ordinary news report may give rise to substantial liability2 has
disturbing implications, for the decision could lead to a degree of media self-censorship.
Cf. Smith v. California, 361 U. S. 147, 150-154 (1959). Hereafter, whenever a television news editor
is unsure whether certain film footage received from a camera crew might be held to portray an
"entire act,"3 he may decline coverage--even of clearly newsworthy events--or confine the broadcast
to watered-down verbal reporting, perhaps with an occasional still picture. The public is then the
loser. This is hardly the kind of news reportage that the First Amendment is meant to foster. See
generally Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S. 241, 257-258 (1974); Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U.
S. 374, 389 (1967); New York Times Co. v. Sullivan,376 U. S. 254, 270-272, 279 (1964).

In my view the First Amendment commands a different analytical starting point from the one selected
by the Court. Rather than begin with a quantitative analysis of the performer's behavior--is this or
is this not his entire act?--we should direct initial attention to the actions of the news media: what
use did the station make of the film footage? When a film is used, as here, for a routine portion of a
regular news program, I would hold that the First Amendment protects the station from a "right of
publicity" or "appropriation" suit, absent a strong showing by the plaintiff that the news broadcast was
a subterfuge or cover for private or commercial exploitation.

I emphasize that this is a "reappropriation" suit, rather than one of the other varieties of "right of
privacy" tort suits identified by Dean Prosser in his classic article. Prosser, Privacy, 48 Calif. L. Rev.
383 (1960). In those other causes of action the competing interests are considerably different. The
plaintiff generally seeks to avoid any sort of public exposure, and the existence of constitutional
privilege is therefore less likely to turn on whether the publication occurred in a news broadcast or
in some other fashion. In a suit like the one before us, however, the plaintiff does not complain about
the fact of exposure to the public, but rather about its timing or manner. He welcomes some publicity,
but seeks to retain control over means and manner as a way to maximize for himself the monetary
benefits that flow from such publication. But having made the matter public--having chosen, in
essence, to make it newsworthy--he cannot, consistent with the First Amendment, complain of
routine news reportage. Cf. Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 339-348, 351-352
(1974) (clarifying the different liability standards appropriate in defamation suits, depending on
whether or not the plaintiff is a public figure).

Since the film clip here was undeniably treated as news and since there is no claim that the use was
subterfuge, respondent's actions were constitutionally privileged.

I would affirm.

[1] The script of the commentary accompanying the film clip read as follows:

"This . . . now . . . is the story of a true spectator sport . . . the sport of human cannonballing . . . in fact, the

380 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
great Zacchini is about the only human cannonball around, these days . . . just happens that, where he is,
is the Great Geauga County Fair, in Burton . . . and believe me, although it's not a long act, it's a thriller
. . . and you really need to see it in person . . . to appreciate it. . . ." (Emphasis in original.) App. 12.
4 The court relied on Housh v. Peth, 165 Ohio St. 35, 133 N. E. 2d 340, 341 (1956), the syllabus of which
held:

"An actionable invasion of the right of privacy is the unwarranted appropriation or exploitation of
one's personality, the publicizing of one's private affairs with which the public has no legitimate
concern, or the wrongful intrusion into one's private activities in such a manner as to outrage or cause
mental suffering, shame or humiliation to a person of ordinary sensibilities."

The court also indicated that the applicable principles of Ohio law were those set out in Restatement
(Second)  652C of Torts (Tent. Draft No. 13, 1967), and the comments thereto, portions of which
were stated in the footnotes of the opinion. Also, referring to the right as the "right of publicity," the
court quoted approvingly from Haelan Laboratories, Inc. v. Topps Chewing Gum, Inc., 202 F. 2d 866, 868
(CA2 1953).

6 Section 51 of the New York Civil Rights Law (McKinney 1976) provides an action for injunction
and damages for invasion of the "right of privacy" granted by  50:

"A person, firm or corporation that uses for advertising purposes, or for the purposes of trade, the
name, portrait or picture of any living person without having first obtained the written consent of
such person, or if a minor of his or her parent or guardian, is guilty of a misdemeanor."
7 "The law of privacy comprises four distinct kinds of invasion of four different interests of the
plaintiff, which are tied together by the common name, but otherwise have almost nothing in
common except that each represents an interference with the right of the plaintiff . . . `to be let alone.'"
Prosser, Privacy, 48 Calif. L. Rev., at 389. Thus, according to Prosser, some courts had recognized a
cause of action for "intrusion" upon the plaintiff's seclusion or solitude; public disclosure of "private
facts" about the plaintiff's personal life; publicity that places the plaintiff in a "false light" in the public
eye; and "appropriation" of the plaintiff's name or likeness for commercial purposes. One may be
liable for "appropriation" if he "pirate[s] the plaintiff's identity for some advantage of his own." Id., at
403.
9 E. g., Ettore v. Philco Television Broadcasting Corp., 229 F. 2d 481 (CA3), cert. denied, 351 U. S. 926
(1956); Sharkey v. National Broadcasting Co., 93 F. Supp. 986 (SDNY 1950); Pittsburgh Athletic Co. v. KQV
Broadcasting Co., 24 F. Supp. 490 (WD Pa. 1938); Twentieth Century Sporting Club, Inc. v. Transradio Press
Service, 165 Misc. 71, 300 N. Y. S. 159 (1937); Hogan v. A. S. Barnes & Co., 114 U. S. P. Q. 314 (Pa. Ct. C.
P. 1957); Myers v. U. S. Camera Publishing Corp., 9 Misc. 2d 765, 167 N. Y. S. 2d 771 (1957). The cases
prior to 1961 are helpfully reviewed in Gordon, Right of Property in Name, Likeness, Personality and
History, 55 Nw. U. L. Rev. 553 (1960).

Ettore v. Philco Television Broadcasting Corp., supra, involved a challenge to television exhibition of a film
made of a prize fight that had occurred some time ago. Judge Biggs, writing for the Court of Appeals,
said:

"There are, speaking very generally, two polar types of cases. One arises when some accidental
occurrence rends the veil of obscurity surrounding an average person and makes him, arguably,
newsworthy. The other type involves the appropriation of the performance or production of a

                                                                                                              23. RIGHTS OF PUBLICITY 381
professional performer or entrepreneur. Between the two extremes are many gradations, most
involving strictly commercial exploitation of some aspect of an individual's personality, such as his
name or picture." 229 F. 2d, at 486.
". . . The fact is that, if a performer performs for hire, a curtailment, without consideration, of his right
to control his performance is a wrong to him. Such a wrong vitally affects his livelihood, precisely as a
trade libel, for example, affects the earnings of a corporation. If the artistry of the performance be used
as a criterion, every judge perforce must turn himself into a literary, theatrical or sports critic." Id., at
490.
1 Although the record is not explicit, it is unlikely that the "act" commenced abruptly with the
explosion that launched petitioner on his way, ending with the landing in the net a few seconds
later. One may assume that the actual firing was preceded by some fanfare, possibly stretching over
several minutes, to heighten the audience's anticipation: introduction of the performer, description
of the uniqueness and danger, last minute checking of the apparatus, and entry into the cannon, all
accompanied by suitably ominous commentary from the master of ceremonies. If this is found to be
the case on remand, then respondent could not be said to have appropriated the "entire act" in its
15-second newsclip--and the Court's opinion then would afford no guidance for resolution of the
case. Moreover, in future cases involving different performances, similar difficulties in determining
just what constitutes the "entire act" are inevitable.
2 At some points the Court seems to acknowledge that the reason for recognizing a cause of action
asserting a "right of publicity" is to prevent unjust enrichment. See, e. g., ante, at 576. But the
remainder of the opinion inconsistently accepts a measure of damages based not on the defendant's
enhanced profits but on harm to the plaintiff regardless of any gain to the defendant. See, e. g.,
ante, at 575 n. 12. Indeed, in this case there is no suggestion that respondent television station gained
financially by showing petitioner's flight (although it no doubt received its normal advertising revenue
for the news program--revenue it would have received no matter which news items appeared).
Nevertheless, in the unlikely event that petitioner can prove that his income was somehow reduced as
a result of the broadcast, respondent will apparently have to compensate him for the difference.
3 Such doubts are especially likely to arise when the editor receives film footage of an event at a
local fair, a circus, a sports competition of limited duration (e. g., the winning effort in a ski-jump
competition), or a dramatic production made up of short skits, to offer only a few examples.

382 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                       24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET

   Learning Objectives: Unit 24

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the legal authority and components of trade secret law.
           Recall the elements of a trade secret.
           Explain the concept of a trade secret and reasonable precautions with reference to the Defend
              Trade Secret Act and caselaw.
           Analyze whether something is a trade secret.

International News Service v. Associate Press involved legal rights in intangibles that were largely defined
in the context of that specific litigation-so much so that the Court coined a term, quasi-property. But
most rights in creative intangibles are much more formally defined. This allows people to have a clear
understanding of what is encompassed by the intellectual property right.

We'll begin our study of these rights with something that is not so far off from the legal theory in INS
v. AP: misappropriation of trade secrets. These laws govern information--in particular, economically
valuable information that its creator would prefer to keep secret.

Secrecy, by itself, is a relatively easy concept: if you don't tell anyone about information that only you
possess, it's difficult for other people to know it. The problem is that information that is not shared
with anyone else is of relatively little value, and it is extremely difficult to build a business of more
than one person without sharing economically valuable information.

Employing contracts--specifically, non-disclosure agreements--is one way to limit disclosure. But as
you learned in contract law, contracts aren't perfect mechanisms: they necessarily are unable to deal
with every possible situation, they rely on the prognosticating ability of the parties at the time the
contract was created as opposed to their knowledge at the time of alleged breach, they can be both
over- and under-restrictive of the parties' activities, and they require that the parties actually have
entered into a contract with relevant provisions.

Trade secret law largely fills these gaps. It begins by defining the concept of trade secrets,
differentiating between information that is protectable and that which is not. It then provides a tort-
based cause of action for the owner of trade secrets as against a person who misappropriates those
secrets.

Trade secret law has historically been governed by state law, modeled after the Uniform Trade Secrets

                                                                                         24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 383
Act (UTSA) (most states) or the relevant provisions of the Restatement (Second) of Torts. The UTSA
is available at on the Uniform Law Commission's website, https://www.uniformlaws.org/ (search for
"Uniform Trade Secrets Act"). In 2016, however, Congress enacted the Defend Trade Secrets Act.
The DTSA provides a federal cause of action for trade secret misappropriation. It largely mirrors the
UTSA and general principles of trade secret law, so while neither case involves the DTSA, the basic
component of the law are the same.
The Federal Defend Trade Secrets Act was signed into law by President Obama in 2016. It is codified
at 18 U.S.C.  1836, et seq. The specific portions that we'll refer to are excerpted below.

   18 U.S.C 1836(b)(1) - Private Civil Actions (2016)

   An owner of a trade secret that is misappropriated may bring a civil action under this subsection if the
   trade secret is related to a product or service used in, or intended for use in, interstate or foreign
   commerce.

   18 U.S.C 1839 - Definitions (2016)

   ...
   (3) the term "trade secret" means all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic,
   or engineering information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs,
   prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or
   intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized physically, electronically, graphically,
   photographically, or in writing if:

            a. the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and
            b. the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally
            known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another person who can
            obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information
   (4) the term "owner", with respect to a trade secret, means the person or entity in whom or in which
   rightful legal or equitable title to, or license in, the trade secret is reposed;
   (5) the term misappropriation means--
            A. acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows or has reason to know that the
            trade secret was acquired by improper means; or
            B. disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent by a person
            who--

                     (i) used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret;

384 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                  (ii) at the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know that the knowledge of the
                  trade secret was--

                           (I) derived from or through a person who had used improper means to acquire the
                           trade secret;
                           (II) acquired under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain the secretary of the
                           trade secret or limit the use of the trade secret; or
                           (III) derived from or through a person who owed a duty to the person seeking relief to
                           maintain the secrecy of the trade secret or limit the use of the trade secret; or
                  (iii) before a material change of the position of the person, knew or had reason to know that--
                           (I) the trade secret was a trade secret; and
                           (II) knowledge of the trade secret had been acquired by accident or mistake;
(6) the term "improper means"--
         A. includes theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach or inducement of a breach of a duty to maintain
         secrecy, or espionage through electronic or other means; and
         B. does not include reverse engineering, independent derivation, or nay other lawful means of
         acquisition...

                                                                                     24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 385
LEARNING CURVE TOYS V. PLAYWOOD TOYS (7TH CIR. 2003)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read Learning Curve v. PlayWood, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is a trade secret?
           What is the legal analysis for determining whether something is a trade secret?
           What underlying policies at play in this opinion? How do they differ from the policies involved in
              copyright disputes?
           Based on this opinion and the DTSA, would the list of contacts on a sales representative's LinkedIn
              account be a trade secret? The password for the LinkedIn account?
           What is the requirement of "reasonable measures"?

                                        Learning Curve Toys v. PlayWood Toys
                                                 342 F.3d 714 (7th Cir. 2003)

RIPPLE, Circuit Judge.
PlayWood Toys, Inc. ("PlayWood") obtained a jury verdict against Learning Curve Toys, Inc. and
its representatives, Roy Wilson, Harry Abraham and John Lee (collectively, "Learning Curve"), for
misappropriation of a trade secret in a realistic looking and sounding toy railroad track under the
Illinois Trade Secrets Act, 765 ILCS 1065/1 et seq. The jury awarded PlayWood a royalty of "8% for
a license that would have been negotiated [absent the misappropriation] to last for the lifetime of
the product." R.194. Although there was substantial evidence of misappropriation before the jury, the
district court did not enter judgment on the jury's verdict. Instead, it granted judgment as a matter of
law in favor of Learning Curve, holding that PlayWood did not have a protectable trade secret in the
toy railroad track. PlayWood appealed. For the reasons set forth in the following opinion, we reverse
the judgment of the district court and reinstate the jury's verdict. We further remand the case to the
district court for a jury trial on exemplary damages and for consideration of PlayWood's request for
attorneys' fees.
I
BACKGROUND
A. Facts
In 1992, Robert Clausi and his brother-in-law, Scott Moore, began creating prototypes of wooden

386 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
toys under the name PlayWood Toys, Inc., a Canadian corporation. Clausi was the sole toy designer
and Moore was the sole officer and director of PlayWood. Neither Clausi nor Moore had prior
experience in the toy industry, but Clausi had "always been a bit of a doodler and designer," Trial Tr.
at 58, and the two men desired to "create high-quality hardwood maple toys for the independent toy
market," id. at 241. As a newly formed corporation, PlayWood did not own a facility in which it could
produce toys. Instead, it worked in conjunction with Mario Borsato, who owned a wood-working
facility. Subject to a written confidentiality agreement with PlayWood, Borsato manufactured
prototypes for PlayWood based on Clausi's design specifications.

PlayWood's first attempt to market publicly its toys was at the Toronto Toy Fair on January 31, 1992.
PlayWood received favorable reviews from many of the toy retailers in attendance; PlayWood also
learned that the best way to get recognition for its toys was to attend the New York Toy Fair ("Toy
Fair") the following month. Based on this information, Clausi and Moore secured a position at the Toy
Fair in order to display PlayWood's prototypes. It was during this Toy Fair that Clausi and Moore first
encountered Learning Curve representatives Roy Wilson, Harry Abraham and John Lee.

On the morning of February 12, 1993, the first day of the Toy Fair, Roy Wilson stopped at PlayWood's
booth and engaged Clausi and Moore in conversation. Wilson identified himself as Learning Curve's
toy designer and explained that his company had a license from the Britt Allcroft Company to
develop Thomas the Tank Engine & FriendsTM (hereinafter "Thomas") trains and accessories. Wilson
commented that he was impressed with the look and quality of PlayWood's prototypes and raised the
possibility of working together under a custom manufacturing contract to produce Learning Curve's
line of Thomas products. Clausi and Moore responded that such an arrangement would be of great
interest to PlayWood. Later that same day, Harry Abraham, Learning Curve's vice president, and
John Lee, Learning Curve's president, also stopped by PlayWood's booth. They too commented on
the quality of PlayWood's prototypes and indicated that PlayWood might be a good candidate for a
manufacturing contract with Learning Curve.

Clausi and Moore continued to have discussions with Learning Curve's representatives over the
remaining days of the Toy Fair, which ended on February 14. During these discussions, Lee indicated
that he would like two of his people, Abraham and Wilson, to visit PlayWood in Toronto the day after
the Toy Fair ended in order to determine whether the two parties could work out a manufacturing
arrangement for some or all of Learning Curve's wooden toys. Clausi, feeling a little overwhelmed
by the suggestion, requested that their visit be postponed a few days so that he could better acquaint
himself with Learning Curve's products. The parties ultimately agreed that Abraham and Wilson
would visit PlayWood at Borsato's facility on February 18, 1993, four days after the conclusion of the
Toy Fair. Clausi spent the next several days after the Toy Fair researching Learning Curve's products
and considering how PlayWood could produce Learning Curve's trains and track.

On February 18, 1993, Abraham and Wilson visited PlayWood in Toronto as planned. The meeting
began with a tour of Borsato's woodworking facility, where the prototypes on display at the Toy
Fair had been made. After the tour, the parties went to the conference room at Borsato's facility.
At this point, according to Clausi and Moore, the parties agreed to make their ensuing discussion
confidential. Clausi testified:

        After we sat down in the board room, Harry [Abraham of Learning Curve] immediately said:
        "Look, we're going to disclose confidential information to you guys, and we're going to
        disclose some designs that Roy [Wilson of Learning Curve] has that are pretty confidential. If

                                                                                         24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 387
        Brio were to get their hands on them, then we wouldn't like that. And we're going to do it
        under the basis of a confidential understanding."

        And I said: "I also have some things, some ideas on how to produce the track and produce the
        trains now that I've had a chance to look at them for the last couple of days, and I think they're
        confidential as well. So if we're both okay with that, we should continue." So we did.

Trial Tr. at 76-77. Moore testified to the existence of a similar conversation:

        It was at this point that Harry Abraham told us that they were going to disclose some
        confidential documents, drawings, pricing, margins, and asked us if we would keep that
        information confidential.

        * * * * * *

        I believe it was Robert [Clausi] who said that, you know, absolutely, we would keep it
        confidential. In fact, we had some ideas that we felt would be confidential we would be
        disclosing to them, and would they keep it, you know, confidential? Would they reciprocate?
        And Harry [Abraham] said: "Absolutely." And then we proceeded to go along with the meeting.

Trial Tr. at 247-48.

Immediately after the parties agreed to keep their discussion confidential, Wilson, at Abraham's
direction, showed Clausi and Moore drawings of various Thomas characters and provided
information on the projected volume of each of the products. Clausi testified that he considered
the documents disclosed by Learning Curve during the meeting confidential because they included
information on products not yet released to the public, as well as Learning Curve's projected volumes,
costs and profit margins for various products. After viewing Wilson's various drawings, the parties
discussed PlayWood's ideas on how to manufacture Learning Curve's trains. Clausi suggested that
they might use a CNC machine, which he defined as a computer numerically controlled drill that
carves in three dimensions, to create Learning Curve's trains out of a single piece of wood (as opposed
to piecing together separate pieces of wood).

The parties' discussion eventually moved away from train production and focused on track design.
Wilson showed Clausi and Moore drawings of Learning Curve's track and provided samples of their
current product. At this point, Abraham confided to Clausi and Moore that track had posed "a bit of a
problem for Learning Curve." Trial Tr. at 85. Abraham explained that sales were terrific for Learning
Curve's Thomas trains, but that sales were abysmal for its track. Abraham attributed the lack of sales
to the fact that Learning Curve's track was virtually identical to that of its competitor, Brio, which had
the lion's share of the track market. Because there was "no differentiation" between the two brands of
track, Learning Curve's track was not even displayed in many of the toy stores that carried Learning
Curve's products. Id. Learning Curve had worked unsuccessfully for several months attempting to
differentiate its track from that of Brio.

After detailing the problems with Learning Curve's existing track, Abraham inquired of Clausi
whether "there was a way to differentiate" its track from Brio's track. Trial Tr. at 86. Clausi
immediately responded that he "had had a chance to look at the track and get a feel for it [over] the
last few days" and that his "thoughts were that if the track were more realistic and more functional,
that kids would enjoy playing with it more and it would give the retailer a reason to carry the product,

388 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
especially if it looked different than the Brio track." Id. at 87. Clausi further explained that, if the
track "made noise and [ ] looked like real train tracks, that the stores wouldn't have any problem, and
the Thomas the Tank line, product line would have [ ] its own different track" and could "effectively
compete with Brio." Id. Abraham and Wilson indicated that they were "intrigued" by Clausi's idea and
asked him what he meant by "making noise." Id.

Clausi decided to show Abraham and Wilson exactly what he meant. Clausi took a piece of Learning
Curve's existing track from the table, drew some lines across the track (about every three-quarters
of an inch), and stated: "We can go ahead and machine grooves right across the upper section ...,
which would look like railway tracks, and down below machine little indentations as well so that it
would look more like or sound more like real track. You would roll along and bumpity-bumpity as
you go along." Trial Tr. at 255. Clausi then called Borsato into the conference room and asked him to
cut grooves into the wood "about a quarter of an inch deep from the top surface." Id. at 88. Borsato
left the room, complied with Clausi's request, and returned with the cut track three or four minutes
later. Clausi ran a train back and forth over the cut piece of track. The track looked more realistic
than before, but it did not make noise because the grooves were not deep enough. Accordingly, Clausi
instructed Borsato to cut the grooves "just a little bit deeper so that they go through the rails." Id.
Borsato complied with Clausi's request once again and returned a few minutes later with the cut piece
of track. Clausi proceeded to run a train back and forth over the track. This time the track made a
"clickety-clack" sound, but the train did not run smoothly over the track because the grooves were cut
"a little bit too deep." Id. at 258. Based on the sound produced by the track, Clausi told Abraham and
Moore that if PlayWood procured a contract with Learning Curve to produce the track, they could
call it "Clickety-Clack Track." Id. at 89.

Both Abraham and Wilson indicated that Clausi's concept of cutting grooves into the track to produce
a clacking sound was a novel concept. Thereafter, Wilson and Clausi began to discuss how they could
improve the idea to make the train run more smoothly on the track, but Abraham interrupted them
and stated: "No, focus. You guys have to get the contract for the basic product first, and then we can
talk about new products, because . . . it takes [our licensor] a long time to approve new products and
new designs." Trial Tr. at 89.

The meeting ended shortly thereafter without further discussion about Clausi's concept for the
noise-producing track. Before he left, Wilson asked Clausi if he could take the piece of track that
Borsato had cut with him while the parties continued their discussions. Clausi gave Wilson the piece
of track without hesitation. The piece of track was the only item that Abraham and Wilson took
from the meeting. Clausi and Moore did not ask Wilson for a receipt for the cut track, nor did
they seek a written confidentiality agreement to protect PlayWood's alleged trade secret. After the
meeting, Clausi amended PlayWood's confidentiality agreement with Borsato to ensure that materials
discussed during the meeting would remain confidential. Clausi also stamped many of the documents
that he received from Learning Curve during the meeting as confidential because they included
information on products not yet released to the public. PlayWood never disclosed the contents of
Learning Curve's documents to anyone.

During March of 1993, PlayWood and Learning Curve met on three separate occasions to discuss
further the possibility of PlayWood manufacturing Learning Curve's Thomas products. At one of the
meetings, and at Learning Curve's request, PlayWood submitted a manufacturing proposal for the
Thomas products. Learning Curve rejected PlayWood's proposal. Learning Curve told Clausi that its
licensor wanted the Thomas products to be made in the United States.

                                                                                         24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 389
Thereafter, PlayWood had no contact with Learning Curve until late October of 1993, when Abraham
contacted Clausi to discuss another possible manufacturing contract because Learning Curve's
secondary supplier was not providing enough product. Again, PlayWood submitted a manufacturing
proposal at Learning Curve's request, but it too was rejected. Learning Curve later stated that its new
business partner had decided to manufacture the product in China.

Clausi and Moore continued to work on PlayWood's toy concepts. After the 1994 New York Toy Fair,
which was not particularly successful for PlayWood, Clausi and Moore began to focus their efforts on
refining PlayWood's concept for the noise-producing track. During this time, Clausi and Moore made
no attempt to license or sell the concept to other toy companies because they believed that PlayWood
still had "an opportunity to get in the door" with Learning Curve if they could perfect the concept and
also because they believed that they were bound by a confidentiality agreement. Trial Tr. at 267.

In December of 1994, while shopping for additional track with which to experiment, Moore
discovered that Learning Curve was selling noise-producing track under the name "Clickety-Clack
Track." Like the piece of track that Clausi had Borsato cut during PlayWood's February 18, 1993,
meeting with Learning Curve, Clickety-Clack TrackTM has parallel grooves cut into the wood, which
cause a "clacking" sound as train wheels roll over the grooves. Learning Curve was promoting the new
track as

        "the first significant innovation in track design since the inception of wooden train systems .
        . . . It is quite simply the newest and most exciting development to come along recently in the
        wooden train industry, and it's sure to cause a sensation in the marketplace . . . . [I]t brings
        that sound and feel of the real thing to a child's world of make-believe without bells, whistles,
        electronic sound chips or moving parts."

PlayWood's Tr. Ex.71.

Moore was "stunned" when he saw the track because he believed that Learning Curve had stolen
PlayWood's concept. Trial Tr. at 268. He testified: "This was our idea. This is what we've been working
on even up to that day to go back to [Learning Curve] as an opportunity to get in the door, and there
it is on the shelf." Id. Moore purchased a package of Clickety-Clack TrackTM and showed it to Clausi.
Clausi testified that he was disappointed when he saw the track because he believed that Learning
Curve had taken PlayWood's name and design concept "almost exactly as per [their] conversation" on
February 18, 1993. Trial Tr. at 103.

PlayWood promptly wrote a cease and desist letter to Learning Curve. The letter accused Learning
Curve of stealing PlayWood's concept for the noise-producing track that it disclosed to Learning
Curve "in confidence in the context of a manufacturing proposal." PlayWood's Tr. Ex.66 at 1. Learning
Curve responded by seeking a declaratory judgment that it owned the concept.

Previously, on March 16, 1994, Learning Curve had applied for a patent on the noise-producing track.
The patent, which was obtained on October 3, 1995, claims the addition of parallel impressions or
grooves in the rails, which cause a "clacking" sound to be emitted as train wheels roll over them. The
patent identifies Roy Wilson of Learning Curve as the inventor.

Clickety-Clack TrackTM provided an enormous boost to Learning Curve's sales. Learning Curve had
$20 million in track sales by the first quarter of 2000, and $40 million for combined track and
accessory sales.

390 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  B. District Court Proceedings

  Learning Curve responded to PlayWood's cease and desist letter by seeking a declaratory judgment
  that it owned the concept for noise-producing toy railroad track, as embodied in Clickety-Clack
  Track.TM PlayWood counterclaimed against Learning Curve, as well as its representatives, Roy Wilson,
  Harry Abraham and John Lee. PlayWood asserted that it owned the concept and that Learning
  Curve had misappropriated its trade secret. 1Learning Curve voluntarily dismissed its complaint for
  declaratory relief, and PlayWood's claim for trade secret misappropriation proceeded to trial. The
  jury returned a verdict in favor of PlayWood. The trial court declined to enter judgment on the
  verdict and instead asked the parties to brief Learning Curve's Rule 50 motion on the issue of whether
  PlayWood had a protectable trade secret under the Illinois Trade Secrets Act, 765 ILCS 1065/1 et
  seq. The district court granted Learning Curve's motion and entered judgment in its favor on the
  ground that PlayWood presented insufficient evidence of a trade secret. See R.202. Specifically, the
  court determined that PlayWood did not have a trade secret in its concept for noise-producing toy
  railroad track under Illinois law because: (1) PlayWood did not demonstrate that its concept was
  unknown in the industry; (2) PlayWood's concept could have been easily acquired or duplicated
  through proper means; (3) PlayWood failed to guard the secrecy of its concept; (4) PlayWood's concept
  had no economic value; and (5) PlayWood expended no time, effort or money to develop the concept.
  See id.

  II

  DISCUSSION

  A. Trade Secret Status

  We review the district court's decision to grant Learning Curve's motion for judgment as a matter of
  law de novo, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to PlayWood. See Veach v. Sheeks, 316
  F.3d 690, 692 (7th Cir.2003). "We shall not second-guess the jury's view of the contested evidence; the
  proper inquiry is whether, given the totality of the evidence, [PlayWood] presented sufficient evidence
  from which a reasonable jury could find in [its] favor." David v. Caterpillar, Inc., 324 F.3d 851, 858 (7th
  Cir. 2003).

  The parties agree that their dispute is governed by the Illinois Trade Secrets Act ("Act"), 765 ILCS
  1065/1 et seq. To prevail on a claim for misappropriation of a trade secret under the Act, the plaintiff
  must demonstrate that the information at issue was a trade secret, that it was misappropriated and
  that it was used in the defendant's business. See Composite Marine Propellers, Inc. v. Van Der Woude,
  962 F.2d 1263, 1265-66 (7th Cir.1992) (per curiam); Southwest Whey, Inc. v. Nutrition 101, Inc., 117
  F.Supp.2d 770, 775-76 (N.D.Ill.2000); Magellan Int'l. Corp. v. Salzgitter Handel GmbH., 76 F.Supp.2d 919,
  926 (N.D.Ill.1999). The issue currently before us is whether there was legally sufficient evidence for

1. In its amended counterclaim, PlayWood asserted eight causes of action: (1) implied-in-fact contract; (2) quasi-contract; (3)
   idea misappropriation; (4) fraud and deceptive business practices under the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business
   Practices Act, 815 ILCS 505/1 et seq.; (5) misappropriation of trade secrets under the Illinois Trade Secrets Act, 765 ILCS
   1065/1 et seq.; (6) unfair competition under  44(b) of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1126; (7) unfair competition under  43(a)
   of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C.  1125; and (8) deceptive trade practices under the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act,
   815 ILCS  510/1 et seq. R.35. With the exception of misappropriation of trade secrets, the district court entered summary
   judgment against PlayWood on all counts. PlayWood does not appeal the grant of summary judgment on those counts.

                                                                                            24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 391
the jury to find that PlayWood had a trade secret in its concept for the noise-producing toy railroad
track that it revealed to Learning Curve on February 18, 1993.

The Act defines a trade secret as:

        [I]nformation, including but not limited to, technical or non-technical data, a formula, pattern,
        compilation, program, device, method, technique, drawing, process, financial data, or list of
        actual or potential customers or suppliers, that:

        (1) is sufficiently secret to derive economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally
        known to other persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use; and

        (2) is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy
        or confidentiality.

765 ILCS 1065/2(d). Both of the Act's statutory requirements focus fundamentally on the secrecy of
the information sought to be protected. See Mangren Research & Dev. Corp. v. Nat'l Chem. Co., Inc.,
87 F.3d 937, 942 (7th Cir.1996); Computer Care v. Serv. Sys. Enters., Inc., 982 F.2d 1063, 1072 (7th
Cir.1992); Pope v. Alberto-Culver Co., 296 Ill.App.3d 512, 230 Ill.Dec. 646, 694 N.E.2d 615, 617 (1998);
Stampede Tool Warehouse, Inc. v. May, 272 Ill. App.3d 580, 209 Ill.Dec. 281, 651 N.E.2d 209, 215 (1995);
Serv. Ctrs. of Chicago, Inc. v. Minogue, 180 Ill.App.3d 447, 129 Ill.Dec. 367, 535 N.E.2d 1132, 1136
(1989). However, the requirements emphasize different aspects of secrecy. The first requirement,
that the information be sufficiently secret to impart economic value because of its relative secrecy,
"precludes trade secret protection for information generally known or understood within an industry
even if not to the public at large." Pope, 230 Ill.Dec. 646, 694 N.E.2d at 617. The second requirement,
that the plaintiff take reasonable efforts to maintain the secrecy of the information, prevents a plaintiff
who takes no affirmative measures to prevent others from using its proprietary information from
obtaining trade secret protection. See Jackson v. Hammer, 274 Ill.App.3d 59, 210 Ill.Dec. 614, 653
N.E.2d 809, 816 (1995) ("[T]he Act requires a plaintiff to take `affirmative measures' to prevent others
from using information.").

Although the Act explicitly defines a trade secret in terms of these two requirements, Illinois courts
frequently refer to six common law factors (which are derived from  757 of the Restatement (First) of
Torts) in determining whether a trade secret exists: (1) the extent to which the information is known
outside of the plaintiff's business; (2) the extent to which the information is known by employees and
others involved in the plaintiff's business; (3) the extent of measures taken by the plaintiff to guard
the secrecy of the information; (4) the value of the information to the plaintiff's business and to its
competitors; (5) the amount of time, effort and money expended by the plaintiff in developing the
information; and (6) the ease or difficulty with which the information could be properly acquired or
duplicated by others. See Delta Med. Sys. v. Mid-America Med. Sys., Inc., 331 Ill. App.3d 777, 265 Ill.Dec.
397, 772 N.E.2d 768, 780 (2002); Stampede Tool Warehouse, 209 Ill.Dec. 281, 651 N.E.2d at 215-16;
George S. May Int'l Co. v. Int'l Profit Assocs., 256 Ill.App.3d 779, 195 Ill.Dec. 183, 628 N.E.2d 647, 653
(1993); see also C & F Packing Co., Inc. v. IBP, Inc., 224 F.3d 1296, 1302 (Fed.Cir.2000) (applying Illinois
law).

Contrary to Learning Curve's contention, we do not construe the foregoing factors as a six-part test,
in which the absence of evidence on any single factor necessarily precludes a finding of trade secret
protection. Instead, we interpret the common law factors as instructive guidelines for ascertaining
whether a trade secret exists under the Act. The language of the Act itself makes no reference to

392 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  these factors as independent requirements for trade secret status, and Illinois case law imposes no
  such requirement that each factor weigh in favor of the plaintiff. See ILG Indus., Inc. v. Scott, 49 Ill.2d
  88, 273 N.E.2d 393, 396 (1971) ("An exact definition of a trade secret, applicable to all situations,
  is not possible. Some factors to be considered in determining whether given information is one's
  trade secret are [the six factors enumerated in the Restatement].") (internal quotation marks omitted).
  In this respect, Illinois law is compatible with the approach in other states. Courts from other
  jurisdictions, as well as legal scholars, have noted that the Restatement factors are not to be applied
  as a list of requisite elements. See, e.g., Basic American, Inc. v. Shatila, 133 Idaho 726, 992 P.2d 175, 184
  (1999); Minuteman, Inc. v. Alexander, 147 Wis.2d 842, 434 N.W.2d 773, 778 (Wis.1989); 2 Gregory E.
  Upchurch, Intellectual Property Litigation Guide: Patents & Trade Secrets  16.02, at 16-17 to 16-18 (2002)
  ("On the whole, these factors are a guide to the proper decision on the existence of a trade secret, not
  a list of requirements.").

  The existence of a trade secret ordinarily is a question of fact. 2 As aptly observed by our colleagues on
  the Fifth Circuit, a trade secret "is one of the most elusive and difficult concepts in the law to define."
  Lear Siegler, Inc. v. Ark-Ell Springs, Inc., 569 F.2d 286, 288 (5th Cir. 1978). In many cases, the existence
  of a trade secret is not obvious; it requires an ad hoc evaluation of all the surrounding circumstances.
  For this reason, the question of whether certain information constitutes a trade secret ordinarily is
  best "resolved by a fact finder after full presentation of evidence from each side." Id. at 289. We do not
  believe that the district court was sufficiently mindful of these principles. The district court, in effect,
  treated the Restatement factors as requisite elements and substituted its judgment for that of the jury.
  PlayWood presented sufficient evidence for the jury reasonably to conclude that the Restatement
  factors weighed in PlayWood's favor.

  1. Extent to which PlayWood's concept for noise-producing toy railroad track was known
  outside of PlayWood's business

  PlayWood presented substantial evidence from which the jury could have determined that
  PlayWood's concept for noise-producing toy railroad track was not generally known outside of
  PlayWood's business. It was undisputed at trial that no similar track was on the market until Learning
  Curve launched Clickety-Clack TrackTM in late 1994, more than a year after PlayWood first
  conceived of the concept. Of course, as Learning Curve correctly points out, "[m]erely being the
  first or only one to use particular information does not in and of itself transform otherwise general
  knowledge into a trade secret." George S. May Int'l, 195 Ill.Dec. 183, 628 N.E.2d at 654. "If it did,
  the first person to use the information, no matter how ordinary or well known, would be able to
  appropriate it to his own use under the guise of a trade secret." Serv. Ctrs., 129 Ill.Dec. 367, 535
  N.E.2d at 1137. However, in this case, there was additional evidence from which the jury could have
  determined that PlayWood's concept was not generally known within the industry.

  First, there was substantial testimony that Learning Curve had attempted to differentiate its track
  from that of its competitors for several months, but that it had been unable to do so successfully.

  Furthermore, PlayWood's expert witness, Michael Kennedy, testified that PlayWood's concept, as

2. See Nilssen v. Motorola, Inc., 963 F.Supp. 664, 675 (N.D.Ill.1997) (applying Illinois law); see also Penalty Kick Mgm't Ltd. v. Coca
   Cola Co., 318 F.3d 1284, 1291 (11th Cir.2003) (applying Georgia law); Pate v. Nat'l Fund Raising Consultants, Inc., 20 F.3d 341,
   344 (8th Cir.1994) (applying Colorado law); Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Roxen Serv., Inc., 813 F.2d 26, 29 (2d Cir.1987) (applying
   New York law); 1 Melvin F. Jager, Trade Secrets Law  5.2, at 5-3 (2002); 2 Gregory E. Upchurch, Intellectual Property Litigation
   Guide: Patents & Trade Secrets  16.03, at 16-18 (2002).

                                                                                            24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 393
embodied in Clickety-Clack TrackTM, was unique and permitted "its seller to differentiate itself from
a host of competitors who [were] making a generic product." Trial Tr. at 518. Kennedy explained that
the look, sound and feel of the track made it distinct from other toy railroad track: "[W]hen a child
runs a train across this track, he can feel it hitting those little impressions. And when you're talking
about young children[,] having the idea that they can see something that they couldn't see before, feel
something that they couldn't feel before, hear something that they couldn't hear before, that is what
differentiates this toy from its other competitors." Id. at 489.

Finally, PlayWood presented evidence that Learning Curve sought and obtained a patent on the noise-
producing track. It goes without saying that the requirements for patent and trade secret protection
are not synonymous. Unlike "a patentable invention, a trade secret need not be novel or unobvious."
2 Rudolf Callmann, The Law of Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies  14.15, at 14-124 (4th
ed.2003). "The idea need not be complicated; it may be intrinsically simple and nevertheless qualify
as a secret, unless it is common knowledge and, therefore, within the public domain." Forest Labs., Inc.
v. Pillsbury Co., 452 F.2d 621, 624 (7th Cir. 1971) (internal quotation marks omitted). However, it is
commonly understood that "[i]f an invention has sufficient novelty to be entitled to patent protection,
it may be said a fortiori to be entitled to protection as a trade secret." 1 Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim on
Trade Secrets  1.08[1], at 1-353 (2002) (internal footnotes omitted). In light of this evidence, we cannot
accept Learning Curve's argument that no rational jury could have found that PlayWood's concept
was unknown outside of its business.

2. Extent to which PlayWood's concept was known to employees and others involved in
PlayWood's business

The district court did not address the extent to which PlayWood's concept was known to employees
and others involved in PlayWood's business. However, we agree with PlayWood that the evidence was
sufficient to establish that its concept for noise-producing track was known only by key individuals
in its business.

At the outset, we note briefly that PlayWood was a small business, consisting only of Clausi and
Moore. Illinois courts have recognized on several occasions that the expectations for ensuring secrecy
are different for small companies than for large companies. See Jackson, 210 Ill.Dec. 614, 653 N.E.2d at
815 ("[T]he determination of what steps are reasonably necessary to protect information is different
for a large company than for a small one."); Elmer Miller, Inc. v. Landis, 253 Ill.App.3d 129, 192 Ill.Dec.
378, 625 N.E.2d 338, 342 (1993) ("[R]easonable steps for a two or three person shop may be different
from reasonable steps for a larger company."). Apart from Clausi (PlayWood's sole toy designer and
the person who conceived of the concept for noise-producing track) and Moore (PlayWood's sole
officer and director), the only person who knew about the concept was Borsato, the person who
physically produced PlayWood's prototype at Clausi's direction. The concept was disclosed to Borsato
in order for PlayWood to develop fully its trade secret. See 1 Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade
Secrets  1.04, at 1-173 (2002) ("A trade secret does not lose its character by being confidentially
disclosed to agents or servants, without whose assistance it could not be made of any value.") (internal
quotation marks omitted). Moreover, Borsato's actions were governed by a written confidentiality
agreement with PlayWood. Indeed, as an extra precaution, Clausi even amended PlayWood's
confidentiality agreement with Borsato immediately after the February 18, 1993, meeting to ensure
that materials discussed during the meeting would remain confidential. From this evidence, the jury
reasonably could have determined that this factor also weighed in favor of PlayWood.

394 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  3. Measures taken by PlayWood to guard the secrecy of its concept

  There also was sufficient evidence for the jury to determine that PlayWood took reasonable
  precautions to guard the secrecy of its concept. The Act requires the trade secret owner to take actions
  that are "reasonable under the circumstances to maintain [the] secrecy or confidentiality" of its trade
  secret; it does not require perfection. 765 ILCS 1065/2(d)(2). Whether the measures taken by a trade
  secret owner are sufficient to satisfy the Act's reasonableness standard ordinarily is a question of
  fact for the jury.3 Indeed, we previously have recognized that "only in an extreme case can what is a
  `reasonable' precaution be determined [as a matter of law], because the answer depends on a balancing
  of costs and benefits that will vary from case to case." Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. DEV Indus., Inc., 925
  F.2d 174, 179 (7th Cir.1991).

  Here, the jury was instructed that it must find "by a preponderance of the evidence that PlayWood's
  trade secrets were given to Learning Curve as a result of a confidential relationship between the
  parties." Trial Tr. at 1449. By returning a verdict in favor of PlayWood, the jury necessarily found
  that Learning Curve was bound to PlayWood by a pledge of confidentiality. The jury's determination
  is amply supported by the evidence. Both Clausi and Moore testified that they entered into an oral
  confidentiality agreement with Abraham and Wilson before beginning their discussion on February
  18, 1993. In particular, Clausi testified that he told Abraham and Wilson: "I also have some things,
  some ideas on how to produce the track and produce the trains now that I've had a chance to
  look at them for the last couple of days, and I think they're confidential as well. So if we're both
  okay with that, we should continue." Trial Tr. at 77. In addition to this testimony, the jury heard
  that Learning Curve had disclosed substantial information to PlayWood during the February 18th
  meeting, including projected volumes, costs and profit margins for various products, as well as
  drawings for toys not yet released to the public. The jury could have inferred that Learning Curve
  would not have disclosed such information in the absence of a confidentiality agreement. Finally, the
  jury also heard (from several of Learning Curve's former business associates) that Learning Curve
  routinely entered into oral confidentiality agreements like the one with PlayWood.

  PlayWood might have done more to protect its secret. As Learning Curve points out, PlayWood
  gave its only prototype of the noise-producing track to Wilson without first obtaining a receipt or
  written confidentiality agreement from Learning Curve--a decision that proved unwise in hindsight.
  Nevertheless, we believe that the jury was entitled to conclude that PlayWood's reliance on the
  oral confidentiality agreement was reasonable under the circumstances of this case.4 First, it is well
  established that "[t]he formation of a confidential relationship imposes upon the disclosee the duty to
  maintain the information received in the utmost secrecy" and that "the unprivileged use or disclosure
  of another's trade secret becomes the basis for an action in tort." Burten v. Milton Bradley Co., 763
  F.2d 461, 463 (1st Cir.1985). Second, both Clausi and Moore testified that they believed PlayWood
  had a realistic chance to "get in the door" with Learning Curve and to produce the concept as part of
  Learning Curve's line of Thomas products. Clausi and Moore did not anticipate that Learning Curve

3. See Mangren Research & Dev. Corp. v. Nat'l Chem. Co., Inc., 87 F.3d 937, 943 (7th Cir. 1996); Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. DEV
   Indus., Inc., 925 F.2d 174, 179 (7th Cir.1991); see also 1 Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade Secrets  1.04, at 1-170 (2002); 2
   Rudolf Callmann, The Law of Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies  14.26, at 14-209 (4th ed.2003).

4. We iterate that the proper inquiry is not whether, in our independent judgment, we believe that PlayWood took reasonable
   precautions to maintain the secrecy of its concept; rather, the issue is whether PlayWood's "failure to do more was so plain a
   breach of the obligation of a trade secret owner to make reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy as to justify" overturning the
   jury verdict in its favor. Rockwell, 925 F.2d at 177.

                                                                                            24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 395
  would violate the oral confidentiality agreement and utilize PlayWood's concept without permission;
  rather, they believed in good faith that they "were going to do business one day again with Learning
  Curve with respect to the design concept." Trial Tr. at 236-37. Finally, we believe that, as part of the
  reasonableness inquiry, the jury could have considered the size and sophistication of the parties, as
  well as the relevant industry. Both PlayWood and Learning Curve were small toy companies, and
  PlayWood was the smaller and less experienced of the two. Viewing the evidence in the light most
  favorable to PlayWood, as we must, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence for the jury to
  determine that PlayWood took reasonable measures to protect the secrecy of its concept.

  4. Value of the concept to PlayWood and to its competitors

  There was substantial evidence from which the jury could have determined that PlayWood's concept
  had value both to PlayWood and to its competitors. It was undisputed at trial that Learning Curve's
  sales skyrocketed after it began to sell Clickety-Clack TrackTM. In addition, PlayWood's expert
  witness, Michael Kennedy, testified that PlayWood's concept for noise-producing track had
  tremendous value. Kennedy testified that the "cross-cuts and changes in the [track's] surface" imparted
  value to its seller by causing the track to "look different, feel different and sound different than
  generic track." Trial Tr. at 504. Kennedy further testified that, in his opinion, the track would have
  commanded a premium royalty under a negotiated license agreement because the "invention allows
  its seller to differentiate itself from a host of competitors who are making a generic product with
  whom it is competing in a way that is proprietary and exclusive, and it gives [the seller] a significant
  edge over [its] competition." Id. at 518-19.

  Despite this evidence, the district court concluded that PlayWood's concept had no economic value.
  The court's conclusion was based, in part, on the fact that PlayWood's prototype did not work
  perfectly; as noted by the court, the first set of cuts were too shallow to produce sound and the
  second set of cuts were too deep to permit the train to roll smoothly across the track. In the district
  court's view, even if the concept of cutting grooves into the wooden track in order to produce noise
  originated with Clausi, the concept lacked value until it was refined, developed and manufactured by
  Learning Curve.

  We cannot accept the district court's conclusion because it is belied by the evidence. At trial, Kennedy
  was asked whether, in his opinion, the fact that PlayWood's prototype did not work perfectly affected
  the value of PlayWood's concept, and he testified that it did not. See Trial Tr. at 578. Kennedy testified
  that he would assign the same value to PlayWood's concept as it was conceived on February 18, 1993,
  as he would the finished product that became known as Clickety-Clack TrackTM because, at that time,
  he would have known "that most of the design [had] already been done and that [he] just need[ed]
  to go a little bit further to make it really lovely." Id. at 578. Kennedy further testified that it was
  standard practice in the industry for a license to be negotiated based on a prototype (much like the one
  PlayWood disclosed to Learning Curve) rather than a finished product and that the license generally
  would cover the prototypical design, as well as any enhancements or improvements of that design. See
  Trial Tr. at 500-01.5

5. Specifically, Kennedy testified:

   Q: Now, when you were at Tyco, you were in the toy business and people were bringing you inventions, did people bring
   you inventions or trade secrets that were in the kind of form that we find Defendants' Exhibit 9 [Clickety-Clack Track], fully
   polished and finished and so on?

  396 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Based on this testimony, we cannot accept the district court's conclusion that PlayWood's concept
  possessed no economic value.

  It is irrelevant under Illinois law that PlayWood did not actually use the concept in its business. "[T]he
  proper criterion is not `actual use' but whether the trade secret is `of value' to the company." Syntex
  Ophthalmics, Inc. v. Tsuetaki, 701 F.2d 677, 683 (7th Cir.1983).6 Kennedy's testimony was more than
  sufficient to permit the jury to conclude that the concept was "of value" to PlayWood. It is equally
  irrelevant that PlayWood did not seek to patent its concept. So long as the concept remains a secret,
  i.e., outside of the public domain, there is no need for patent protection. Professor Milgrim makes
  this point well: "Since every inventor has the right to keep his invention secret, one who has made a
  patentable invention has the option to maintain it in secrecy, relying upon protection accorded to a
  trade secret rather than upon the rights which accrue by a patent grant." 1 Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim
  on Trade Secrets  1.08[1], at 1-353 (2002). It was up to PlayWood, not the district court, to determine
  when and how the concept should have been disclosed to the public.

  5. Amount of time, effort and money expended by PlayWood in developing its concept

  PlayWood expended very little time and money developing its concept; by Clausi's own account, the
  cost to PlayWood was less than one dollar and the time spent was less than one-half hour. The district
  court determined that "[s]uch an insignificant investment is . . . insufficient as a matter of Illinois law
  to establish the status of a `trade secret.'" R.202 at 16. We believe that the district court gave too much
  weight to the time, effort and expense of developing the track.7

   A: I've seen some pretty rough-looking toys in meeting with inventors. I've seen toys that were obviously made by hand. I've
   seen toys that had cracks, seams and joints that you don't expect to see when they're manufactured. Certainly that's true . . . .
   So the answer is: You don't see a final product when you meet with an inventor. You see a preliminary product or a prototype
   kind of product.

   Q: Now, when a prototype is brought to you as a disclosure, as a secret, as an invention that somebody wants to license to
   you, does it make a difference to you whether it's a prototype or a finished product?

   A: Not necessarily, because it depends on who is going to make it, which is uncertain at the time. It depends on how difficult
   it is to make, which could be uncertain at that time. It's helpful if we know that it's easy to make. It's helpful if we know how
   much it costs to make. But you don't always know that.

   Q: When you go to license that kind of invention that's brought to you, is it your intent to license only the prototype that's
   brought to you?

   A: No. I think every license agreement that I negotiate in the toy industry includes the prototypical design. It includes
   enhancements and improvements on that design, regardless of whether they're made by the inventor or whether they're
   made by the manufacturer. It includes something called line extensions, which is the transfer of this invention to a toy which
   maybe wasn't first thought of for its application. It includes all of those things. Trial Tr. at 499-501.

6. Both the Uniform Trade Secrets Act and the Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition expressly reject prior use by the
   person asserting rights in the information as a prerequisite to trade secret protection. See Unif. Trade Secrets Act  1 cmt.
   (1990) ("The broader definition in the proposed Act extends protection to a plaintiff who has not yet had an opportunity
   or acquired the means to put a trade secret to use."); Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition  39 cmt. e (1995) ("Use
   by the person asserting rights in the information is not a prerequisite to protection under the rule stated in this Section,"
   in part, because such a "requirement can deny protection during periods of research and development and is particularly
   burdensome for innovators who do not possess the capability to exploit their innovations.").

7. Professor Milgrim, for one, rejects any per se requirement of developmental costs: Where cost is referred to it is almost
   always invariably incidental to other, basic definitional elements, such as secrecy. Since it is established that a trade secret

                                                                                            24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 397
  Although Illinois courts commonly look to the Restatement factors for guidance in determining
  whether a trade secret exists, as we have noted earlier, the requisite statutory inquiries under Illinois
  law are (1) whether the information "is sufficiently secret to derive economic value, actual or
  potential, from not being generally known to other persons who can obtain economic value from
  its disclosure or use;" and (2) whether the information "is the subject of efforts that are reasonable
  under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy or confidentiality." 765 ILCS 1065/2(d). A significant
  expenditure of time and/or money in the production of information may provide evidence of value,
  which is relevant to the first inquiry above. However, we do not understand Illinois law to require
  such an expenditure in all cases.

  As pointed out by the district court, several Illinois cases have emphasized the importance of
  developmental costs. However, notably, none of those cases concerned the sort of innovative and
  creative concept that we have in this case. Indeed, several of the cases in Illinois that emphasize
  developmental costs concern compilations of data, such as customer lists.8 In that context, it makes
  sense to require the expenditure of significant time and money because there is nothing original or
  creative about the alleged trade secret. Given enough time and money, we presume that the plaintiff's
  competitors could compile a similar list.

  Here, by contrast, we are dealing with a new toy design that has been promoted as "the first significant
  innovation in track design since the inception of wooden train systems." PlayWood's Tr. Ex.71. Toy
  designers, like many artistic individuals, have intuitive flashes of creativity. Often, that intuitive flash
  is, in reality, the product of earlier thought and practice in an artistic craft. We fail to see how the
  value of PlayWood's concept would differ in any respect had Clausi spent several months and several
  thousand dollars creating the noise-producing track. Accordingly, we conclude that PlayWood's lack
  of proof on this factor does not preclude the existence of a trade secret.

  6. Ease or difficulty with which PlayWood's concept could have been properly acquired or
  duplicated by others

  Finally, we also believe that there was sufficient evidence for the jury to determine that PlayWood's
  concept could not have been easily acquired or duplicated through proper means. PlayWood's expert

   can be discovered fortuitously (ergo, without costly development), or result purely from the exercise of creative facilities, it
   would appear inconsistent to consider expense of development of a trade secret as an operative substantive element. See 1
   Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade Secrets  1.02[2], at 1-146 & 1-150 (2002) (internal footnotes omitted).

8. See, e.g., Delta Med. Sys. v. Mid-America Med. Sys., Inc., 331 Ill.App.3d 777, 265 Ill. Dec. 397, 772 N.E.2d 768, 781 (2002) ("Delta
   presented no testimony at the hearing as to the amount of effort expended in acquiring its customer list."); Strata Mktg., Inc.
   v. Murphy, 317 Ill.App.3d 1054, 251 Ill.Dec. 595, 740 N.E.2d 1166, 1177 (2000) ("Strata's customer lists, which it alleged take
   considerable effort, time, and money to compile, could be deemed a trade secret."); Stampede Tool Warehouse, Inc. v. May, 272
   Ill.App.3d 580, 209 Ill.Dec. 281, 651 N.E.2d 209, 216 (1995) ("The customer list has been developed through the laborious
   method of prospecting, which requires a substantial amount of time, effort, and expense by Stampede."); Springfield Rare Coin
   Galleries, Inc. v. Mileham, 250 Ill.App.3d 922, 189 Ill.Dec. 511, 620 N.E.2d 479, 485 (1993) ("Under Illinois law, customer lists
   and other customer information will constitute confidential information only when the information has been developed
   by the employer over a number of years at great expense and kept under tight security."); Abbott-Interfast Corp. v. Harkabus,
   250 Ill. App.3d 13, 189 Ill.Dec. 288, 619 N.E.2d 1337, 1344 (1993) ("Items such as customer lists, pricing information, and
   business techniques can be trade secrets if the employer has developed the information over a number of years at great
   expense and kept [it] under tight security.") (internal quotation marks omitted); Prudential Ins. Co. of America v. Van Matre, 158
   Ill.App.3d 298, 110 Ill.Dec. 563, 511 N.E.2d 740, 745 (1987) ("A customer list or other customer information constitutes a
   trade secret in which an employer holds a protectable interest where the employer developed the information over a number
   of years, at great expense, and kept the information under lock and key.").

  398 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
witness, Michael Kennedy, testified: "This is a fairly simple product if you look at it. But the truth is
that because it delivers feeling and sound as well as appearance, it isn't so simple as it first appears.
It's a little more elegant, actually, than you might think." Trial Tr. at 504. In addition to Kennedy's
testimony, the jury heard that Learning Curve had spent months attempting to differentiate its track
from Brio's before Clausi disclosed PlayWood's concept of noise-producing track. From this evidence,
the jury could have inferred that, if PlayWood's concept really was obvious, Learning Curve would
have thought of it earlier.

Despite this evidence, the district court concluded that PlayWood's concept was not a trade secret
because it could have been easily duplicated, stating that "[h]ad PlayWood succeeded in producing and
marketing [the] notched track, the appearance of the track product itself would have fully revealed the
concept PlayWood now claims as a secret." R.202 at 5-6. Of course, the district court was correct in
one sense; PlayWood's own expert recognized that, in the absence of patent or copyright protection,
the track could have been reverse engineered just by looking at it. See Trial Tr. at 562. However,
the district court failed to appreciate the fact that PlayWood's concept was not publicly available. As
Professor Milgrim states: "A potent distinction exists between a trade secret which will be disclosed
if and when the product in which it is embodied is placed on sale, and a `trade secret' embodied in
a product which has been placed on sale, which product admits of discovery of the `secret' upon
inspection, analysis, or reverse engineering." 1 Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade Secrets  1.05[4],
at 1-228 (2002). "Until disclosed by sale the trade secret should be entitled to protection." Id.; see
also 2 Rudolf Callmann, The Law of Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies  14.15, at 14-123
(4th ed. 2003) ("The fact that a secret is easy to duplicate after it becomes known does not militate
against its being a trade secret prior to that time."). Reverse engineering can defeat a trade secret
claim, but only if the product could have been properly acquired by others, as is the case when
the product is publicly sold. Here, PlayWood disclosed its concept to Learning Curve (and Learning
Curve alone) in the context of a confidential relationship; Learning Curve had no legal authority
to reverse engineer the prototype that it received in confidence. See Laff v. John O. Butler Co., 64
Ill.App.3d 603, 21 Ill.Dec. 314, 381 N.E.2d 423, 433 (1978) ("[A] trade secret is open to anyone, not
bound by a confidential relationship or a contract with the secret's owner, who can discover the secret
through lawful means."). Accordingly, we must conclude that the jury was entitled to determine that
PlayWood's concept could not easily have been acquired or duplicated through proper means.

B. Exemplary Damages

The Illinois Trade Secrets Act authorizes exemplary damages of up to twice the amount of
compensatory damages if there was a "willful and malicious misappropriation." 765 ILCS 1065/4(b).
The jury was not given an instruction on exemplary damages because the district court granted
Learning Curve's motion for judgment as a matter of law on this issue prior to closing argument. See
Trial Tr. at 1355. PlayWood submits that the jury should have been permitted to determine whether
Learning Curve's intentional misappropriation of PlayWood's trade secret in the realistic looking
and sounding toy railroad track justified an award of exemplary damages. See Medow v. Flavin, 336
Ill.App.3d 20, 270 Ill.Dec. 174, 782 N.E.2d 733, 746 (2002) (stating generally that "the question of
whether a defendant's conduct was sufficiently willful or wanton to justify the imposition of punitive
damages is for the jury to decide") (quoting Schmidt v. Ameritech Illinois, 329 Ill.App.3d 1020, 263
Ill.Dec. 543, 768 N.E.2d 303 (2002)).

There are no Illinois cases construing the phrase "willful and malicious misappropriation" under the
Act. However, we previously have held that the phrase includes "an intentional misappropriation as

                                                                                         24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 399
   well as a misappropriation resulting from the conscious disregard of the rights of another." Mangren
   Research & Dev. Corp. v. Nat'l Chem. Co., Inc., 87 F.3d 937, 946 (7th Cir.1996); see also Lucini Italia Co.
   v. Grappolini, No. 01 C 6405, 2003 WL 1989605, at *19 (N.D.Ill. Apr.28, 2003); RKI, Inc. v. Grimes, 177
   F.Supp.2d 859, 879 (N.D.Ill.2001); Richardson Elecs., Ltd. v. Avnet, Inc., No. 98 C 5095, 1999 WL 59976,
   at *5 (N.D.Ill. Feb.6, 1999); but see Roton Barrier, Inc. v. Stanley Works, 79 F.3d 1112, 1120 (Fed.Cir.1996)
   (holding that exemplary damages are not permitted under the Act when the defendant was motivated
   by competition, rather than by malice).9

   We agree with PlayWood that a rational jury could determine that exemplary damages are justified
   in this case. Specifically, we believe that a rational jury could determine that Learning Curve
   intentionally misappropriated PlayWood's trade secret in the noise-producing track and then
   attempted to conceal the misappropriation by creating false evidence of prior independent
   development. Accordingly, we remand this case to the district court with the instruction to hold a
   jury trial on exemplary damages.10 We leave it to the district court on remand to consider PlayWood's
   request for attorneys' fees. See 765 ILCS 1065/5(iii) (permitting the court to award reasonable
   attorneys' fees to the prevailing party where "willful and malicious misappropriation exists").

   Conclusion

   For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district court is reversed, and the jury's verdict is
   reinstated. The case is remanded to the district court for a jury trial on exemplary damages and for
   consideration of attorneys' fees by the court. PlayWood may recover its costs in this court.

   Reversed and remanded.

 9. In other contexts, Illinois courts routinely have held that "exemplary damages may be awarded when torts are committed
    with fraud, actual malice, deliberate violence or oppression, or when the defendant acts willfully, or with such gross
    negligence as to indicate a wanton disregard of the rights of others." Kelsay v. Motorola, Inc., 74 Ill.2d 172, 23 Ill.Dec. 559, 384
    N.E.2d 353, 359 (1978); see also Medow v. Flavin, 336 Ill. App.3d 20, 270 Ill.Dec. 174, 782 N.E.2d 733, 747 (2002); Tucker v.
    Illinois Power Co., 232 Ill.App.3d 15, 173 Ill.Dec. 512, 597 N.E.2d 220, 231 (1992).

10. We decline to consider PlayWood's argument that the district court erred by excluding under Daubert v. Merrell Dow
    Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 113 S.Ct. 2786, 125 L.Ed.2d 469 (1993), the testimony of PlayWood's ink expert that a
    handwritten entry in Lee's "100-Day Agenda" relating to noise-producing track was not written contemporaneously with
    the other handwritten entries. Rule 10(b)(2) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure provides that "[i]f the appellant
    intends to urge on appeal that a finding or conclusion is unsupported by the evidence or is contrary to the evidence, the
    appellant must include in the record a transcript of all evidence relevant to that finding or conclusion." Fed. R.App. P.
    10(b)(2). PlayWood did not request that the transcript of the Daubert hearing be included in the record on appeal. As a result,
    we are unable to evaluate whether the district court erred in excluding the testimony of PlayWood's ink expert; accordingly,
    PlayWood has forfeited this argument. See Hotaling v. Chubb Sovereign Life Ins. Co., 241 F.3d 572, 581 (7th Cir.2001); LaFollette
    v. Savage, 63 F.3d 540, 545 (7th Cir.1995); Wilson v. Electro Marine Sys., Inc., 915 F.2d 1110, 1117 (7th Cir. 1990). We recognize
    that, as an alternative to forfeiture, we have the authority under Rule 10(e) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure to
    order PlayWood to supplement the record to include the Daubert hearing. See Fed. R.App. P. 10(e); see also LaFollette, 63
    F.3d at 545. However, we decline to exercise that authority in this case because PlayWood "ha[s] had ample opportunity to
    correct the problem but ha[s] failed to do so." LaFollette, 63 F.3d at 545. Learning Curve pointed out in its answer brief that
    the Daubert hearing was not made part of the record on appeal. See Appellees' Br. at 41 ("PlayWood would have this Court
    undertake a de novo review and reverse the trial court's ruling on the admissibility of expert testimony, rendered after a
    Daubert hearing, without any reference to the evidence introduced at that hearing! Indeed, PlayWood has not included the
    hearing transcript in the record before the Court."). Despite notice of Learning Curve's objection to the incomplete record,
    PlayWood made no attempt to supplement the record or to explain why a transcript of the hearing was not necessary to
    permit meaningful appellate review.

    400 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Complete the following assessments to check your comprehension of trade secret misappropriation.

                     An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                     here:
         https://pressbooks.uiowa.edu/intro-ip/?p=1665#h5p-1

                                                                                         24. THE ELEMENTS OF A TRADE SECRET 401
                   25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS

   Learning Objectives: Unit 25

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Recall the forms of misappropriation of trade secrets.
           Identify what is not misappropriation of trade secrets.
           Analyze whether a given form of conduct constitutes misappropriation of a trade secret.

Assuming that information is a protectable trade secret, the second step of a trade secret
misappropriation analysis is to determine whether the trade secret has been misappropriated. In
this class we will study the different forms that misappropriation can take, as well as identify some
conduct that is expressly not deemed to constitute misappropriation. In identifying these categories,
it will help to reread the DTSA.

402 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
E. I. DUPONT DENEMOURS V. CHRISTOPHERS (5TH CIR. 1970)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read E.I. DuPont v. Christophers and Uncle B's Bakery v. O'Rourke, ask yourself the following questions:
           What does it mean to misappropriate a trade secret? What is the difference between
              misappropriation and appropriation?
           Is there a difference between misappropriation as defined in DuPont v Christopher and Uncle B's
              Bakery v. O'Rourke versus the DTSA?
           What underlying policies are at play in these opinions? How do they manifest themselves in the
              analysis of whether an activity constitutes misappropriation?
           Based on these opinions and the DTSA, would an examination of a plant being constructed today
              using Google Earth images constitute misappropriation?

                                       E. I. DuPont deNemours v. Christophers

                                                431 F.2d 1012 (5th Cir. 1970)

GOLDBERG, Circuit Judge:

This is a case of industrial espionage in which an airplane is the cloak and a camera the dagger.
The defendants-appellants, Rolfe and Gary Christopher, are photographers in Beaumont, Texas. The
Christophers were hired by an unknown third party to take aerial photographs of new construction at
the Beaumont plant of E. I. DuPont deNemours & Company, Inc. Sixteen photographs of the DuPont
facility were taken from the air on March 19, 1969, and these photographs were later developed and
delivered to the third party.

DuPont employees apparently noticed the airplane on March 19 and immediately began an
investigation to determine why the craft was circling over the plant. By that afternoon the
investigation had disclosed that the craft was involved in a photographic expedition and that the
Christophers were the photographers. DuPont contacted the Christophers that same afternoon and
asked them to reveal the name of the person or corporation requesting the photographs. The
Christophers refused to disclose this information, giving as their reason the client's desire to remain
anonymous.

Having reached a dead end in the investigation, DuPont subsequently filed suit against the
Christophers, alleging that the Christophers had wrongfully obtained photographs revealing
DuPont's trade secrets which they then sold to the undisclosed third party. DuPont contended that
it had developed a highly secret but unpatented process for producing methanol, a process which

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 403
gave DuPont a competitive advantage over other producers. This process, DuPont alleged, was a
trade secret developed after much expensive and time-consuming research, and a secret which the
company had taken special precautions to safeguard. The area photographed by the Christophers was
the plant designed to produce methanol by this secret process, and because the plant was still under
construction parts of the process were exposed to view from directly above the construction area.
Photographs of that area, DuPont alleged, would enable a skilled person to deduce the secret process
for making methanol. DuPont thus contended that the Christophers had wrongfully appropriated
DuPont trade secrets by taking the photographs and delivering them to the undisclosed third party. In
its suit DuPont asked for damages to cover the loss it had already sustained as a result of the wrongful
disclosure of the trade secret and sought temporary and permanent injunctions prohibiting any
further circulation of the photographs already taken and prohibiting any additional photographing of
the methanol plant.

The Christophers answered with motions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction and failure to state a claim
upon which relief could be granted. Depositions were taken during which the Christophers again
refused to disclose the name of the person to whom they had delivered the photographs. DuPont then
filed a motion to compel an answer to this question and all related questions.

On June 5, 1969, the trial court held a hearing on all pending motions and an additional motion by the
Christophers for summary judgment. The court denied the Christophers' motions to dismiss for want
of jurisdiction and failure to state a claim and also denied their motion for summary judgment. The
court granted DuPont's motion to compel the Christophers to divulge the name of their client. Having
made these rulings, the court then granted the Christophers' motion for an interlocutory appeal under
28 U.S.C.A.  1292(b) to allow the Christophers to obtain immediate appellate review of the court's
finding that DuPont had stated a claim upon which relief could be granted. Agreeing with the trial
court's determination that DuPont had stated a valid claim, we affirm the decision of that court.

This is a case of first impression, for the Texas courts have not faced this precise factual issue, and
sitting as a diversity court we must sensitize our Erie antennae to divine what the Texas courts would
do if such a situation were presented to them. The only question involved in this interlocutory appeal
is whether DuPont has asserted a claim upon which relief can be granted. The Christophers argued
both at trial and before this court that they committed no "actionable wrong" in photographing
the DuPont facility and passing these photographs on to their client because they conducted all
of their activities in public airspace, violated no government aviation standard, did not breach any
confidential relation, and did not engage in any fraudulent or illegal conduct. In short, the
Christophers argue that for an appropriation of trade secrets to be wrongful there must be a trespass,
other illegal conduct, or breach of a confidential relationship. We disagree.

It is true, as the Christophers assert, that the previous trade secret cases have contained one or more of
these elements. However, we do not think that the Texas courts would limit the trade secret protection
exclusively to these elements. On the contrary, in Hyde Corporation v. Huffines, 1958, 158 Tex. 566, 314
S.W. 2d 763, the Texas Supreme Court specifically adopted the rule found in the Restatement of Torts
which provides:

        One who discloses or uses another's trade secret, without a privilege to do so, is liable to the
        other if

        (a) he discovered the secret by improper means, or

404 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        (b) his disclosure or use constitutes a breach of confidence reposed in him by the other in
        disclosing the secret to him * * *."

Restatement of Torts  757 (1939).

Thus, although the previous cases have dealt with a breach of a confidential relationship, a trespass,
or other illegal conduct, the rule is much broader than the cases heretofore encountered. Not limiting
itself to specific wrongs, Texas adopted subsection (a) of the Restatement which recognizes a cause of
action for the discovery of a trade secret by any "improper" means.

The defendants, however, read Furr's Inc. v. United Specialty Advertising Co., Tex.Civ.App.1960, 338
S.W.2d 762, writ ref'd n.r.e., as limiting the Texas rule to breach of a confidential relationship. The
court in Furr's did make the statement that

        The use of someone else's idea is not automatically a violation of the law. It must be something
        that meets the requirements of a `trade secret' and has been obtained through a breach of
        confidence in order to entitle the injured party to damages and/or injunction. 338 S.W.2d at
        766 (emphasis added).

We think, however, that the exclusive rule which defendants have extracted from this statement is
unwarranted. In the first place, in Furr's the court specifically found that there was no trade secret
involved because the entire advertising scheme claimed to be the trade secret had been completely
divulged to the public. Secondly, the court found that the plaintiff in the course of selling the scheme
to the defendant had voluntarily divulged the entire scheme. Thus the court was dealing only with a
possible breach of confidence concerning a properly discovered secret; there was never a question of
any impropriety in the discovery or any other improper conduct on the part of the defendant. The
court merely held that under those circumstances the defendant had not acted improperly if no breach
of confidence occurred. We do not read Furr's as limiting the trade secret protection to a breach of
confidential relationship when the facts of the case do raise the issue of some other wrongful conduct
on the part of one discovering the trade secrets of another. If breach of confidence were meant to
encompass the entire panoply of commercial improprieties, subsection (a) of the Restatement would
be either surplusage or persiflage, an interpretation abhorrent to the traditional precision of the
Restatement. We therefore find meaning in subsection (a) and think that the Texas Supreme Court
clearly indicated by its adoption that there is a cause of action for the discovery of a trade secret by
any "improper means." Hyde Corporation v. Huffines, supra.

The question remaining, therefore, is whether aerial photography of plant construction is an
improper means of obtaining another's trade secret. We conclude that it is and that the Texas courts
would so hold. The Supreme Court of that state has declared that "the undoubted tendency of the law
has been to recognize and enforce higher standards of commercial morality in the business world."
Hyde Corporation v. Huffines, supra 314 S.W.2d at 773. That court has quoted with approval articles
indicating that the proper means of gaining possession of a competitor's secret process is "through
inspection and analysis" of the product in order to create a duplicate. K & G Tool & Service Co. v. G & G
Fishing Tool Service, 1958, 158 Tex. 594, 314 S.W.2d 782, 783, 788. Later another Texas court explained:

        The means by which the discovery is made may be obvious, and the experimentation leading
        from known factors to presently unknown results may be simple and lying in the public
        domain. But these facts do not destroy the value of the discovery and will not advantage a
        competitor who by unfair means obtains the knowledge without paying the price expended

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 405
        by the discoverer." Brown v. Fowler, Tex.Civ. App.1958, 316 S.W.2d 111, 114, writ ref'd n.r.e.
        (emphasis added).

We think, therefore, that the Texas rule is clear. One may use his competitor's secret process if
he discovers the process by reverse engineering applied to the finished product; one may use a
competitor's process if he discovers it by his own independent research; but one may not avoid these
labors by taking the process from the discoverer without his permission at a time when he is taking
reasonable precautions to maintain its secrecy. To obtain knowledge of a process without spending
the time and money to discover it independently is improper unless the holder voluntarily discloses it
or fails to take reasonable precautions to ensure its secrecy.

In the instant case the Christophers deliberately flew over the DuPont plant to get pictures of a
process which DuPont had attempted to keep secret. The Christophers delivered their pictures to a
third party who was certainly aware of the means by which they had been acquired and who may be
planning to use the information contained therein to manufacture methanol by the DuPont process.
The third party has a right to use this process only if he obtains this knowledge through his own
research efforts, but thus far all information indicates that the third party has gained this knowledge
solely by taking it from DuPont at a time when DuPont was making reasonable efforts to preserve
its secrecy. In such a situation DuPont has a valid cause of action to prohibit the Christophers from
improperly discovering its trade secret and to prohibit the undisclosed third party from using the
improperly obtained information.

We note that this view is in perfect accord with the position taken by the authors of the Restatement.
In commenting on improper means of discovery the savants of the Restatement said:

        f. Improper means of discovery. The discovery of another's trade secret by improper means
        subjects the actor to liability independently of the harm to the interest in the secret. Thus, if
        one uses physical force to take a secret formula from another's pocket, or breaks into another's
        office to steal the formula, his conduct is wrongful and subjects him to liability apart from the
        rule stated in this Section. Such conduct is also an improper means of procuring the secret
        under this rule. But means may be improper under this rule even though they do not cause any
        other harm than that to the interest in the trade secret. Examples of such means are fraudulent
        misrepresentations to induce disclosure, tapping of telephone wires, eavesdropping or other
        espionage. A complete catalogue of improper means is not possible. In general they are means
        which fall below the generally accepted standards of commercial morality and reasonable
        conduct." Restatement of Torts  757, comment f at 10 (1939).

In taking this position we realize that industrial espionage of the sort here perpetrated has become a
popular sport in some segments of our industrial community. However, our devotion to freewheeling
industrial competition must not force us into accepting the law of the jungle as the standard of
morality expected in our commercial relations. Our tolerance of the espionage game must cease when
the protections required to prevent another's spying cost so much that the spirit of inventiveness
is dampened. Commercial privacy must be protected from espionage which could not have been
reasonably anticipated or prevented. We do not mean to imply, however, that everything not in
plain view is within the protected vale, nor that all information obtained through every extra optical
extension is forbidden. Indeed, for our industrial competition to remain healthy there must be
breathing room for observing a competing industrialist. A competitor can and must shop his
competition for pricing and examine his products for quality, components, and methods of

406 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
manufacture. Perhaps ordinary fences and roofs must be built to shut out incursive eyes, but we need
not require the discoverer of a trade secret to guard against the unanticipated, the undetectable, or the
unpreventable methods of espionage now available.
In the instant case DuPont was in the midst of constructing a plant. Although after construction the
finished plant would have protected much of the process from view, during the period of construction
the trade secret was exposed to view from the air. To require DuPont to put a roof over the unfinished
plant to guard its secret would impose an enormous expense to prevent nothing more than a school
boy's trick. We introduce here no new or radical ethic since our ethos has never given moral sanction
to piracy. The market place must not deviate far from our mores. We should not require a person
or corporation to take unreasonable precautions to prevent another from doing that which he ought
not do in the first place. Reasonable precautions against predatory eyes we may require, but an
impenetrable fortress is an unreasonable requirement, and we are not disposed to burden industrial
inventors with such a duty in order to protect the fruits of their efforts. "Improper" will always
be a word of many nuances, determined by time, place, and circumstances. We therefore need not
proclaim a catalogue of commercial improprieties. Clearly, however, one of its commandments does
say "thou shall not appropriate a trade secret through deviousness under circumstances in which
countervailing defenses are not reasonably available."
Having concluded that aerial photography, from whatever altitude, is an improper method of
discovering the trade secrets exposed during construction of the DuPont plant, we need not worry
about whether the flight pattern chosen by the Christophers violated any federal aviation regulations.
Regardless of whether the flight was legal or illegal in that sense, the espionage was an improper
means of discovering DuPont's trade secret.
The decision of the trial court is affirmed and the case remanded to that court for proceedings on the
merits.

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 407
UNCLE B'S BAKERY, INC. V. KEVIN O'ROURKE AND BROOKLYN BAGEL BOYS,
INC. (N.D. IOWA 1996)

                  Uncle B's Bakery, Inc. v. Kevin O'Rourke and Brooklyn Bagel Boys, Inc.

                                            920 F.Supp. 1405 (N.D. Iowa 1996)

       MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER REGARDING PLAINTIFF'S MOTION FOR
                                              PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION

BENNETT, District Judge.

Although the court had not imagined that supermarket bagels could spawn rivalries more intense
than that between cream cheese and butter, the court has discovered in this "trade secrets" case
that rival bagel makers hone their competitive edges with as much alacrity as other entrepreneurs.
Presently before the court is the application of one maker and distributor of supermarket bagels
for a preliminary injunction seeking to protect its "trade secrets" in bagel making and packaging
by enjoining a former employee from disclosing those secrets to, or working for, a competitor, and
the competitor's misappropriation of any of those secrets. The court must decide what is, or was,
"secret" in this case, and what "secrets," if any, it should protect. The former employee argues that
the "secret" in the case, at least from him, was the non-disclosure and non-competition agreement
the bagel maker seeks to enforce against him, but which he claims he never saw, signed, or otherwise
agreed to. Governing law and a balance of equities must determine what are protectable secrets in this
case, whether those secrets should be protected by a preliminary injunction, and what is the proper
scope of such an injunction should the court find that one must issue.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Procedural Background

Plaintiff Uncle B's Bakery, Inc., filed its complaint in this matter on February 6, 1996, against
defendant Kevin O'Rourke, the former manager of Uncle B's Bakery's Ellsworth, Iowa, plant, and
defendant Brooklyn Bagel Boys, Inc., O'Rourke's current employer. Diversity jurisdiction is asserted
pursuant to 28 U.S.C.  1332(a) and (c). Uncle B's Bakery is an Iowa corporation with its principal
place of business in Iowa. O'Rourke is a citizen of the State of Virginia, but is currently employed
as the plant manager of one of Brooklyn Bagel Boys' bagel manufacturing plants in Franklin Park, a
suburb of Chicago, Illinois. Brooklyn Bagel Boys is an Illinois corporation with its principal place of
business in Illinois.

Uncle B's Bakery's complaint in this matter is in eight counts, each alleging misconduct under Iowa
law following O'Rourke's termination of his employment with Uncle B's Bakery and subsequent
employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys, which Uncle B's Bakery asserts is one of its direct competitors
in the business of making and distributing bagels sold through supermarkets. Uncle B's Bakery's
claims center upon alleged disclosure by O'Rourke of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets and O'Rourke's

408 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  alleged violation of a non-competition agreement as the actual or threatened results of his
  employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. The complaint also alleges Brooklyn Bagel Boys'
  misappropriation of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets, as well as alleged interference by Brooklyn
  Bagel Boys with Uncle B's Bakery's prospective business advantage or Uncle B's Bakery's contractual
  relationship with O'Rourke. 1

  The matter immediately pending before the court is Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a preliminary
  injunction, filed the same day as Uncle B's Bakery's complaint, seeking to enjoin O'Rourke's violation
  of a non-competition agreement and the defendants' misappropriation of Uncle B's Bakery's trade
  secrets. 2 In its motion for a preliminary injunction, Uncle B's Bakery also requested an expedited
  evidentiary hearing. On March 8, 1996, the court granted the request for an expedited hearing, and
  scheduled a hearing on the motion for a preliminary injunction for March 25, 1996, in Fort Dodge,
  Iowa.

  In the interim, on February 28, 1996, Brooklyn Bagel Boys and O'Rourke filed a joint answer to
  the complaint denying all of Uncle B's Bakery's claims. In addition, the defendants asserted three
  affirmative defenses: (1) Uncle B's Bakery's complaint fails to state a claim upon which relief can be
  granted; (2) Uncle B's Bakery first breached its employment agreement with O'Rourke by failing to
  pay him for moving expenses and vacation pay; and (3) O'Rourke never signed nor agreed to the terms
  of any restrictive covenant with Uncle B's Bakery. On February 28, 1996, Brooklyn Bagel Boys and
  O'Rourke also filed a motion for an extension of time to respond to Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a

1. Specifically, Count I of the complaint alleges O'Rourke's breach of a confidentiality agreement by using or disclosing to
   others, without authorization of Uncle B's Bakery, information relating to the production or packaging of food products
   manufactured and distributed by Uncle B's Bakery. As relief, this count seeks a preliminary and permanent injunction
   restraining O'Rourke from using or disclosing confidential information or trade secrets in violation of the confidentiality
   agreement with Uncle B's Bakery, damages, attorneys fees, and costs. Count II alleges breach of a non-competition clause
   in an employment agreement allegedly signed by O'Rourke when he entered into his employment with Uncle B's Bakery.
   As relief, this count seeks a preliminary and permanent injunction restraining O'Rourke from accepting or continuing
   employment with any competitor of Uncle B's Bakery, liquidated damages as specified in the contract of employment in
   which the non-competition clause is contained, punitive damages, attorneys fees and costs, and such other relief as the court
   deems proper. Count III alleges intentional interference by Brooklyn Bagel Boys with the contractual relationship between
   O'Rourke and Uncle B's Bakery. As relief on this claim, Uncle B's Bakery seeks actual and punitive damages and such other
   relief as the court deems proper. Count III alleges intentional interference by Brooklyn Bagel Boys with the contractual
   relationship between O'Rourke and Uncle B's Bakery. As relief on this claim, Uncle B's Bakery seeks actual and punitive
   damages and such other relief as the court deems just and proper. Count IV alleges that Brooklyn Bagel Boys intentionally
   interfered with a prospective business advantage of Uncle B's Bakery. This claim seeks as relief actual and punitive damages,
   costs, and such other relief as the court deems just and proper. Count V alleges both defendants have made an actual or
   threatened misappropriation of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets in violation of Iowa Code Ch. 550, the Iowa Uniform Trade
   Secrets Act. It seeks relief in the form of a preliminary and permanent injunction preventing such misappropriation or
   threatened misappropriation of trade secrets and requiring affirmative acts, not specified, to protect Uncle B's Bakery's trade
   secrets, actual and punitive damages, attorneys fees and costs, and such other relief as the court deems just and proper. Count
   VI alleges O'Rourke's breach of a fiduciary duty to maintain the confidentiality of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets, and seeks
   actual and punitive damages and plaintiff's costs as relief, as well as such other relief as the court deems just and proper.
   Count VII alleges that O'Rourke fraudulently misrepresented his intention to work for a competitor of Uncle B's Bakery
   with intent to deceive Uncle B's Bakery, thus causing a delay in Uncle B's Bakery's efforts to protect its trade secrets. This
   count also seeks actual and punitive damages, costs, and such other relief as the court deems just and proper. The final count
   of the complaint, Count VIII, is an alternative to Count VII, alleging negligent misrepresentation. It also seeks actual and
   punitive damages, costs, and such other relief as the court deems just and proper.

2. Thus, Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a preliminary injunction is the companion motion to the prayers for preliminary and
   permanent injunctions made in Counts I, II, and V of the complaint.

                                                                                     25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 409
preliminary injunction. The court granted the defendants' motion for an extension of time, requiring
a response to the motion for preliminary injunction on or before March 6, 1996. A timely response to
the motion for preliminary injunction was therefore filed on March 6, 1996.

This matter proceeded to hearing on March 25 and 26, 1996. At the hearing, plaintiff Uncle B's Bakery
was represented by counsel Dennis W. Johnson of Dorsey & Whitney, P.L.L.P., in Des Moines, Iowa.
Defendants Brooklyn Bagel Boys and Kevin O'Rourke were represented by local counsel Richard H.
Moeller of Berenstein, Moore, Moser, Berenstein & Heffernan, in Sioux City, Iowa. At the hearing,
Uncle B's Bakery presented numerous exhibits and the testimony of several witnesses, including
Uncle B's Bakery's CEO, William Rose, Jr., and six other officers and employees of the company.
Defendants also presented exhibits and the testimony of two witnesses, Kevin O'Rourke and
Christopher Scott, Brooklyn Bagel Boys' vice president for operations.

At the hearing, the parties submitted a stipulation for a protective order to protect information the
parties perceived to be sensitive or confidential from disclosure except to authorized persons and the
court. A courtesy copy of the stipulation and proposed protective order had been transmitted to the
court by facsimile on March 21, 1996. During the hearing, the court granted the parties' motion for a
protective order, and entered the protective order as proposed by the parties. Thus, several portions
of the preliminary injunction hearing were closed to the public and the representative for Brooklyn
Bagel Boys, Christopher Scott, also left the courtroom.

The parties declined the opportunity for any post-hearing briefing. This matter is therefore fully
submitted.

B. Findings Of Fact

1. The Provisional Nature Of Findings And Conclusions

Although the court is disposing of Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a preliminary injunction following
briefing by all parties and an evidentiary hearing lasting a day and a half, it is well to remember that
in the context of preliminary injunction applications, the court typically operates under "severe time
constraints" and must customarily decide the motion "on the basis of procedures that are less formal
and evidence that is less complete than in a trial on the merits." University of Texas v. Camenisch, 451
U.S. 390, 395, 101 S.Ct. 1830, 1835, 68 L.Ed.2d 175 (1981). Thus, the Supreme Court in Camenisch
stated the general rule that "the findings of fact and conclusions of law made by a court granting a
preliminary injunction are not binding at trial on the merits." University of Texas v. Camenisch, 451 U.S.
390, 395, 101 S.Ct. 1830, 1835, 68 L.Ed.2d 175 (1981); accord Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum, Inc., 70
F.3d 958, 962 (8th Cir.1995) (citing this statement from Camenisch as the "general rule" for findings
of fact and conclusions of law in preliminary injunction rulings); United States v. Barnes, 912 F.Supp.
1187, 1190 (N.D.Iowa 1996) (applying the "general rule" of Camenisch to a preliminary injunction
ruling on the government's request for a preliminary injunction pursuant to 18 U.S.C.  1345 to enjoin
activities of defendants who were allegedly engaged in mail fraud in violation of 18 U.S.C.  1341).
Any findings of fact in this ruling, made either in this section or in the course of the legal analysis,
as well as any conclusions of law forming part of the court's determination of whether the issuance
of a preliminary injunction is proper in this case, are intended to be subject to this "general rule" and
are not to be considered "final." With this caveat in mind, the court turns to the findings of fact upon
which Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a preliminary injunction depends as those facts are established
by the documentary evidence and testimony presented at the hearing on March 25 and 26, 1996.

410 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
2. The bagel makers and their products

Uncle B's Bakery is in the business of producing and distributing what it describes as "fresh, never-
frozen bagels" that are sold in supermarket refrigerated cases nationwide. Uncle B's Bakery's bagels
are unique in that they are the only never-frozen bagels that are sold in the refrigerated cases
of supermarkets. The "fresh, never-frozen" line of bagels sold in refrigerator cases constitutes the
majority of Uncle B's Bakery's production and sales. Uncle B's Bakery has also introduced a fresh
bagel, also sold in supermarkets, but in bread aisles, in-store bakeries, and deli departments, under
Uncle B's Bakery's "Millspring" brand name. According to its market evaluations, Uncle B's Bakery
asserts that, while the entire bagel market is growing at a phenomenal rate, "frozen" bagel sales are
growing only at a 2-3% rate. Faster growth rates in sales are apparent for "fresh," or bread aisle,
bagels, and for refrigerated bagels, currently the smallest share of bagel sales. Uncle B's Bakery's sales
of its unique refrigerated product are growing at over 120%, according to Uncle B's Bakery's market
estimates. Uncle B's Bakery controls about 48% of the refrigerated bagel sales, but asserts that other
bagels sold in the refrigerated case have first been frozen, then "slacked out," or thawed, prior to sale
from a store's refrigerated or dairy case. Uncle B's Bakery does not sell a frozen bagel. All of Uncle B's
Bakery's bagels are currently sold under its own labels.

Brooklyn Bagel Boys, to the contrary, has the largest share of its production and sales in "frozen"
bagels. Thus, its bagels are sold primarily in supermarket freezer sections, but under a variety of
private labels, that is, labels bearing a name other than Brooklyn Bagel Boys. In fact, ninety-six percent
of Brooklyn Bagel Boys' sales are made under private labels, with only the small remainder of its sales
under its own Brooklyn Bagel Boys' label. Like Uncle B's Bakery, Brooklyn Bagel Boys also makes
a "fresh," or bread aisle, bagel, also sold under private label brand names. As will be discussed more
extensively below, the nature of the packaging used by each bagel maker is critical in the present
controversy. Although Uncle B's Bakery's bagels are sold in "air tight" bags, Brooklyn Bagel Boys'
bagels are sold in plastic bags closed with a plastic fastener, which does not produce an "air tight"
seal. Each bagel company involved in this litigation employs its own unique, and secret, recipes for its
bagels.

Brooklyn Bagel Boys attempted to cast doubt on Uncle B's Bakery's assertion that the two companies
are "direct competitors," because Brooklyn Bagel Boys produces bagels sold in the frozen foods
section of supermarkets, while Uncle B's Bakery produces bagels sold in refrigerator cases, as well
as in fresh bread, deli, and bakery sections of supermarkets. The court is convinced that whether or
not bagel producers consider the slight difference in the location in which their bagels are sold in
a supermarket to be of overweening significance to their perception of whether or not their bagels
"compete," to consumers, grocery store bagels are grocery store bagels--at least in the absence of any
empirical or other evidence to the contrary. By contrast, the court recognizes that a consumer might
not conceive of bagel producers as "direct competitors" where one produces grocery store bagels
and the other produces fresh bagels sold on site in its own bakery outlets or franchised restaurants.
Furthermore, the two companies produce bagels for marketing in some of the same store chains, and
virtually identical, nationwide geographical markets. Uncle B's Bakery markets in forty-three states,
and Brooklyn Bagel Boys in forty-four, as well as Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Finally, at the
preliminary injunction hearing it was demonstrated that the two companies each produce a "fresh,"
or bread aisle, bagel, and those products do compete directly. Thus, Uncle B's Bakery and Brooklyn
Bagel Boys are both direct and indirect competitors in the supermarket bagel business.

3. Bagels, shelf life, and technology

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 411
Uncle B's Bakery guarantees a ninety-day shelf life for its refrigerated bagels, which its representatives
testified is less than the 120 days its testing has indicated is the actual shelf life, thus allowing thirty
days for storage and shipping. The shelf life of Uncle B's Bakery's "fresh," or bread aisle, bagels is
also long by industry standards, approaching four weeks. The longest shelf life guaranteed by any
competitor identified at the preliminary injunction hearing was sixty to seventy days, but the court
finds that the vast majority of grocery store bagels sold in the "fresh" bread aisle or refrigerator case
typically have a significantly shorter shelf life, usually of less than three weeks. Only "frozen" bagels
can rival Uncle B's Bakery's guaranteed shelf life for its refrigerator case bagels, which Uncle B's
Bakery achieves without freezing. Uncle B's Bakery presented testimony that it has had less than one
percent returns of its product for any reason, including reasons unrelated to its product failing to
survive in saleable form for the full duration of the guaranteed shelf life. Uncle B's Bakery believes the
industry average for returns is eleven to twelve percent.

Uncle B's Bakery asserts that it is able to maintain the quality and shelf life of both its refrigerated
and "fresh" bagel products without freezing owing to confidential and proprietary formulations and
manufacturing and packaging processes, including an "air tight" packaging process. At the hearing, it
was demonstrated that Uncle B's Bakery's "air tight" packaging process, instrumental in the long shelf
life and quality of its products maintained without freezing, involves placing Uncle B's Bakery's bagels
in "air tight" bags and back-flushing the bags with medical grade gases to inhibit staling and molding.
This process was described as "controlled atmosphere packaging" (CAP), or "modified atmosphere
packaging" (MAP). The "air tight" packaging process involves special equipment made exclusively for
Uncle B's Bakery. Although the CAP or MAP process has been used for several years for a variety of
foods, such as meats and cheeses, Uncle B's Bakery is the only bagel maker and distributor employing
this approach to improving product freshness, quality, and shelf life. Although Brooklyn Bagel Boys
was aware of the MAP process years ago, like other commercial bakers of bagels and other products,
Brooklyn Bagel Boys considered this packaging process too expensive and unnecessary an investment
to explore it further. Uncle B's Bakery asserted that the material of the "air tight" bags it employs meets
unique specifications and the suppliers of these bags are bound not to disclose Uncle B's Bakery's use
of the material in question. Kevin O'Rourke testified, however, that the material used by Uncle B's
Bakery for its bags, at least during his tenure with the company, was a "stock" material available from
a number of suppliers. The court finds that whether or not the material used is a "stock" material
of packaging suppliers, what material is actually used by Uncle B's Bakery for its packaging, the
specifications that material must meet, and who actually supplies the bags to Uncle B's Bakery are
all "secret." Furthermore, the court finds that there is no reason, based on the preliminary injunction
record, that the packaging secrets, as well as some of the other production secrets Uncle B's Bakery
treasures, could not be applied to bagels other than refrigerated, never frozen bagels.

Other significant contributors to the long shelf life of Uncle B's Bakery's bagels are its unique recipes,
including special ingredients to prevent molding or staling, and its bagel-making processes. Uncle
B's Bakery's bagel-making process employs special, assertedly secret, cold treatments to the bagels to
shorten the period of "retarding," or refrigerated rising, after the yeast are activated. The "retarding"
process is common to various commercial bakery products. However, Uncle B's Bakery employs
unique, and secret, methods to shorten significantly this retarding period, cutting the "retarding" time
to approximately three-quarters of the period it formerly required. A shorter retarding time obviously
increases the daily capacity for bagel production at Uncle B's Bakery's plant. Uncle B's Bakery has
also explored other bagel-making techniques focusing on the benefits of specific, assertedly secret,
ingredients and processes. As part of the development of special processes, CEO William Rose, Jr.,

412 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
and then plant manager Kevin O'Rourke took an extended trip to Europe to test various techniques
employed there. From its research and development, Uncle B's Bakery has developed certain new
processes it is currently beginning to implement.

Despite several years of attempting to obtain a "process" patent for its bagel production and bagging
process, Uncle B's Bakery has thus far failed to obtain a patent. Nonetheless, Uncle B's Bakery has
invested over seven years and several million dollars in developing its freshness technology and
processes.

4. Uncle B's Bakery's efforts to protect its secrets

Uncle B's Bakery asserts, and the court finds, that it has carefully guarded its trade secrets and
confidential information. For example, anyone who visits Uncle B's Bakery's plant is required to sign
a confidentiality agreement. Indeed, employees are instructed that if any unescorted person appears
in the plant, that person is to be escorted to the company's offices to complete a confidentiality
agreement before he or she can conduct any other business or visit any portion of the plant.

The confidentiality agreement signed by visitors, according to the copy of the agreement signed
by O'Rourke, states, inter alia, that the parties recognize that Uncle B's Bakery "desires to keep its
processes and equipment for the production and packaging of its products confidential." Plaintiff's
Exhibit 1, Plant Visitor Confidentiality Agreement (hereinafter, "Confidentiality Agreement"), p. 1.
The confidential information in question

        includes, but is not limited to, any and all of Company's past, present, or future raw or processed
        products, ingredients, manufacturing, advertising or design techniques, plans, ideas, formulas,
        equipment brands and types, processes, methods, and operating conditions not previously
        publicly known (hereinafter the "Information").

Id. The Confidentiality Agreement also states that the parties "consider their relationship one of
confidence with respect to the Information and agree that the Information constitutes valuable trade
secrets which are the sole property of Company." Id. Visitors signing the Confidentiality Agreement,
including O'Rourke, therefore agreed that they would "hold the Information in confidence," and "take
all reasonable action to prevent the unauthorized use or disclosure of the Information and to protect
the confidentiality of the Company's interests in the Information." Id. at p. 2,  1. Furthermore, the
Confidentiality Agreement states that

        Visitor understands that any violation of this Agreement will cause Company immediate and
        irreparable harm which money damages cannot adequately remedy. Therefore, upon any
        actual or impending violation of this Agreement, Visitor consents to issuance by any court of
        competent jurisdiction, a restraining order, preliminary injunction, and/or permanent
        injunction, without bond, restraining or enjoining such violation by Visitor or any entity or
        person acting in concert with Visitor. Visitor understands that such orders are in addition to,
        and do not limit, any other remedies available to the Company.

Id. at p. 2,  2. The Confidentiality Agreement further provides that it "shall remain valid and in effect
indefinitely," id. at p. 2,  3, and that "[i]n the event that Visitor enters the Plant at a future date, Visitor

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 413
  will remain bound by this Agreement and will not be required to sign an additional Agreement." Id. at
  p. 2,  4. 3

  As a further example of Uncle B's Bakery's efforts to maintain confidentiality of its manufacturing
  processes, Uncle B's Bakery extracts from all of its suppliers a more comprehensive confidentiality
  agreement, requiring the suppliers to keep confidential Uncle B's Bakery's use of particular machinery
  or supplies. In a number of cases in which Uncle B's Bakery believes that particularly unique or
  sensitive technology or supplies are used in its production or bagging processes, it has extracted
  "exclusivity" agreements from key suppliers, forbidding the suppliers from providing identical
  products to Uncle B's Bakery's competitors, as well as requiring them not to disclose Uncle B's
  Bakery's use of such products.

  Furthermore, Uncle B's Bakery requires all employees to enter into a "Non-Disclosure/
  Non-Compete" Agreement before commencing employment with the company. The
  "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement defines the confidential information to which it
  pertains as

          the following categories of information (hereinafter the "Trade Secrets and Confidential
          Information"): the development of original and unique recipes, ingredients, manufacturing
          techniques, packaging techniques, proceses [sic] involved in the production and/or packaging
          of Employer's products, equipment brands and types used, and trade secrets for the production
          and packaging of bread products.

  Plaintiff's Exhibit 3, "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, p. 1. For essentially the same
  reasons stated in the Confidentiality Agreement described above, the "Non-Disclosure/
  Non-Compete" Agreement embodies the signatories' agreement to the following terms significant in
  the context of the present motion for a preliminary injunction:

          2. NON-DISCLOSURE Employee agrees that such Trade Secrets and Confidential Information,
          as set forth above, are the property of the Employer and that any of the Trade Secrets and
          Confidential Information hereafter revealed to Employee directly or indirectly are revealed
          in strict confidence. Employee expressly agrees and covenants to keep and respect such
          confidences and shall not, during or after the term of employment, disclose Employer's Trade
          Secrets and Confidential Information to any person, business, corporation, or other entity for
          any reason or purpose unless explicitly authorized by Employer.

          3. NON-COMPETE It is expressly understood and agreed that during Employee's training
          and employment, Employee will be exposed to Employer's Trade Secrets and Confidential
          Information and will therefore become a valuable asset. Employee expressly agrees and
          covenants not to compete directly or indirectly, nor have an interest in any business,
          corporation or other entity which competes directly or indirectly, nor work for any person,
          business, corporation or other entity which competes directly or indirectly with Employer

3. The Confidentiality Agreement has other provisions not pertinent to this preliminary injunction ruling. For example, it also
   provides that in any dispute under the Confidentiality Agreement involving litigation, the prevailing party shall be entitled
   to attorney fees and other costs in addition to all other remedies; it provides that it is a fully integrated contract that is
   binding on successors and that is made and to be performed in the state of Iowa, "whose substantive laws, without regard to
   conflicts of law, shall apply to its construction and enforcement"; and it provides that the visitor acknowledges receipt and
   review of a copy of the agreement before signing it and understands all of its terms.

  414 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
          within a 500 mile radius of any of Employer's marketing outlets either during the term of
          Employee's employment or for a period of five years thereafter.

          4. INJUNCTION It is expressly understood and agreed that in the event of the violation by
          Employee of this agreement or of the threatened violation thereof, the Employer shall be
          entitled to obtain an injunction enjoining and restraining Employee from violating the terms of
          this agreement. Employee consents upon such violation or threatened violation to the issuance
          of an exparte [sic] temporary injunction until such time as opportunity for hearing thereon be
          granted upon notice prescribed by the courts.

  "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, p. 2. 4 The "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete"
  Agreement also provides that it "shall be construed according to the laws of" the State of Iowa. Id. at
  p. 3,  9. 5

  A good share of the testimony of Uncle B's Bakery's witnesses was devoted to establishing that it is a
  company policy, with no exceptions, that every employee, down to the lowest levels, immediately sign
  a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement upon starting employment with Uncle B's Bakery,
  and the court finds that this was indeed the policy. Based on the uniformity with which the policy
  was enforced, the court finds that it would be only in the most extraordinary of circumstances that
  this policy would not be known to a particular employee. Upon arriving to start employment, the
  company's protocol is for each new employee of Uncle B's Bakery to be presented with a packet
  of forms he or she must sign. This packet includes, in addition to W-2 forms and forms required
  by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, an "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement.
  The employee is required to complete all forms, and Uncle B's Bakery's Human Resources Manager,
  JoAnn Kuhfus, or her assistant, then reviews all forms for completeness and correctness. If all forms
  have not been completed, Ms. Kuhfus testified that she "followed up" with that employee until all
  forms were completed. She testified that no employee had ever refused to sign the "Non-Disclosure/
  Non-Compete" Agreement, but if that occurred, she would likely refer the matter to her direct
  supervisor, CFO Howard McClellan. Witnesses for Uncle B's Bakery had reviewed the personnel files
  of all current employees and those employees to depart during 1995, numbering approximately 160
  files, and could discover only two in which a signed "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement
  could not be found. One file missing a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement was Kevin
  O'Rourke's. The entire file of another employee, Mr. Conrad, could not be located at all. His file
  had been sent to the company's attorneys when Mr. Conrad threatened litigation after termination
  for poor performance, and the attorneys had been unable to find and return it as of the time of the
  preliminary injunction hearing.

  The court finds the evidence that Uncle B's Bakery's policy is that all employees sign
  "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreements is overwhelming. Although perhaps less well founded

4. Another form of the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, also acknowledged to have been used by Uncle B's
   Bakery at some time, stated a non-competition period of only two years. However, the parties stipulated that such
   agreements with a five-year non-competition period were signed by two new employees, one on February 9, 1994, shortly
   before O'Rourke began his employment with Uncle B's Bakery, and another in the fall of 1993, as indicative of when
   the change over from a two-year to a five-year non-competition period occurred in the standard "Non-Disclosure/
   Non-Compete" Agreement employed by the company.

5. Additional terms of the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement not relevant at this stage of the proceedings pertain
   to damages and other remedies for breach of its terms, a non-waiver of the employer's rights under the agreement except in
   writing signed by the employer, and attorneys' fees and costs in actions to protect the employer's rights under the agreement.

                                                                                     25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 415
in objective evidence, the court also finds that, in general, employees of Uncle B's Bakery were
aware of the requirement that they sign a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement. Adherence
to Uncle B's Bakery's policy of requiring "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreements from its
employees has been so nearly unanimous, and the knowledge among the workforce that such
agreements are required is so general, as to raise a reasonable inference that the apparent exceptions,
O'Rourke and Conrad, also conformed to the policy by entering into "Non-Disclosure/
Non-Compete" Agreements. O'Rourke has attempted to rebut that inference as to him, and the court
considers below whether his argument that he never saw, signed, or knew about such an agreement
sufficiently undermines Uncle B's Bakery's likelihood of success on the merits to preclude entry of a
preliminary injunction enjoining his employment with a competitor.

5. Kevin O'Rourke's employment with Uncle B's Bakery

It is undisputed that Kevin O'Rourke was hired as the production manager for Uncle B's Bakery's
Ellsworth, Iowa, plant in early 1994. O'Rourke was recruited by Uncle B's Bakery from his position
as plant manager for a supermarket chain in Richmond, Virginia, where his duties included managing
a bakery and bagel manufacturing plant. O'Rourke came to work for Uncle B's Bakery on February
15, 1994. It is also undisputed that, as plant manager, O'Rourke was privy to and, in most cases,
deeply involved in the development or implementation of all of the matters Uncle B's Bakery asserts
are secret concerning the operations of its Ellsworth plant. O'Rourke was at least generally aware
of matters outside of bagel production as well, such as sales, accounting, purchasing, and planning,
because of his involvement with other members of Uncle B's Bakery's management team in regular
company meetings. Thus, the most significant factual questions here involve whether O'Rourke
was bound by Uncle B's Bakery's ubiquitous Confidentiality Agreement, "Non-Disclosure/
Non-Compete" Agreement, or both.

Uncle B's Bakery entered into evidence a copy of a visitor confidentiality agreement signed by Kevin
O'Rourke on December 14, 1993, prior to O'Rourke's employment with Uncle B's Bakery. In addition
to O'Rourke's signature, the confidentiality agreement bears the signature of a representative of Uncle
B's Bakery, its CFO, Howard McClellan, who also initialed as a witness to O'Rourke's signature.
Although defendants asserted as an affirmative defense in their answer that O'Rourke had neither
signed nor agreed to the terms of any restrictive covenants with Uncle B's Bakery, defendants also
admitted in their answer that O'Rourke visited Uncle B's Bakery's production facility in Ellsworth,
Iowa, on or about December 14, 1993, and that he signed a confidentiality agreement that day.
O'Rourke's executed copy of the Confidentiality Agreement was not kept in his personnel file, but in
William Rose, Jr.'s own files, as O'Rourke was a candidate for a high position in the company. The
usual practice of the company is to keep executed visitor Confidentiality Agreements in a file in the
reception area.

Although the parties agree, and the court finds, that O'Rourke signed the Confidentiality Agreement
described above, a significant bone of contention at the preliminary injunction hearing was whether
O'Rourke had ever signed a non-disclosure/non-compete agreement upon which Uncle B's Bakery
also founds its demand for a preliminary injunction enjoining misappropriation of trade secrets, as
well as its further demand for a preliminary injunction enjoining violation of a non-competition
agreement. Although it could produce no executed copy, either with its complaint, as an attachment to
its motion for a preliminary injunction, or as an exhibit in the preliminary injunction hearing, Uncle
B's Bakery asserts that O'Rourke, upon entering into his employment as plant manager of Uncle B's
Bakery's Ellsworth, Iowa, plant, signed a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement of the form

416 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
described above. The defendants contend to the contrary. O'Rourke asserts, not only that he never
saw nor signed such an agreement, but that he never required any employee he hired for Uncle B's
Bakery to sign such an agreement. O'Rourke contends further that he never received nor signed any
contract of employment at all, but only received a letter from Uncle B's Bakery's Chairman and CEO,
William Rose, Jr., stating the terms of his employment.

Although all the rest of the usual forms were found in Mr. O'Rourke's personnel file, no signed
"Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement could be located. Ms. Kuhfus could not recall whether
she had ever seen an executed copy of O'Rourke's "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement
in his personnel file. Lacking any positive evidence of his agreement to the terms of the
"Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, in the form of a signed copy of the agreement, the
court is confronted with a credibility contest concerning whether O'Rourke ever entered into such
an agreement. Witnesses for the two sides tell markedly different versions of the circumstances under
which O'Rourke either did or did not sign the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement.

Both William Rose, Jr., and William Rose, Sr., testified that the two of them had cleaned and readied
O'Rourke's office for his arrival in mid-February of 1994, and that O'Rourke arrived somewhat
earlier than expected late in the afternoon of February 15, 1994. William Rose, Sr., testified that the
Roses greeted O'Rourke, showed him his office, and then asked him to execute the "Non-Disclosure/
Non-Compete" Agreement, which was the only portion of a new employee's packet they considered
essential to get signed immediately. William Rose, Sr., testified that he observed O'Rourke sign the
agreement, then countersigned it himself. William Rose, Jr., then took the executed "Non-Disclosure/
Non-Compete" Agreement and placed in on a desk in the reception area, as Jo Kuhfus was gone for
the day by that time. O'Rourke was then given another tour of the plant before the Roses left him to
settle into his office.

Uncle B's Bakery's explanation for the absence of an executed "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete"
Agreement from O'Rourke's personnel file centers on O'Rourke's motive and opportunity to remove
the agreement from his personnel file when he determined to accept employment with a competitor.
O'Rourke did not deny that he had access to a lockbox in the office area that contained keys to JoAnn
Kuhfus' office, where all personnel records were kept, and that he was, upon several occasions, the
only person in that area of the plant. However, O'Rourke denied removing anything from his file
prior to his departure from Uncle B's Bakery's employment. O'Rourke testified that he was aware
of two forms of the Confidentiality Agreement, the visitor's form and the more extensive form for
suppliers and key persons associated with the company. However, he testified that, until the hearing,
he was unaware of any "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement. When asked about a copy of
the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement of another employee that he had countersigned,
which Uncle B's Bakery had introduced as demonstrating that O'Rourke was indeed aware of the
"Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, O'Rourke testified that he had believed the document
in question at the time was simply the longer form of the confidentiality agreement he knew was used
by the company. O'Rourke testified that he had witnessed the execution of the document only because
no one from human resources was then available to take care of it.

O'Rourke's explanation for the absence of a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement from his
file is simpler than Uncle B's Bakery's: He simply never signed one. O'Rourke testified that no
non-competition agreement was ever discussed prior to his employment, although confidentiality
agreements were discussed extensively. His version of events on the day he arrived was that he was
not asked to sign nor presented with any "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, although he

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 417
  agreed that the Roses had been preparing his office when he arrived, did greet him, and then took
  him on a tour of the plant. O'Rourke testified that at some time shortly after his arrival, although the
  exact timing is uncertain, he received the usual packet of forms for new employees, but that it did
  not contain a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement. The portion of O'Rourke's personnel file
  submitted into evidence shows that all of the other usual employment forms were executed a week or
  ten days after O'Rourke's arrival. 6

  The court finds both O'Rourke's and William Rose, Sr.'s versions of the signing or non-signing of
  the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement to be plausible, and that the witnesses presenting
  those differing versions were credible. Indeed, the credibility assessment here is perhaps the closest
  the court has encountered in a civil case. Whether or not Uncle B's Bakery can ultimately prevail on
  its claim of breach of the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement depends upon whether or not
  O'Rourke signed or otherwise agreed to be bound by such an agreement. However, for the purposes
  of a preliminary injunction, the court may not need to make even a provisional credibility finding,
  because the court's role is to determine the movant's likelihood of success on the merits, not predict
  the outcome of the movant's claim. Thus, the court will make only such provisional findings as it
  must concerning the execution of the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement and only after
  discussing, in the legal analysis portion of this ruling, precisely what and to what extent factual issues
  must be resolved.

  O'Rourke contends that the only employment agreement he ever signed was not the
  "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement proffered by Uncle B's Bakery, but a letter from Uncle
  B's Bakery's CEO, William Rose, Jr., to O'Rourke, dated January 10, 1994. That letter states certain
  terms of Uncle B's Bakery's employment offer to O'Rourke. This letter is also the foundation of
  defendants' affirmative defense that Uncle B's Bakery first breached the terms of its employment
  agreement with O'Rourke. O'Rourke asserts that Uncle B's Bakery breached the terms stated in that
  letter pertaining to paid vacation and an allowance for moving costs. Thus, the pertinent parts of the
  January 10, 1994, letter, at least for the present purposes, are as follows:

          Dear Kevin:

          To confirm our discussion, for [sic] following are the terms of our employment offer:

  * * * * * *

          *Two weeks paid vacation the first year of employment, with increases as the board designates.

  * * * * * *

          *$5,000 allowance for moving cost. $1000 to $2500 now and remainder if needed for family
          move.

  Plaintiff's Exhibit 2, Letter of January 10, 1994. The January 10, 1994, letter is signed by "Bill Rose,"
  and, under the typed heading "Agreed to and accepted by:", is signed by Kevin O'Rourke, with the
  accompanying date of "1/10/94." Id.

  Whatever the controversy over O'Rourke's signing of a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete"

6. The dates on these documents are indicated as either February 23 or February 24, 1994, which O'Rourke testified was
   probably simply his mistake about the date on some of the documents, because all were executed at the same time.

  418 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  Agreement, it is clear that the employment relationship between O'Rourke and Uncle B's Bakery
  did not remain amicable for long. By the fall of 1995, O'Rourke began seeking other employment.
  O'Rourke testified that his renewed job search was prompted by an on-going disagreement with
  Uncle B's Bakery's upper management centering on the failure of Uncle B's Bakery to reimburse
  O'Rourke for moving expenses as promised in the January 10, 1994, letter from Mr. Rose. He also
  testified that his disenchantment with Uncle B's Bakery also stemmed from two public "dressings
  down" he had received from William Rose, Jr., at trade shows or public functions, concerning
  production and quality at the bagel plant. After one of these public dressings down, O'Rourke testified
  that a Uncle B's Bakery shareholder and member of its board of directors, who was also a supplier
  of some of Uncle B's Bakery's unique production equipment, told O'Rourke he had taken enough,
  and that the shareholder would assist O'Rourke in looking for other employment. That shareholder,
  according to O'Rourke, informed him of an opening for a plant manager at Brooklyn Bagel Boys and
  made the initial contacts with Brooklyn Bagel Boys on his behalf. O'Rourke eventually tendered his
  resignation on November 6, 1995, to become effective December 1, 1995.

  William Rose, Jr., however, testified that O'Rourke became annoyed with him when he refused to
  make him a loan under the guise of an advance of moving expenses. Rose testified that he told
  O'Rourke he was not entitled to any more moving money until he moved his family from Virginia.
  Although Rose asserted that all of O'Rourke's own moving expenses had been paid, he produced no
  documentary evidence of such payments at the preliminary injunction hearing. O'Rourke testified
  that he had never been reimbursed or paid any of the $1,000 to $2,500 the letter of January 10, 1994,
  indicated he was entitled to up front.

  The court need not resolve any question concerning why O'Rourke decided to leave his position,
  nor, indeed, need the court determine whether or not Uncle B's Bakery breached the employment
  agreement embodied in the January 10, 1994, letter, in order to determine whether O'Rourke is bound
  by the Confidentiality Agreement he undeniably signed or the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete"
  Agreement he contends he did not sign. Both of those agreements are independent of the terms of the
  January 10, 1994, letter.

  Both of the Roses testified that after he submitted his resignation, O'Rourke assured them that he
  would not be going to work for a competitor. Other of Uncle B's Bakery's witnesses also testified that
  O'Rourke had led them to believe that his new job was not with a competitor. 7 O'Rourke stated in an
  affidavit submitted in resistance to the motion for a preliminary injunction that he never told anyone
  where he was going to be employed next, because at the time of his resignation he did not know which
  of several employment offers he was going to accept. However, at the preliminary injunction hearing,
  O'Rourke testified that, although he had other employment prospects, he had chosen Brooklyn Bagel
  Boys by the time he had advised the Roses that he was leaving. The reason he declined to state where
  he was going, he testified, was that he did not want to compromise the Uncle B's Bakery shareholder
  who had assisted him in finding other employment.

  Once he had made up his mind to leave, O'Rourke testified that he never gave any assurances that
  he would not work for a competitor, although he testified that he told the Roses and other Uncle B's
  Bakery employees that they need have no fears about his breaching any confidentiality agreement.
  O'Rourke testified that William Rose, Jr., at one time reminded him that he could not work for

7. The court finds no reason here to address or resolve the conflicting testimony concerning whether O'Rourke indicated to
   coworkers at Uncle B's Bakery prior to his departure that he was going to get even with the Roses or instead only suggested
   that the Roses were going to damage their own business for reasons unrelated to him.

                                                                                     25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 419
  a competitor because of the non-competition agreement he had signed. O'Rourke testified that he
  responded that he had never signed any such agreement. O'Rourke testified that William Rose, Jr.,
  became agitated, and went looking for the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement O'Rourke
  had purportedly signed, but could not find it. O'Rourke testified that the Roses thereafter pestered
  him to sign a "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, but that he saw no reason to when he
  had promised to honor his obligations not to disclose their confidential information. Certainly, no
  "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement was signed at that time.

  The court finds that the question of whether a preliminary injunction should issue in this case
  will turn on whether O'Rourke is bound by the Confidentiality Agreement, the "Non-Disclosure/
  Non-Compete" Agreement, or both, not on whether or not O'Rourke misled Uncle B's Bakery's
  representatives concerning where he would next be employed. 8 Believing that it should not make any
  unnecessary findings of fact, even provisional ones, on a preliminary injunction record, the court will
  address other matters.

  6. O'Rourke's employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys

  Whatever assurances were or were not given about his future employment, O'Rourke accepted
  employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys, and began working as the plant manager of one of Brooklyn
  Bagel Boys' two bagel production plants in Franklin Park in December of 1995. Another very
  significant factual dispute involves whether O'Rourke's employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys
  necessarily threatens disclosure of Uncle B's Bakery's confidential information and trade secrets,
  as well as whether it violates the terms of O'Rourke's purported non-competition agreement with
  Uncle B's Bakery. Uncle B's Bakery asserts that O'Rourke's employment with a "direct competitor"
  necessarily threatens disclosure and misappropriation of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets, because of
  the managerial position O'Rourke held with Uncle B's Bakery and now holds with Brooklyn Bagel
  Boys and the information he was privy to while employed with Uncle B's Bakery.

  The court found above that Brooklyn Bagel Boys is indeed a direct competitor of Uncle B's Bakery's
  in the "fresh," bread aisle bagel market, and is at least an indirect competitor in the more broadly
  defined "supermarket" bagel market. Defendants, however, presented the testimony of Christopher
  Scott that Brooklyn Bagel Boys has specifically asked O'Rourke not to divulge any trade secrets of
  Uncle B's Bakery concerning its recipes, manufacturing processes, and, more particularly, its "air
  tight" packaging processes. He testified that Brooklyn Bagel Boys was already aware of the MAP
  process, and had rejected it as neither commercially necessary nor commercially feasible. He testified
  that Brooklyn Bagel Boys therefore does not use and has no plans to develop or employ an "air
  tight" packaging process in its production process, so there is little risk that it will appropriate
  Uncle B's Bakery's "air tight" freshness secrets. He also testified that Brooklyn Bagel Boys has no
  intention or interest in branching out into the refrigerated bagel business, but stated that if one of
  its private label customers specifically requested that Brooklyn Bagel Boys make such a product,
  and could demonstrate a commercially viable ground for doing so, Brooklyn Bagel Boys would
  probably try to fulfill that demand. Both O'Rourke and Scott testified that, to date, O'Rourke has not
  disclosed any trade secrets of Uncle B's Bakery, and that it is not necessary for him to do so in the

8. The testimony concerning these supposed assurances may convince a trier of fact that Uncle B's Bakery was lulled into a
   false sense of security in order to conceal from Uncle B's Bakery that O'Rourke was going to work for a competitor and to
   delay Uncle B's Bakery's discovery of the threat of disclosure of its trade secrets. This factual controversy may be pertinent
   to some of the claims in Uncle B's Bakery's lawsuit, but the court finds that it is unnecessary to resolve, even provisionally,
   whether assurances were given in order to rule on the application for a preliminary injunction.

  420 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
  performance of his job with Brooklyn Bagel Boys, because of his own fund of experience with the
  bagel-making and distributing business, as the result of years of experience in the field, and because of
  the significant differences between Brooklyn Bagel Boys' recipes and processes and those employed
  by Uncle B's Bakery. Scott and O'Rourke both asserted that Brooklyn Bagel Boys has its own recipes
  and manufacturing processes for bagels, which differ significantly from Uncle B's Bakery's, and that
  Brooklyn Bagel Boys has no desire or motivation to change its own successful recipes and processes.
  O'Rourke, who is the only witness thoroughly familiar with both production systems, asserted that
  it would be impossible to revamp Brooklyn Bagel Boys's present production line to incorporate
  Uncle B's Bakery's unique process. Most specifically, Brooklyn Bagel Boys' bagel production system
  involves no "retarding" process, which, even under Uncle B's Bakery's unique cold treatment, still
  takes several hours, and there is no practicable way to introduce such a process into the Brooklyn
  Bagel Boys production system at this time. Furthermore, Brooklyn Bagel Boys has just conducted a
  major expansion involving the completion of another bakery production line for non-bagel products,
  and no further expansions are contemplated.

  Although the court accepts this testimony at its face value, the court nonetheless finds that Uncle B's
  Bakery has reason to be concerned about disclosure of its trade secrets and confidential information
  as the result of O'Rourke's employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. The reasons for that conclusion
  are discussed below, following the court's examination of the standards for determining whether
  Uncle B's Bakery has shown a threat of irreparable harm from O'Rourke's employment with Brooklyn
  Bagel Boys.

  With this factual background in mind, recognizing that it at best provides the court with a provisional
  record upon which to base decisions of some significance to the parties, the court turns to the legal
  analysis of Uncle B's Bakery's motion to enjoin disclosure and misappropriation of trade secrets and
  improper employment of a former employee with a competitor. With the proper legal framework in
  mind, the court will return to some of the necessary factual determinations it must make in order to
  resolve the question of whether a preliminary injunction should issue in this case.

  II. LEGAL ANALYSIS

  (Including some further preliminary findings of fact)

  A. Standards For Preliminary Injunctions

  In their briefs, admittedly prepared under the "severe time constraints" that necessarily attend
  prosecution of a motion for a preliminary injunction, the parties have given but little attention
  to the standards applicable to a motion for a preliminary injunction. 9This slim discussion of the
  applicable standards may be attributable, as well, to the fact that it is well-settled in this circuit
  that applications for preliminary injunctions are generally measured against the standards set forth
  in the decision of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in Dataphase Sys., Inc. v. CL Sys., Inc., 640
  F.2d 109, 113 (8th Cir.1981) (en banc). Whatever the reason for largely leaving to the court the
  responsibility for discovering the proper standards, there is little danger that the court will act in

9. Indeed, in its brief, Uncle B's Bakery, the party upon whom the burden to show entitlement of preliminary injunction
   devolves, does not so much as list or identify the standards by which a motion for a preliminary injunction is to be
   decided, instead relying entirely on two federal cases from this district in which the court enjoined a former employee's
   employment with a competitor, either to enjoin possible disclosure of the former employer's trade secrets or to enforce a
   non-competition agreement.

                                                                                     25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 421
ignorance of those standards, because this court has several times during the last year or so extensively
discussed in published opinions the Dataphase standards for granting a temporary restraining order
or issuing a preliminary injunction. See United States v. Barnes, 912 F.Supp. 1187, 1192-93 (N.D.Iowa
1996) (applying Dataphase standards to motion for preliminary injunction under 18 U.S.C.  1345
after finding a correlation between the Dataphase standards and the special requirements of the
fraud injunction statute); Heather K. v. City of Mallard, 887 F.Supp. 1249, 1256-66 (N.D.Iowa 1995)
(ruling on application for TRO in ADA case, which sought to enjoin municipality's open burning
ordinance which was causing injury to child with severe respiratory problems, including explication
and application of each of the Dataphase factors); Curtis 1000, Inc. v. Youngblade, 878 F.Supp. 1224,
1243-49 (N.D.Iowa 1995) (ruling on application for preliminary injunction, which sought to enjoin
conduct by a former salesman in violation of a covenant not to compete, also including discussion and
application of Dataphase factors); Sports Design and Development, Inc. v. Schoneboom, 871 F.Supp. 1158,
1162-65 (N.D.Iowa 1995) (concluding standards are the same for a TRO or preliminary injunction,
citing S.B. McLaughlin & Co. v. Tudor Oaks Condominium Project, 877 F.2d 707, 708 (8th Cir.1989),
and applying those standards from Dataphase in case involving alleged trademark infringement of
fishing lures); but see Terra Int'l, Inc. v. Mississippi Chem. Corp., 896 F.Supp. 1468, 1473 (N.D.Iowa 1995)
(Dataphase factors are not applicable to a motion for a preliminary injunction to enjoin a second-
filed action, citing Northwest Airlines, Inc. v. American Airlines, Inc., 989 F.2d 1002, 1004 (8th Cir.1993)).
The court will not expound upon those standards extensively here. The important point is that the
standards generally applicable to issuance of either a temporary restraining order or a preliminary
injunction in this circuit are set out in the seminal Dataphase decision. See Dataphase Sys., Inc., 640 F.2d
at 113 & n. 5.

1. "Dataphase" standards

Over the last decade and a half, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals has repeatedly cited the standards
stated in Dataphase as the basis on which courts are to determine whether or not to issue a preliminary
injunction in a civil case. Heather K., 887 F.Supp. at 1256-57 (citing Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals
cases applying these standards). The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals most recently applied these
standards in Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum, Inc., 70 F.3d 958 (8th Cir.1995). One recent formulation of
the Dataphase standards is as follows:

        When considering a motion for a preliminary injunction, a district court weighs the movant's
        probability of success on the merits, the threat of irreparable harm to the movant absent the
        injunction, the balance between the harm and the injury that the injunction's issuance would
        inflict on other interested parties, and the public interest. Dataphase Sys., Inc. v. C L. Sys., Inc., 640
        F.2d 109, 114 (8th Cir.1981) (en banc). We reverse the issuance of a preliminary injunction only
        if the issuance "is the product of an abuse of discretion or misplaced reliance on an erroneous
        legal premise." City of Timber Lake v. Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, 10 F.3d 554, 556 (8th Cir.1993),
        cert. denied, 512 U.S. 1236, 114 S.Ct. 2741, 129 L.Ed.2d 861 (1994).

Pottgen v. Missouri State High Sch. Activities Ass'n, 40 F.3d 926, 929 (8th Cir.1994). The burden of
establishing the propriety of a preliminary injunction is on the movant. Baker Elec. Co-op., Inc. v.
Chaske, 28 F.3d 1466, 1472 (8th Cir.1994); Modern Computer Sys., Inc. v. Modern Banking Sys., Inc., 871
F.2d 734, 737 (8th Cir.1989) (en banc). "No single [Dataphase] factor in itself is dispositive; in each case
all of the factors must be considered to determine whether on balance they weigh towards granting
the injunction." Baker Elec. Co-op., 28 F.3d at 1472 (quoting Calvin Klein Cosmetics Corp. v. Lenox Labs.,
Inc., 815 F.2d 500, 503 (8th Cir.1987), and also citing Dataphase).

422 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
2. Other standards

Although the Dataphase standards are generally applicable to motions for preliminary injunctions in
civil cases in this circuit, the court cannot pass on without comment on at least two other candidates
in this case for articulations of the applicable standards. First, in another diversity action also
involving efforts by a former employer to enjoin competition by a former employee purportedly in
violation of a non-competition agreement, this court considered whether the Erie doctrine, requiring
application of state law to substantive questions in diversity cases, required application of state
or federal standards to issuance of a preliminary injunction. See Curtis 1000, Inc., 878 F.Supp. at
1243-44. In Curtis 1000, this court concluded that it should apply federal rather than Iowa law to
the determination of whether a preliminary injunction should issue in that case, because, the court
found, federal courts are to apply their own rules of civil procedure, including Fed.R.Civ.P. 65, which
incorporates traditional federal equity practice for the issuance of preliminary injunctions. Id. at 1244.
The parties here have not raised the question of whether state or federal law applies to the issuance of
a preliminary injunction in this case, this court has decided the question in a prior decision and finds
no ground to abandon that decision, and, furthermore, again as in Curtis 1000, the court concludes
that, as a practical matter, application of federal rather than Iowa law to the question before the court
would not be "outcome determinative," as Iowa courts apply roughly the same test as do federal courts
of this circuit to issuance of a preliminary injunction, although the Iowa standard may in fact be more
lenient. Id. Therefore, the court will look to the federal standards, rather than state standards, for
issuance of a preliminary injunction.

That is not the end of the potentially applicable standards in this case, however, any more than it
was the end of the question in Curtis 1000. In both this case and Curtis 1000, the court has been
confronted with purported agreements between the parties stating standards applicable to issuance
of a preliminary injunction in the circumstances alleged here, breach of a confidentiality agreement
and breach of a non-competition agreement. See Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1249-51. In Curtis
1000, the parties had entered into a non-competition agreement which provided that the employer
need only prove the existence of a breach of the covenant not to compete, not proof of each of
the Dataphase factors, in order to be entitled to injunctive relief. Id. at 1250. Here, the court notes
that the Confidentiality Agreement signed by O'Rourke provides that the parties recognize that "any
violation of this Agreement will cause Company immediate and irreparable harm which money
damages cannot adequately remedy," and "[t]herefore, upon any actual or impending violation of this
Agreement," O'Rourke consented to issuance of a preliminary injunction, "without bond," enjoining
violation of the Confidentiality Agreement. Confidentiality Agreement, p. 2,  2. Furthermore, the
"Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement O'Rourke is purported to have signed also contains
provisions governing issuance of a preliminary injunction, which provide that "[i]t is expressly
understood and agreed that in the event of the violation by Employee of this agreement or of
the threatened violation thereof, the Employer shall be entitled to obtain an injunction enjoining
and restraining Employee from violating the terms of this agreement," and stating the employee's
consent to issuance of an ex parte TRO upon any violation or threatened violation of the agreement.
"Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, p. 2,  4.

Thus, these contractual standards for issuance of a preliminary injunction are even broader than those
encountered in Curtis 1000, because they provide for issuance of a preliminary injunction upon proof
of either a violation, or threatened violation, of the terms of the agreements, without proof of each of
the Dataphase factors, in order to be entitled to injunctive relief. Cf. Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1250
(preliminary injunction to issue on proof of a breach of the non-competition agreement). As in Curtis

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 423
   1000, the court concludes that these contractual standards are not at odds with Eighth Circuit Court
   of Appeals standards, because "the Court of Appeals of this circuit has held that irreparable harm `can
   be inferred from a trial court's actual finding of a breach [of a restrictive covenant] by the defendant.' "
   Id. (quoting Overholt Crop Ins. Serv. Co. v. Travis, 941 F.2d 1361, 1371 (8th Cir.1991)). Furthermore, the
   principle of freedom of contract is entitled to some precedence where courts have accepted certain
   restraints on trade. Id. However, as in Curtis 1000, the court again concludes that it need not decide
   whether to apply Dataphase standards or contractual standards in this case, at least not immediately,
   because "if in this case [Uncle B's Bakery] is entitled to a preliminary injunction under the more
   stringent standards established by Dataphase and its progeny, then the court need not consider the
   lower threshold purportedly set by the contract[s]." Id. at 1250-51. Only if the court concludes that
   Uncle B's Bakery is not entitled to a preliminary injunction under the Dataphase standards will it
   return to the question of whether Uncle B's Bakery is nonetheless entitled to a preliminary injunction
   under the contractual standards.

   B. Application Of The Standards

   The court will consider Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a preliminary injunction in light of each of
   the Dataphase factors in turn, to determine whether these factors weigh in favor of enjoining, to
   some extent, the conduct of either O'Rourke or Brooklyn Bagel Boys. The court reserves for further
   consideration below the question of the extent or scope of any injunctive relief, should the court first
   determine that issuance of a preliminary injunction is appropriate.

   1. Likelihood of success on the merits

   The first factor considered by the courts under Dataphase when ruling on an application for a TRO
   or preliminary injunction is the likelihood or probability of success on the merits. Pottgen, 40 F.3d at
   929. When considering this factor, the court is not deciding whether the movant for a preliminary
   injunction will ultimately win. Glenwood Bridge, Inc. v. City of Minneapolis, 940 F.2d 367, 371 (8th
   Cir.1991); O'Connor v. Peru State College, 728 F.2d 1001, 1002 (8th Cir.1984) (in such preliminary
   proceedings, "the court should avoid deciding with any degree of certainty who will succeed or not
   succeed."). In isolation, the likelihood of success on the merits is meaningless. Glenwood Bridge, 940
   F.2d at 371 (quoting similar language in Dataphase ). Therefore, the court must consider other factors,
   especially the threat of irreparable harm. XXXX

   In order to weigh in the movant's favor, the movant's success on the merits must be "at least ...
   sufficiently likely to support the kind of relief it requests." 10

10. Another circuit court of appeals has recently described the meaning of likelihood of success on the merits and its interplay
    with the balance of harms as follows:

              What is true is that if the party seeking the preliminary injunction would suffer more harm from the denial of it than
              his opponent would suffer from its being granted, the injunction should be granted even if the party seeking it has no
              more than a 50-50 chance of winning, and even, in some cases, if the odds are worse. If for example the party seeking
              the injunction would lose $10,000 if it was denied, and has a 40 percent chance of being in the right, and the other
              party would lose only $1,000 if the injunction is granted and has (necessarily) a 60 percent chance of being in the
              right, then the cost of denial of the injunction to the party seeking it, when discounted by the probability that he is in
              the right, would exceed the cost of granting the injunction to the other party, when discounted by the probability of
              his being in the right. (That is, $4,000 ($10,000 x .40) is greater than $600 ($1,000 x .60).). E.g., Green River Bottling Co.
              v. Green River Corp., 997 F.2d 359, 361 (7th Cir.1993); Curtis v. Thompson, 840 F.2d 1291, 1296 (7th Cir.1988). But if
              as in this case the judge, having obtained in the preliminary hearing all the facts that [the judge] believes pertinent to

    424 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Sanborn Mfg. v. Campbell Hausfeld/Scott Fetzer Co., 997 F.2d 484, 488 (8th Cir.1993) (action under
the Lanham Act in which the court concluded that either result argued by the opposing parties was
directly supported by the evidence presented). Thus, likelihood of success on the merits requires
that the movant find support for its position in governing law. See, e.g., Baker Elec. Co-op, 28 F.3d at
1473-74 (Indian tribe's sovereignty to regulate electrical services); ILQ Inv., Inc. v. City of Rochester,
25 F.3d 1413, 1416 (8th Cir.) (first amendment and prior restraint of expression), cert. denied, 513
U.S. 1017, 115 S.Ct. 578, 130 L.Ed.2d 493 (1994); City of Timber Lake v. Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, 10
F.3d 554, 556-58 (8th Cir.1993) (Indian tribe's regulatory authority and authority of states to regulate
activities on tribal lands), cert. denied, 512 U.S. 1236, 114 S.Ct. 2741, 129 L.Ed.2d 861 (1994); Aziz v.
Moore, 8 F.3d 13, 15 (8th Cir.1993) (denial of injunctive relief proper because federal courts "must
abstain from imposing injunctions on prison officials [in an action under 42 U.S.C.  1983 action] `in
the absence of a concrete showing of a valid claim and constitutionally mandated directives for relief,'
" quoting Rogers v. Scurr, 676 F.2d 1211, 1214 (8th Cir.1982)). The court therefore must consider what
law governs Uncle B's Bakery's claims concerning misappropriation of trade secrets and violation of
a non-competition agreement.

a. The law governing misappropriation of trade secrets

In this diversity action, the substantive law governing Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets claim is Iowa
law. See generally Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 58 S.Ct. 817, 82 L.Ed. 1188 (1938); Austin
v. Super Valu Stores, Inc., 31 F.3d 615, 618 (8th Cir.1994) (citing Erie ); Jackson v. Anchor Packing Co., 994
F.2d 1295, 1310 (8th Cir.1993) (in a diversity action, the federal court is not free to fashion rules of
law from whole cloth, but is instead bound to apply the law of the state in which it sits as far as it is
able to discern it from the rulings of the state's courts). The court finds that protection of trade secrets
is a matter of Iowa statutory and common law. See 205 Corp. v. Brandow, 517 N.W.2d 548, 551 (Iowa
1994) (holding that by omitting a section of the uniform act, which would have specifically displaced
all other trade secret recoveries, at the time the act was adopted by the Iowa legislature, "Chapter 550
has not preempted all tort theories involving trade secrets," although duplicative recoveries would
not be allowed; therefore, the court allowed claims of both misappropriation of trade secrets and
inducement to breach a duty not to disclose confidential information); see also Diversified Fastening
Sys., Inc. v. Rogge, 786 F.Supp. 1486, 1490-91 (N.D.Iowa 1991) (considering a statutory claim under
Chapter 550 and a common-law breach of fiduciary duty not to disclose confidential information
claim as alternative bases for granting a preliminary injunction to prevent disclosure of trade secrets).

i. The Iowa Uniform Trade Secrets Act. The Iowa legislature passed the Iowa Uniform Trade Secrets Act,
Iowa Code Ch. 550, in 1990, and amended that act in 1991. See Acts 1990 (73 G.A.) ch. 1201; Acts
1991 (74 G.A.) ch. 35; see also Diversified Fastening Sys., 786 F.Supp. at 1491 (Iowa Code Chapter 550
was adopted in April of 1990). The Iowa Supreme Court recently discussed the essential features of
the Trade Secrets Act in Economy Roofing & Insulating Co. v. Zumaris, 538 N.W.2d 641 (Iowa 1995):

        Iowa Code section 550.3(1) (1991) provides that "[t]he owner of a trade secret may petition
        the district court to enjoin an actual or threatened misappropriation." Iowa Code section

deciding which party is in the right, is able to make up [his or her] mind that the party seeking the injunction has no
legal ground for his case, [the judge] should not only deny the injunction, [he or she] should dismiss the suit; for [the
judge] knows how it will come out.

Curtis 1000, Inc. v. Suess, 24 F.3d 941, 945 (7th Cir.1994).

                                                              25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 425
            550.4(1) provides that "an owner of a trade secret is entitled to recover damages for the
            misappropriation."

            Iowa Code section 550.2(4) defines a trade secret as [follows:] information, including but not
            limited to a formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique, or process that
            is both of the following:

                    a. Derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally
                    known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by a person able to obtain
                    economic value from its disclosure or use.

                    b. Is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its
                    secrecy.

            Iowa Code  550.2(4).

            Iowa Code section 550.2(3) in pertinent part defines misappropriation as doing any of the
            following:

                    a. Acqui[ring] a trade secret by a person who knows that the trade secret is acquired by
                    improper means.

                    b. Disclos[ing] or us[ing] a trade secret by a person who uses improper means to acquire
                    the trade secret.

                    c. Disclos[ing] or us[ing] a trade secret by a person who at the time of disclosure or
                    use, knows that the trade secret is derived from or through a person who had utilized
                    improper means to acquire the trade secret.

            Iowa Code  550.2(3).

            "Improper means" is defined as "theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach or inducement of
            a breach of a duty to maintain secrecy, or espionage, including but not limited to espionage
            through an electronic device." Iowa Code  550.2(1).

   Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 646; 205 Corp. v. Brandow, 517 N.W.2d 548, 550 (Iowa 1994)
   (Sections 550.4 and 550.5 provide for damages or injunctions misappropriation of trade secrets,
   respectively, and also quoting the statute's definition of trade secrets in 550.2(4));11 see also Pioneer
   Hi-Bred Int'l v. Holden Foundation Seeds, 35 F.3d 1226, 1238 (8th Cir.1994) (finding that
   misappropriation of a trade secret under the common-law requires, inter alia, "improper means,"
   but that improper means are not necessarily unlawful, and further finding that direct evidence
   of improper conduct is not required, and is rarely available; therefore, circumstantial evidence is
   sufficient, and an inference of misappropriation from limited facts is warranted, particularly where

11. One of the 1991 amendments to the Trade Secrets Act substituted the word "both" in Iowa Code  550.2(4) for "either," thus
    defining a "trade secret" as requiring both the limitations stated in subdivisions (a) and (b). Acts 1991 (74 G.A.) ch. 35,  1,
    eff. April 23, 1991; see also Brown v. Iowa Legislative Council, 490 N.W.2d 551, 554 n. 2 (Iowa 1992) (noting the change from
    "either" to "both" in  550.2(4), and considering a claim brought before the change under the former version of the statute,
    and finding that efforts to keep source codes encrypted and intervention in litigation to assert trade secrecy were sufficient
    to satisfy  550.2(4)(b), and therefore finding the information at issue qualified under the statute as a trade secret, without
    suggesting that the information failed  550.2(4)(a)).

    426 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   the secret is so unique its duplication would probably be improper); 12 Diversified Fastening Sys., Inc.,
   786 F.Supp. at 1490-91 (identifying the essential elements of the Iowa act as later stated by the Iowa
   Supreme Court in Economy Roofing ).

   An essential element of a claim, for an injunction or damages, under the Trade Secrets Act is whether
   the information in question could legally constitute "trade secrets," just as it was under the pre-
   existing common-law protection for trade secrets under Iowa law. See Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d
   at 646-47 (reversing district court's dismissal of trade secrets claim, because district court had
   erroneously concluded that the information in question "could never legally constitute trade secrets");
   205 Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 550-51 (also focusing on proper definition of "trade secret" to determine
   viability of claim under the act); US West Communications, Inc., v. Office of Consumer Advocate, 498
   N.W.2d 711, 714 (Iowa 1993) (same); and compare Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co. v. Rowe, 424 N.W.2d 235,
   245-46 (Iowa 1988) (common-law claim of misappropriation of a trade secret, brought before the
   Uniform Trade Secrets Act had been adopted in Iowa, identified the elements of such a claim as "
   `(1) existence of a trade secret, (2) acquisition of the secret as a result of a confidential relationship,
   and (3) unauthorized use of the secret,' " quoting Basic Chemicals, Inc. v. Benson, 251 N.W.2d 220,
   226 (Iowa 1977)); and see also Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, 35 F.3d at 1235 (finding that the elements of
   a common-law misappropriation of trade secrets claim under Iowa law are those stated in Basic
   Chemicals, 251 N.W.2d at 226, and citing Restatement of Torts,  757 cmt. b (1939), as embodying the
   definition of a trade secret; the court was not, however, faced with a challenge to the definition of
   a trade secret, but only considered whether the plaintiff had failed to keep the genetic messages for
   seed corn in question "secret," whether the defendant had actually possessed the protected genetic
   messages, and whether the defendant had obtained the material "by improper means."); E.W. Bliss Co. v.
   Struthers-Dunn, Inc., 408 F.2d 1108, 1112 (8th Cir.1969) (stating elements of a common-law misappropriation
   of trade secrets claim identical to those stated in Basic Chemicals); Diversified Fastening Sys., 786 F.Supp.
   at 1491 (considering injunction under the Iowa Trade Secrets Act, and stating, "The court does not
   decide whether th[e] common law action [available under Iowa law prior to enactment of the uniform
   act] has been supplanted by Iowa Code Chapter 550, or whether elements of the tort outlined by the
   Iowa courts are equally applicable to an action under Chapter 550," then citing the elements of the
   common-law claim of misappropriation of trade secrets under Iowa law as stated in Kendall/Hunt
   Publishing and Basic Chemicals). In a case decided shortly before Economy Roofing, the Iowa Supreme
   Court rejected any common-law definition of trade secrets as applicable under the trade secrets act,
   because the court found that "the words of the statute are plain and unambiguous." 205 Corp., 517
   N.W.2d at 550; and contrast Kendall/Hunt Publishing, 424 N.W.2d at 246 (finding that an exact definition
   of a "trade secret" under the common law did not exist, and employing a multi-factor test to determine
   whether information was or was not a trade secret). In Economy Roofing, the Iowa Supreme Court
   reaffirmed its broad interpretation of the definition of "trade secret" under Iowa Code  550.2(4):

            In a recent case we gave a broad interpretation of "information" that could legally constitute
            "trade secrets":

                    Under the plain language of [Iowa Code section 550.2(4) ] "trade secret" is defined as

12. The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals's decision in Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, in which federal jurisdiction was based on federal
    questions under the Lanham trademark act, but which also involved a complicated pendent claim, under Iowa law, asserting
    misappropriation of trade secrets, does not address the Iowa Trade Secrets Act or any provision of Iowa Code Ch. 550.
    However, the Pioneer Hi-Bred litigation spanned many years, and was based on alleged misappropriation of trade secrets for
    corn seed that had occurred during the 1980s, prior to Iowa's passage of its trade secrets act. See Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, 35 F.3d
    at 1228-29.

                                                                                       25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 427
                    "information" and eight examples of this term are provided. Although these examples
                    cover items normally associated with the production of goods, "trade secrets" are not
                    limited to the listed examples. Business information may also fall within the definition of
                    a trade secret, including such matters as maintenance of data on customer lists and needs,
                    source of supplies, confidential costs, price data and figures. One commentator explains:

                            Trade secrets can range from customer information, to financial information, to
                            information about manufacturing processes to the composition of products. There
                            is virtually no category of information that cannot, as long as the information is
                            protected from disclosure to the public, constitute a trade secret.

                    We believe that a broad range of business data and facts which, if kept secret, provide the
                    holder with an economic advantage over competitors or others, qualify as trade secrets.

            US West Communications, Inc. v. Office of Consumer Advocate, 498 N.W.2d 711, 714 (Iowa 1993)
            (citations omitted).

   Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 646-47 (emphasis in the original). The court, after reaffirming this
   broad interpretation of a "trade secret" under the act, noted that whether or not information in
   question constitutes a trade secret is "a mixed question of law and fact." Id. at 648. The "legal part of the
   question" is whether the information in question "could constitute a trade secret under the first part
   of the definition of trade secret in section 550.2(4) (" `Trade secret ' means information, including but
   not limited to a formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique, or process....")."
   Id. The "fact part of the question," on the other hand, arises from the remaining part of the statutory
   definition found in subdivisions (a) and (b) of  550.2(4). Id. at 648-49. In other words, the factual
   question is whether the information is both of the following:

            a. Derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to,
            and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by a person able to obtain economic value
            from its disclosure or use[; and]

            b. Is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.

   Iowa Code  550.2(4); Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 649. 13

   In 205 Corp., the Iowa Supreme Court further explained these two factual elements of a trade secret.
   205 Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 550-51. The court noted that as to the first limitation, in  550.2(4)(a),
   the plaintiff must "show it derived economic value because the [confidential pizza recipes] were
   unknown to, and not readily ascertainable by, a person who would profit from their disclosure
   and use." 205 Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 550; US West, 498 N.W.2d at 714 ( 550.2(4)(a) requires proof
   of "independent economic value"). In referring to "economic value," the Iowa Supreme Court has

13. In Economy Roofing, the Iowa Supreme Court held that a court's determination that information is not, and presumably
    a determination that information is, a trade secret in the course of a preliminary injunction hearing is not a "final"
    determination on the merits of the question, but instead does not remove the issue from contention at a trial on the merits.
    Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 648. This, of course, is in keeping with the "general rule" this court has found applicable to
    preliminary injunction rulings under the law of the U.S. Supreme Court and this circuit. Furthermore, in the case before it in
    Economy Roofing, in which the district court had made only the legal part of the determination in the course of a preliminary
    injunction hearing, and the district court's determination on that part was clearly erroneous, the Iowa Supreme Court held
    that the court's refusal to reconsider the question at a summary judgment hearing was reversible error. Id. at 649.

    428 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
held, this subsection of the statute "speaks to the value of the information to either the owner or a
competitor; any information which protects the owner's competitive edge or advantage." US West, 498
N.W.2d at 714 (citing Millgrim on Trade Secrets,  9.03(3)(f); Stork-Werkspoor V.V. v. Koek, 534 So.2d 983,
985 (La.Ct.App.1988)). Thus, the court has held, "information kept secret that would be useful to a
competitor and require cost, time and effort to duplicate is of economic value." Id. (citing Surgidev
Corp. v. Eye Technology, Inc., 648 F.Supp. 661, 683 (D.Minn.1986), aff'd, 828 F.2d 452 (8th Cir.1987)).

However, "[b]eyond independent economic value, [the plaintiff] was required to show that it expended
reasonable efforts under the circumstances to maintain secrecy of [its] [purported trade secrets],"
citing Iowa Code  550.2(4)(b) for this second limitation. 205 Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 550. This second
element of a trade secret under the Iowa statutory definition is in keeping with the recognition of
"secrecy" as one of the elements of the common-law definition of a trade secret. See, e.g., Pioneer
Hi-Bred Int'l, 35 F.3d at 1235 (citing Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470, 475, 94 S.Ct.
1879, 1883, 40 L.Ed.2d 315 (1974), for the proposition that "[f]undamental to the existence of a trade
secret is that the matter be, in fact, secret."); Coenco, Inc. v. Coenco Sales, Inc., 940 F.2d 1176, 1178-79
(8th Cir.1991) (same). In 205 Corp., the court concluded that the "key to this second element of the
trade secret test is found in the words `reasonable under the circumstances.' " Id. at 551 (in the case
before it, the court found reasonable efforts under the circumstances even though all employees knew
one of the recipes in question, because it was necessary for all employees to know it in order to
maintain the freshness of the product by preparing it daily); see also Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l, 35 F.3d at
1235 (common-law case holding, "The secrecy [of a purported trade secret], however, need not be
absolute. Reasonable precautions to protect the secrecy of a trade secret will suffice," citing, inter alia,
Surgidev Corp. v. Eye Technology, Inc., 828 F.2d 452, 455 (8th Cir.1987), and focusing, in that case, on
"unanticipated," "undetectable," or "unpreventable" methods of espionage as exceeding what could
reasonably be guarded against).

ii. Is the information in question "trade secrets"? The court concludes, at least provisionally, for the
purposes of this preliminary injunction ruling, that Uncle B's Bakery's information identified, for
example, in the Confidentiality Agreement, concerning its recipes, manufacturing, and packaging
processes, is all "trade secrets" within the meaning of Iowa Code  550.2(4). As to the legal part of
the question, the court concludes that this information fits the statutory list of "trade secrets" as
including, but not limited to, "a formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method, technique, or
process...." See Iowa Code  550.2(4); Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 648. As to the two companion
factual tests of a "trade secret" under the Iowa act, the court finds, first, that Uncle B's Bakery has
"show[n] it derived economic value because the [confidential recipes and processes] were unknown
to, and not readily ascertainable by, a person who would profit from their disclosure and use." 205
Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 550 ( 550.2(4)(a) is the source of this requirement); see also Economy Roofing, 538
N.W.2d at 648; US West, 498 N.W.2d at 714. Brooklyn Bagel Boys argues that almost all the individual
segments of Uncle B's Bakery's production system were generally known to the baking industry,
including MAP and some of the processes Uncle B's Bakery uses in raising its bagels, but, on the
basis of the preliminary injunction record, the court concludes that the entirety of Uncle B's Bakery's
manufacturing process, from ingredients through bagging, is sufficiently unique to constitute a trade
secret under Iowa law. Furthermore, although it may be readily ascertainable that Uncle B's Bakery's
bagels are packaged in an "air tight" bag, it is not readily ascertainable what equipment or process
is involved in so bagging the bagels, nor is it readily ascertainable what part the formulation and
preparation of the bagels themselves may have in their freshness without freezing and long shelf-
life. Certainly, Uncle B's Bakery has "derived economic value" from its secret processes, because, as it

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 429
   asserts, it is the only bagel maker to produce "fresh, never-frozen" bagels for supermarket distribution,
   giving it a unique share of the grocery store bagel market. This value of the information would accrue
   to "either the owner or a competitor [and is] information which protects the owner's competitive edge
   or advantage." US West, 498 N.W.2d at 714. Indeed, Brooklyn Bagel Boys' assertion that it had found
   the MAP process impracticably expensive suggests that a bagel production system that is founded on
   the process, at least one beginning to enjoy significant commercial success, may have some unique
   qualities that could cause a reevaluation of the practicability of MAP for the bagel industry and
   therefore constitute a process of independent economic value to competitors.

   Not only does the information concerning recipes, production, and packaging processes pass the
   "independent economic value" prong of the "trade secret" test under  550.2(4)(a), but it also passes the
   "reasonable efforts under the circumstances to maintain secrecy" prong of the test stated in Iowa Code
    550.2(4)(b). 205 Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 550; see also Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 648 ( 550.2(4)(b)
   provides the second factual inquiry of the trade secrets test). The court finds that Uncle B's Bakery's
   requirement that all visitors to its plant, including prospective employees, sign a Confidentiality
   Agreement, like that signed by O'Rourke, constitutes a "reasonable" effort under the circumstances to
   maintain the secrecy of its recipes, manufacturing, and packaging processes. Thus, the information
   concerning recipes, manufacturing, and packaging processes that Uncle B's Bakery seeks to protect
   from disclosure here by way of a preliminary injunction is indeed "trade secrets" entitled to that
   protection. Thus, Uncle B's Bakery has shown a reasonable likelihood of success on its trade secrets
   claim to the extent that the information it seeks to protect is trade secrets under governing law. 14
   Cf. United Centrifugal Pumps v. Cusimano, 708 F.Supp. 1038, 1042-43 (W.D.Ark.1988) (where the court
   simply could not tell if the information in question was trade secrets, even though the court did not
   need to determine with certainty that the movant had a better than fifty percent chance of succeeding
   on the merits of its trade secrets claim, the court found no sufficient likelihood of success on the
   merits to issue a preliminary injunction on disclosure or employment with a competitor).

   iii. Is there a likelihood of disclosure by "improper means"? Governing law, in the form of the Iowa Trade
   Secrets Act, also provides a legal basis for Uncle B's Bakery's claim that its "trade secrets" have been
   "misappropriated," because, pursuant to  550.2(3), O'Rourke's disclosure of, and Brooklyn Bagel
   Boys' acquisition of these "trade secrets" would be through "improper means." See Iowa Code 
   550.2(3)(a)-(c). "Improper means" include "breach of a duty to maintain secrecy." Iowa Code  550.2(a);
   Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 646. Here, Uncle B's Bakery has shown, to the extent necessary
   to demonstrate a reasonable likelihood of success on the merits of its claim, that O'Rourke was
   subject to such a duty not to disclose information Uncle B's Bakery considered trade secrets or
   otherwise confidential. That duty arises, in the first instance, from the Confidentiality Agreement
   O'Rourke signed on December 14, 1993. Any breach of that duty would occur if O'Rourke were to
   disclose confidential information to Brooklyn Bagel Boys through his employment, and therefore
   any disclosure to Brooklyn Bagel Boys or any acquisition of that information by Brooklyn Bagel
   Boys from O'Rourke would be via "improper means" in violation of the statute. As shall be discussed

14. That is not to say that all of the information Uncle B's Bakery claimed was trade secrets at the preliminary injunction
    hearing fits the definition. The court rejects a "trade secrets" designation for information concerning identity of brokers,
    for example, because Uncle B's Bakery failed to demonstrate that this information is not readily ascertainable upon inquiry
    in the industry. The court has found three specific categories of information to be trade secrets, recipes, manufacturing,
    and packaging processes, and no more information need be specifically identified as trade secrets in order to demonstrate
    likelihood of success on the merits. Thus, although there is "not limited to" language in Uncle B's Bakery's Confidentiality
    Agreement, the court limits the scope of its provisional finding of "trade secrets" here to the categories of information
    specifically identified in the Confidentiality Agreement and in the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement.

    430 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   further in the next subsection, however, the Confidentiality Agreement is not the only source of such
   a duty the breach of which would be "improper."

   iv. Likelihood of a successful common-law claim. As a further matter, the Iowa Supreme Court in
   Economy Roofing considered the question of whether, irrespective of whether the information in
   question constituted a "trade secret" within the meaning of the statute, the plaintiff should have been
   allowed to offer evidence that the defendants had breached a fiduciary duty to maintain the secrecy
   of the information considered confidential by their former employer. Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d
   at 648. The court read its prior fiduciary duty cases to encompass not only a fiduciary duty of an
   employee to an employer, but, more specifically, a fiduciary duty of an employee "to maintain the
   secrecy of the information [the former employer] described as trade secrets." Id. (emphasis added). The
   court found that "misappropriation" of trade secrets under the Trade Secrets Act,  550.2(3) and 
   550.2(1), included disclosure when the person making the disclosure had acquired the information
   under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use, or had breached a
   duty to maintain secrecy, and also found that the defendants were employees subject to a fiduciary
   duty to their employer. Id. For both of these reasons, the court concluded that the plaintiff former
   employer should have been allowed "to present evidence on whether (1) the information in the
   computer constituted trade secrets under the statutory definition of trade secrets, and (2) [the former
   employee defendants] had a fiduciary duty to maintain the secrecy of this information." Id. at 648.
   15 The court in Economy Roofing cited with approval the conclusion of the federal district court in
   Norand Corp. v. Parkin, 785 F.Supp. 1353 (N.D.Iowa 1990), in which the court, applying Iowa law, had
   found the likely existence of a fiduciary duty not to disclose trade secrets and confidential information
   in part by looking at the definition of "misappropriation" in  550.2(3)(b), and therefore enjoined a
   former employee from accepting a position with a competitor. Norand Corp., 785 F.Supp. at 1355; see
   also Diversified Fastening Sys., Inc., 786 F.Supp. at 1491 (taking note of a plaintiff employer's assertion
   that there is an Iowa common-law fiduciary duty to maintain the secrecy of trade secrets and
   confidential business information, but finding that all of the information in question was probably
   trade secrets, and therefore there was sufficient likelihood of success on a statutory or common-law
   claim of misappropriation of trade secrets). This court reads these cases, at least for the purposes
   of ruling on the preliminary injunction motion, as standing for the proposition that disclosure of
   information the employer desires to keep confidential, and makes reasonable efforts to maintain as
   confidential, even if the information is not technically "trade secrets" under the statutory definition,
   may be enjoined as a violation of the common-law fiduciary duty of a former employee to a former
   employer. See 205 Corp., 517 N.W.2d at 551 (holding that "Chapter 550 has not preempted all tort
   theories involving trade secrets"). Because the court finds, for the purposes of its preliminary
   injunction ruling, that O'Rourke was an employee subject to this fiduciary duty, and was certainly
   aware that Uncle B's Bakery valued the secrecy or confidentiality of the information in question
   irrespective of whether the information was technically "trade secrets" under the Iowa act, the court
   concludes that Uncle B's Bakery has also shown a reasonable likelihood of success under governing
   law on its claim that the information in question should not be disclosed, even if it is not trade secrets.
   The practical effect of this conclusion is to bring within the scope of any preliminary injunction not
   only the information provisionally held to be "trade secrets" above, but such other information as
   Uncle B's Bakery asserted in the preliminary injunction hearing was "confidential."

15. The court also held that although employees may take with them general knowledge acquired during their employment, an
    allegation that the employees took with them information surreptitiously copied or stolen and provided it to a competitor
    should have survived a motion for summary judgment. Id.

                                                                                       25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 431
v. Substantial defenses. The court therefore turns to the question of whether Uncle B's Bakery's
likelihood of success has been undermined by an adequate showing of an affirmative defense by
the defendants. The essence of the court's conclusions above is that Uncle B's Bakery has not failed
to state a "trade secrets" claim, so that defendants' first affirmative defense does not substantially
undermine Uncle B's Bakery's likelihood of success on the merits of its "trade secrets" claims. As to
the defendants' third affirmative defense, that O'Rourke never signed any restrictive covenant with
Uncle B's Bakery, the court has found, at least for the purposes of this preliminary injunction ruling,
that O'Rourke did indeed sign the Confidentiality Agreement, which is such a restrictive covenant.
Thus, only the second of defendants' affirmative defenses, that Uncle B's Bakery first breached the
employment contract with O'Rourke, requires further discussion.

Defendants' assertion that Uncle B's Bakery first breached any employment contract by failing to
honor the vacation pay and moving expenses provisions of the January 10, 1994, letter agreement
bears no necessary connection to any duty O'Rourke had not to disclose information Uncle B's Bakery
regarded as "secret" or confidential. First, that duty upon O'Rourke arises from the common law
fiduciary duty of an employee to an employer, Economy Roofing, 538 N.W.2d at 648, not from any
employment contract. Second, the Confidentiality Agreement, which embodies an agreement not to
disclose confidential information, pertained not to O'Rourke's status as an employee, but to his status
as a "visitor" to Uncle B's Bakery's production facility, and, by its terms, pertained to any and all future
visits to the plant. Confidentiality Agreement, p. 2,  3. Thus, the second affirmative defense does not
undermine Uncle B's Bakery's likelihood of success on its "trade secrets" claims.

Defendants' second affirmative defense at least hints at a further ground for finding Uncle B's Bakery
has only a limited likelihood of success on the merits: the Confidentiality Agreement might be
unenforceable. In Diversified Fastening Systems, a federal decision from this district applying Iowa
trade secrets law to a motion for a preliminary injunction to prevent disclosure of purported trade
secrets, the court, first concluded that the information in question had been shown to be trade secrets,
to the degree necessary to demonstrate probability of success on the merits. Diversified Fastening Sys.,
786 F.Supp. at 1491. The court then considered whether the plaintiff former employer's likelihood
of success had been undermined by an assertion of the unenforceability of the non-disclosure and
non-competition agreements upon which the employer in part founded its right to enjoin a former
employee's disclosure of trade secrets to his new employer, a competitor. Id. at 1491-95; accord Curtis
1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1257-63 (considering whether a non-competition clause upon which a motion
for a preliminary injunction was based was valid and enforceable as part of the determination of
the plaintiff's likelihood of success). In both Diversified Fastening Systems and Curtis 1000, the court
found that the Iowa Supreme Court applies a three-prong test to the enforceability of any restrictive
covenant:

        (1) Is the restriction reasonably necessary for the protection of the employer's business; (2) is it
        unreasonably restrictive of the employee's rights; and (3) is it prejudicial to the public interest?

Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1260 (citing, inter alia, Lamp v. American Prosthetics, Inc., 379 N.W.2d 909,
910 (Iowa 1986), and Iowa Glass Depot, Inc. v. Jindrich, 338 N.W.2d 376, 381 (Iowa 1983)); Diversified
Fastening Sys., 786 F.Supp. at 1493 (same). Although the court concludes, to the extent it would
make such a conclusion in ruling on a motion for a preliminary injunction, that the Confidentiality
Agreement complies with these three tests, the court also concludes that in this case, at least as
to misappropriation and disclosure of trade secrets, the Iowa Trade Secrets Act and common law
provide all the legal basis necessary for a preliminary injunction to enjoin such disclosures and

432 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   misappropriations. Therefore, whether or not the Confidentiality Agreement is unenforceable would
   not undermine Uncle B's Bakery's likelihood of success on a claim of misappropriation and disclosure
   of trade secrets under governing law. See, e.g., Baker Elec. Co-op, 28 F.3d at 1473-74 (likelihood of
   success on the merits requires that the movant find support for its position in governing law). Thus,
   Uncle B's Bakery's likelihood of success on its misappropriation of trade secrets claims is sufficient to
   weigh in favor of the preliminary injunction it seeks.

   b. Non-competition

   In Diversified Fastening Systems, then-District Court Judge David Hansen also noted that "Iowa Code
   Chapter 550 and the common law protection for trade secrets applies only to prevent the disclosure
   of trade secrets. It does not apply to prevent competition with an employer, except to the extent
   that that competition utilizes trade secrets." Diversified Fastening Sys., 786 F.Supp. at 1491. Contrary
   to Brooklyn Bagel Boys' assertions, the court finds, at least provisionally, that Brooklyn Bagel Boys
   is a competitor of Uncle B's Bakery, because both make and distribute grocery store bagels and,
   furthermore, among the products of both companies are bread aisle bagels. That issue provisionally
   resolved, the question remains whether Uncle B's Bakery can show a likelihood of success on the
   merits of its claim to enjoin O'Rourke's employment with a competitor, Brooklyn Bagel Boys.

   When there is a non-competition agreement between the parties, in order to determine a likelihood
   of success on the merits of enforcing such a clause under governing law, the court must consider, as
   it did in Curtis 1000, whether the non-competition is valid and enforceable under Iowa law. See Curtis
   1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1257-64, 1268-72; accord Vencor, Inc. v. Webb, 33 F.3d 840, 845 (7th Cir.1994)
   (where non-competition clause was unenforceable as unreasonable under Kentucky law, movant for
   preliminary injunction to enforce non-competition failed to show likelihood of success on the merits);
   Baxter Int'l, Inc. v. Morris, 976 F.2d 1189, 1197 (8th Cir.1992) (Illinois law, applicable under Missouri
   choice of law rules, requires that court consider enforceability of covenants not to compete in light
   of their reasonableness); Millard v. Electronic Cable Specialists, 790 F.Supp. 857, 862 (D.Minn.1992)
   (likelihood of success on claim to enforce non-competition agreement, for purposes of a preliminary
   injunction, required the court to consider factors of validity and enforceability under Minnesota law).
   In this prior decision, the court concluded that non-competition covenants are generally valid and
   enforceable under Iowa law, and that, applying the same analytical questions for the enforceability
   of a restrictive covenant stated above, concluded that the covenant not to compete in question was
   enforceable. Id. The court, applying this analysis to the covenant not to compete proffered here, also
   finds it valid and enforceable, as a general matter. 16

   More specifically, the first prong of the test, whether or not the restriction is reasonably necessary
   for the protection of the employer's business, Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1260, has been met, because
   Uncle B's Bakery has made an adequate showing for preliminary injunction purposes that O'Rourke,
   in his position as plant manager, "pirated or had the chance to pirate part of plaintiff's business." Id.
   (quoting Iowa Glass Depot, 338 N.W.2d at 381). Because of O'Rourke's involvement in the company

16. At the preliminary injunction hearing, the court expressed its personal disagreement with the rule that continued
    employment can serve as adequate consideration for a non-competition agreement. However, as the court recognized both
    in the hearing and in its decision in Curtis 1000, the Iowa Supreme Court is of a different view. See Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp.
    at 1259-60. The court must here apply Iowa law, not seek to alter it by judicial fiat or personal preference. Adequate
    consideration for the non-competition agreement, if O'Rourke signed it upon arrival to work, therefore exists in O'Rourke's
    continued employment with Uncle B's Bakery, even if Uncle B's Bakery demanded agreement to such a covenant without
    any prior notice that it was a job requirement, or any prior discussion of its terms.

                                                                                       25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 433
   management team meetings, in which he testified the "unusual" customers or sales targets were
   discussed, even if the whole sales picture was not discussed, O'Rourke had the chance to identify
   these "unusual" customers for Brooklyn Bagel Boys as customers for Brooklyn Bagel Boys' products
   as alternatives to Uncle B's Bakery's. More convincingly still, on the preliminary injunction record,
   O'Rourke " `received from his employer "special training or peculiar knowledge that would allow
   him to unjustly enrich himself at the expense of his former employer." ' " Id. at 1261 (quoting Dain
   Bosworth, Inc. v. Brandhorst, 356 N.W.2d 590, 593 (Iowa Ct.App.1984), in turn quoting Iowa Glass Depot,
   338 N.W.2d at 382); accord Millard, 790 F.Supp. at 862-63 (non-competition clause was reasonably
   necessary to protect former employer's development of services and products with which the former
   employee had been closely associated). That information, in this case, is the trade secrets the court
   has concluded have independent economic value, and to which O'Rourke was not only privy, but
   instrumental in their development. As to the second prong of the test, unreasonable restrictiveness
   to the employee, id. at 1260, the court notes that a five-year time period is at the very limits of
   what the Iowa courts have found enforceable. See Id. at 1262 (citing, inter alia, The Phone Connection,
   Inc. v. Harbst, 494 N.W.2d 445, 449-50 (Iowa Ct.App.1992)). However, in light of Uncle B's Bakery's
   relative youth and significant investment in development of its unique processes, the court does not
   find the five-year restriction to be unreasonably restrictive, at least for the purposes of a preliminary
   injunction, which, if entered, would last for a significantly shorter time period than that. Finally, the
   court can find no public interest undermining the non-competition clause in this case.

   However, the question here is not so much whether the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement
   is enforceable by its terms, but whether O'Rourke ever agreed to be bound by its terms. Thus,
   the court must return to the question of the adequacy of the evidence presented as demonstrating
   that O'Rourke signed the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, even though no signed copy
   of the agreement has been produced. The court considered above the standards for determining
   likelihood of success on the merits, and noted, inter alia, that the question is not whether the court
   predicts that the movant for a preliminary injunction will succeed, but whether the movant's success
   on the merits is "at least ... sufficiently likely to support the kind of relief it requests." Sanborn Mfg.,
   997 F.2d at 488 (the court found sufficient likelihood of success where the court concluded that either
   result argued by the opposing parties was directly supported by the evidence presented). Here, the
   court has identified as a critical credibility determination that must ultimately be made by the trier of
   fact whether O'Rourke signed the non-competition agreement. Plainly, a jury or trier of fact could go
   either way on the question, and therefore Uncle B's Bakery's success is "at least ... sufficiently likely
   to support the kind of relief it requests." Id. Furthermore, there is evidence to push the determination
   beyond equipoise, as this is not merely a case in which the contradictory testimony of two witnesses
   must be weighed. Rather, there is substantial evidence that everyone at Uncle B's Bakery was aware of
   and signed "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreements, down to the lowest level employees. The
   court has difficulty believing that the one person a company would most like to see bound by such an
   agreement, its plant manager, was simply overlooked, although admittedly it is not beyond the realm
   of possibility. The court therefore finds a reasonable likelihood that Uncle B's Bakery will succeed in
   showing that O'Rourke signed and is bound by the terms of the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete"
   Agreement. 17

17. Because the court finds that Uncle B's Bakery has a reasonable likelihood of success on the merits of a claim that O'Rourke
    agreed to be bound by the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, the court need not here consider the further
    question of whether an injunction on O'Rourke's continued employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys could be based solely
    on a need to protect trade secrets or confidential information. Diversified Fastening Sys., 786 F.Supp. at 1491. The court
    recognizes that as a general matter, courts will enjoin employment with a competitor in order to protect a former employer

    434 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Because the court concludes that Uncle B's Bakery has shown a reasonable likelihood of success
under governing law on its "trade secrets" and "non-competition" claims, the court next addresses the
question of whether Uncle B's Bakery can also show the threat of irreparable harm if defendants are
not enjoined from disclosing or misappropriating trade secrets or O'Rourke's continued employment
with Brooklyn Bagel Boys is not enjoined.

2. Irreparable harm

Despite the requirement that the court consider all of the factors in the Dataphase analysis, in this
circuit "a party moving for a preliminary injunction is required to show the threat of irreparable
harm," Baker Elec. Co-op, 28 F.3d at 1472 (citing Modern Computer Sys., Inc. v. Modern Banking Sys.,
Inc., 871 F.2d 734, 738 (8th Cir.1989) (en banc ), and Dataphase), and the lack of irreparable harm is
sufficient ground for denying or vacating a preliminary injunction. Aswegan v. Henry, 981 F.2d 313,
314 (8th Cir.1992) (citing Modern Computer, 871 F.2d at 738). To put it another way, "[t]he threshold
inquiry is whether the movant has shown the threat of irreparable injury." Glenwood Bridge, 940 F.2d
at 371 (quoting Gelco Corp. v. Coniston Partners, 811 F.2d 414, 418 (8th Cir.1987)). Thus, the Eighth
Circuit Court of Appeals has held that

        the movant's failure to sustain its burden of proving irreparable harm ends the inquiry "and
        the denial of the injunctive request is warranted." [Gelco, 811 F.2d] at 420. Accord Modern
        Computer Sys., 871 F.2d at 738; Dataphase, 640 F.2d at 114 n. 9. We must inquire, then, whether
        [movant] has met its burden of proving that it will suffer irreparable harm absent a preliminary
        injunction.

Id. Sufficient showing on this second factor in the Dataphase analysis can be made, for example,
by showing that the movant has no adequate remedy at law. Baker Elec. Co-op, 28 F.3d at 1473.
Conversely, where the movant has an adequate legal remedy, a preliminary injunction will not issue.
Frank B. Hall & Co. v. Alexander & Alexander, Inc., 974 F.2d 1020, 1025 (8th Cir.1992) (but finding
in that case that the district court's conclusion that there was an adequate remedy was based on an
erroneous legal premise, and requiring a proper balance of Dataphase factors).

Here, the Confidentiality Agreement specifically states that the parties agree that any violation of
its terms "will cause Company immediate and irreparable harm which money damages cannot
adequately remedy." Confidentiality Agreement, p. 2,  2; accord Overholt Crop Ins. Serv. Co., 941 F.2d
at 1371 (holding that "[i]rreparable harm `can be inferred from a trial court's actual finding of a breach
[of a restrictive covenant] by the defendant.' "); Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1273 (citing Overholt );
Millard, 790 F.Supp. at 860 ("Courts infer irreparable harm upon the breach of a non-competition
covenant where confidential information is involved."). The court has found, at least provisionally,
that O'Rourke agreed to be bound by the terms of this agreement, and therefore concludes that,

from disclosure of trade secrets where disclosure appears inevitable from the nature of the former employee's employment
with the competitor. See, e.g., Norand, 785 F.Supp. at 1355 ("It does concern the court that there is no non-competition
agreement between plaintiff and defendant," but the court found that simply prohibiting non-disclosure would be
insufficient as the defendant could not help but use his knowledge in his employment with a competitor company, citing
as supporting such a conclusion Emery Indus., Inc. v. Cottier, 202 U.S.P.Q. (BNA) 829 (S.D.Ohio 1978), and Air Prods. and
Chem., Inc. v. Johnson, 296 Pa.Super. 405, 442 A.2d 1114 (1982)). Although defendants' counsel particularly directed the
court's attention to the decision in Emery Industries as indicating critical reasons, not present here, for enjoining continued
employment when no non-competition agreement is involved, the court need not discuss that decision where it has found a
reasonable likelihood that the defendant is bound by a non-competition agreement.

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 435
at least as to its "trade secrets" claims, Uncle B's Bakery has adequately demonstrated a threat of
irreparable harm, because there is a threat of a breach of the agreement implicit in O'Rourke's
employment with a competitor. Similarly, the court finds that there is comparable language in the
"Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, and the court has also found that Uncle B's Bakery has
shown a reasonable likelihood that this agreement is binding on O'Rourke. However, the court will
still consider defendants' argument that there is little real threat of disclosure of trade secrets in the
course of O'Rourke's employment, such that he should not also be enjoined from employment with
Brooklyn Bagel Boys.

Defendants have argued, and presented supporting testimony to the effect that, O'Rourke has not and
will not disclose trade secrets to Brooklyn Bagel Boys, that Brooklyn Bagel Boys has never requested
any such disclosure, and has in fact requested that O'Rourke not divulge any of Uncle B's Bakery's
trade secrets or confidential information. Defendants' arguments and evidence are also to the effect
that Brooklyn Bagel Boys has no desire or need for Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets, because they are
satisfied with their own recipes and manufacturing and packaging methods, thank you very much.
Defendants also presented substantial evidence that Brooklyn Bagel Boys' current manufacturing
and packaging methods are so different from Uncle B's Bakery's that it is unlikely that O'Rourke
will necessarily disclose Uncle B's Bakery's confidential information or trade secrets in the course of
his employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. Defendants also argue, far less persuasively, that even if
they contemplated using or appropriating "air tight" packaging processes, Uncle B's Bakery would
enjoy for a considerable time its current monopoly on such processes, because of the necessity of
obtaining and implementing the required equipment and processes. The court is not inclined to split
hairs about how long it might take Brooklyn Bagel Boys to appropriate the technology and processes
required, when the real question is whether there is an imminent threat of disclosure of the necessary
technology and processes, which is the irreparable harm, even if the economic harm actually comes
later in the form of application of the improperly disclosed information. Certainly, if the disclosure
allows a competitor to cut corners in the research and development process of a similar packaging
process, the competitor will attain a competing product that much sooner, and it is this harm to Uncle
B's Bakery that is irreparable.

The court finds that there is sufficient threat of irreparable harm in this case to weigh in favor of
enjoining both disclosure of trade secrets and O'Rourke's employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys.
As to the former, the harm from disclosures, the Confidentiality Agreement embodies the parties'
agreement that a threat of irreparable harm exists if any confidential information is disclosed, and
the court, having found, at least provisionally, that the information in question is indeed trade secrets,
of independent economic value to Uncle B's Bakery or a competitor, also recognizes that disclosure
of such information threatens irreparable harm. As to the latter, harm of continued employment,
the court notes that there is significant danger of an inadvertent disclosure by O'Rourke of Uncle
B's Bakery's confidential information in the course of his employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys.
Although an employee is entitled to use the fund of general knowledge he or she has accumulated in
the course of employment, that entitlement does not extend to use of trade secrets. Where the one
kind of knowledge ends and the other begins is sufficiently uncertain in this case to raise a realistic
threat of inadvertent disclosure of trade secrets, and consequently a threat of irreparable harm to
Uncle B's Bakery, from O'Rourke's continued employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. Furthermore,
the court finds it highly unlikely that O'Rourke would not draw upon processes or solutions employed
by Uncle B's Bakery should comparable problems arise either in Brooklyn Bagel Boys' present
production system, or in the course of Brooklyn Bagel Boys' independent development and

436 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
implementation of a MAP bagging system or processes for producing never frozen refrigerator
bagels, should it eventually find that it does want to enter that sector of the market after all. Accord
PepsiCo, Inc. v. Redmond, 54 F.3d 1262, 1269 (7th Cir.1995) (affirming district court's determination,
under the Illinois version of the Uniform Trade Secrets Act, that employment with a competitor
should be enjoined, because "unless Redmond possessed an uncanny ability to compartmentalize
information, he would necessarily be making decisions about [the new employer's products] by
relying on his knowledge of [his former employer's] trade secrets."); Baxter Int'l, Inc. v. Morris, 976 F.2d
1189, 1194 (8th Cir.1992) (after trial on the merits, the district court granted, but limited the scope of,
a permanent injunction enjoining disclosure of trade secrets where it was "far from clear" that the new
employer would seek to develop products similar to the former employer's or that the new employer
could use the former employer's technology for its current purposes). In Redmond, the Seventh Circuit
Court of Appeals also stated,

        It is not the "general skills and knowledge acquired during his tenure with" [the former
        employer] that [the former employer] seeks to keep from falling into [the new employer's]
        hands, but rather "the particularized plans or processes developed by [the former employer]
        and disclosed to him while the employer-employee relationship existed, which are unknown to
        others in the industry and which give the employer an advantage over his competitors."

Redmond, 54 F.3d at 1269. The court therefore concluded that the former employer had done much
more than assert that skilled employees were taking their skills elsewhere, and a preliminary
injunction enjoining the former employee's continued employment with a competitor was therefore
appropriate. Id. The same situation obtains here. O'Rourke would be taking with him far more than
his skills, but particularized plans or processed developed by Uncle B's Bakery, in which development
O'Rourke was intimately involved. Although Brooklyn Bagel Boys purportedly has no current plans
to enter the refrigerated, never frozen sector of the grocery store bagel market, and suggested that
it could not use Uncle B's Bakery's processes or technology for its current purposes, Brooklyn
Bagel Boys' representative indicated circumstances in which it would reevaluate its product lines
and develop a product along Uncle B's Bakery's lines. Thus, it is clear, at least on the preliminary
injunction record, that Uncle B's Bakery has reason to fear that Brooklyn Bagel Boys will be motivated
to appropriate its technology and processes, and the threat of disclosure of those processes and that
technology poses a threat of irreparable harm. Compare Baxter Int'l, Inc., 976 F.2d at 1194 (although
it was "far from clear" that there was interest in or the possibility of transfer of technology, limited
permanent injunction against disclosure of trade secrets was properly entered). Thus, the court
concludes that the "irreparable harm" factor also weighs in favor of the issuance of a preliminary
injunction in this case.

3. Balance Of Harm

The court notes that the analysis of the next Dataphase factor, "the balance between the harm and the
injury that the injunction's issuance would inflict on other interested parties, and the public interest,"
Pottgen, 40 F.3d at 929, is not identical to the "irreparable harm" analysis. Irreparable harm focuses
on the harm or potential harm to the plaintiff of the defendant's conduct or threatened conduct.
Dataphase, 640 F.2d at 114. In contrast, the balance of harm analysis examines the harm of granting
or denying the injunction upon both of the parties to the dispute and upon other interested parties,
including the public. Id.; see also Glenwood Bridge, 940 F.2d at 372 (considering the effect of granting or
denying the injunction on the public's interest in a public works construction project as well as upon

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 437
the parties in the balance of harm analysis); Modern Computer Sys., 871 F.2d at 737-38 (harm to other
interested parties also considered).

In conducting the balance of harm analysis required under Dataphase, it is obvious that an illusory
harm to the movant will not outweigh any actual harm to the nonmovant. Frank B. Hall, 974 F.2d at
1023. To determine what must be weighed, the court finds that courts of this circuit have looked at
the threat to the each of the parties' rights that would result from granting or denying the injunction.
Baker Elec. Co-op, 28 F.3d at 1473. Also, the potential economic harm to each of the parties and
to interested third parties of either granting or denying the injunction is relevant. Id. Another
consideration in the balance of harms calculus is whether the defendant has already voluntarily taken
remedial action. Sanborn, 997 F.2d at 489. Where the nonmovant has taken such action, the balance
of harms is readjusted, because the potential for economic or other harm to the movant has been
eliminated. Id. (citing Burndy Corp. v. Teledyne Indus., Inc., 748 F.2d 767, 774 (2d Cir.1984), which
held that injunctive relief was "wholly unnecessary" when the defendant had voluntarily brought
his product labeled with the UL mark into compliance with UL standards and where there was
not a likelihood of repetition or hazard to the public). Similarly, present harm as the result of
past misconduct is not sufficient to justify the injury to the nonmovant of granting a preliminary
injunction requiring some additional corrective action, because such relief "goes beyond the purpose
of a preliminary injunction." Id. at 490 (emphasis in the original).

As to the balance of harms from enjoining disclosure of trade secrets or confidential information,
the court finds that the balance once again tips in favor of a preliminary injunction. As the court
has observed, Uncle B's Bakery stands to suffer significant injury, economic and non-economic, if
disclosure of its trade secrets is not enjoined. However, defendants' evidence and arguments that there
has been and will be no disclosure of trade secrets suggests that they will suffer no harm if the court
enjoins what they have already voluntarily done. Controlling precedent of the Eighth Circuit Court
of Appeals appears to point the other direction, however, because the appellate court has held that
a consideration in the balance of harm calculus is whether the defendants have already voluntarily
taken remedial action, and where the nonmovants have taken such action, the balance of harms is
readjusted, because the potential for economic or other harm to the movant has been eliminated.
Sanborn, 997 F.2d at 489. In this case, the court concluded above that notwithstanding defendants'
evidence of their remedial measures, there was still a threat of harm from an inadvertent disclosure,
and the court concludes therefore that the threat of harm to Uncle B's Bakery has not been eliminated.
Thus, the balance of harms still weighs in favor of issuance of an injunction against disclosure of trade
secrets.

The balance of harms is more complicated as to enjoining O'Rourke's continued employment with
Brooklyn Bagel Boys. In Curtis 1000, the court found that, despite an employee's right to work, the
balance of harms weighed in the former employer's favor to enjoin an employee from violating a non-
competition clause. Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1274. That conclusion was based on the existence of
a non-competition clause, the fact that the validity of the non-competition clause under applicable
Delaware law encompassed a balancing of the economic harms to both parties to the agreement, and
an observation that the employee would not be precluded from working with his present employer,
but only from competing with his former employer for certain customers. Id. at 1274. In the case
now before the court, however, the court has also found an adequate showing of a non-competition
agreement, but the court has not yet balanced the economic harms to the parties of barring O'Rourke's
employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. Furthermore, an injunction would entirely deprive O'Rourke
of his current employment.

438 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   The court is hesitant to enter an injunction barring a person from continuing that person's
   employment, but concludes that the balance of harms nonetheless, if only slightly, actually tips in
   favor of an injunction on O'Rourke's continued employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. The court,
   once again, has concluded that Uncle B's Bakery is faced with a significant threat of disclosure of
   its trade secrets, including inadvertent disclosure. The body of secret or confidential information
   from Uncle B's Bakery known to O'Rourke covers every aspect of Uncle B's Bakery's operations,
   and is far more extensive than the body of "secret" information known to the defendant employees
   enjoined from employment with competitors in any decision of the Iowa Supreme Court of which
   this court is aware. See Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1260-62 (citing Iowa cases in which the critical
   information known to the departing employee giving rise to a reasonable need for a covenant not
   to compete was customer lists and goodwill). Also balanced against O'Rourke's loss of his job is the
   fact that the bagel-making industry is not the only one in which O'Rourke has considerable work
   experience and ability, thus an injunction on employment with a competitor does not leave O'Rourke
   without employment prospects. Accord Millard, 790 F.Supp. at 863 (court found little hardship likely
   to result from enjoining employee not to compete where employee had "demonstrated abilities" and
   experience in fields in his industry that did not compete with his former employer). Furthermore,
   O'Rourke's employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys has been so short-lived at this point that it is
   doubtful he has established himself as a "key man" without whom Brooklyn Bagel Boys cannot
   continue to function. The court is not unmindful of the harms O'Rourke may suffer if he loses his
   current employment, but the court has every reason to believe that those harms will be short-lived,
   may be eased by reasonable assistance of his current employer who is not blameless in the loss of his
   current employment, and involves harms that should have been foreseen by the defendants when they
   contemplated hiring a manager away from a competitor, knowing that competitor employed unique
   manufacturing and packaging processes.

   4. The Public Interest

   The final factor in the Dataphase analysis is the impact of granting or denying the preliminary
   injunction upon the public interest. Pottgen, 40 F.3d at 929. The "public interest" factor frequently
   invites the court to indulge in broad observations about conduct that is generally recognizable as
   costly or injurious. 18 Here, however, the court finds the public interest embodied and articulated
   in the Iowa legislature's passage of the Iowa Trade Secrets Act. Thus, the court finds that the public
   interest in protection of trade secrets weighs in favor of an injunction to accomplish that end.
   Accord Heather K., 887 F.Supp. at 1266-67 (finding the public interest more than adequately stated
   in legislation to accomplish the ends also sought by the proposed injunction). Further, an injunction
   to enforce a contractual agreement, even a contractual agreement not to compete for some period
   of time, is not repugnant to the public interest, as recognized by Iowa law on enforceability of
   such agreements. Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1257-58; accord Millard, 790 F.Supp. at 863 (valid non-
   competition clauses do not violate public policy).

18. The "public interest" factor involves, among other things, the "public's interest in minimizing unnecessary costs" to be met
    from public coffers. Baker Elec. Co-op, 28 F.3d at 1474 (citing James River Flood Control Ass'n v. Watt, 680 F.2d 543, 544- 45 (8th
    Cir.1982) (per curiam )); The court is mindful of the venerable decision of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in E.W. Bliss
    Co., 408 F.2d at 1113-17, in which the appellate court systematically found each provision of the injunction against former
    employees' disclosure and competition invalid as overbroad. However, the court concludes that the present injunction,
    fashioned as indicated, would survive such scrutiny, in light of the need to protect Uncle B's Bakery from intentional and
    inadvertent disclosure of its trade secrets and confidential information.19, 680 F.2d at 544-45 (public interest served by
    avoiding "greater expenditures from the public treasury"). The public interest also favors enjoining false statements, and
    enjoining the safety risks arising from false labeling of products. Sanborn Mfg., 997 F.2d at 490.

                                                                                       25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 439
   All relevant factors therefore tip, to one degree or another, in favor of granting a preliminary
   injunction in this case enjoining both disclosure of trade secrets and continued employment that
   threatens such disclosure.

   C. The Requirements Of Fed.R.Civ.P. 65(c) & (d)

   1. The scope of a preliminary injunction

   Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65(d), which requires, inter alia, that "every order granting
   an injunction and every restraining order ... shall be specific in terms; shall describe in reasonable
   detail, and not by reference to the complaint or other document, the act or acts sought to be restrained
   ...," the preliminary injunction in this case must specifically sets forth its terms. The court finds that
   an injunction of proper scope can be fashioned from appropriate language in the Confidentiality
   Agreement, to which O'Rourke definitely agreed, and from the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete"
   Agreement, to which, although it is disputed, Uncle B's Bakery has shown a reasonable likelihood
   O'Rourke agreed. 19

   In order to ease somewhat the harm O'Rourke will suffer as the result of an injunction on his
   present employment, the court will stay that portion of the preliminary injunction pertaining to
   O'Rourke's continued employment for a period of thirty days, in order that O'Rourke may make other
   employment arrangements. The court warns the defendants that any disclosure by O'Rourke or any
   acquisition by Brooklyn Bagel Boys of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets or confidential information,
   either during this thirty-day grace period or afterwards, during the pendency of the preliminary
   injunction, will be punished as contempts by the severest sanctions of which this court can avail itself.

   2. Fed.R.Civ.P. 65(c)'s security requirement

   Interesting questions arise as to Fed.R.Civ.P. 65(c)'s security requirement in this case. In Curtis
   1000, after extensive consideration of the decisions of courts concerning whether or not some
   security is always required before issuance of a preliminary injunction, and the mandatory language
   of Fed.R.Civ.P. 65(c), which states that "[n]o restraining order or preliminary injunction shall issue
   except upon the giving of security by the applicant," this court concluded "requiring a bond in some
   amount before issuing a preliminary injunction is far the better course." Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at
   1279.

   The only reason application of that conclusion might be called into question in this case is that
   the Confidentiality Agreement specifically states that the party to be enjoined agrees to issuance
   of a preliminary injunction "without bond." Confidentiality Agreement, p. 2,  2. However, the
   other agreement upon which a prayer for injunctive relief is founded, the "Non-Disclosure/
   Non-Compete" Agreement, does not contain any "without bond" language in its injunction
   provisions. "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, p. 2,  4. Uncle B's Bakery's prayers for
   relief in its complaint mirror this situation, praying as to Count I, the "trade secrets" claim based
   on violation of the Confidentiality Agreement, for a preliminary and permanent injunction to issue

19. The court is mindful of the venerable decision of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in E.W. Bliss Co., 408 F.2d at 1113-17,
    in which the appellate court systematically found each provision of the injunction against former employees' disclosure and
    competition invalid as overbroad. However, the court concludes that the present injunction, fashioned as indicated, would
    survive such scrutiny, in light of the need to protect Uncle B's Bakery from intentional and inadvertent disclosure of its trade
    secrets and confidential information.

    440 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
   without bond, but making no reference to the bond requirement as to the other counts on which
   injunctive relief is sought.

   In this case, the court believes that even if it were enjoining misappropriation of trade secrets and
   O'Rourke's employment with a competitor solely on the basis of the Confidentiality Agreement, even
   in the face of the "without bond" language in that agreement, "far the better course" would still be
   to require a bond in some amount. Certainly, where, as here, the injunction on employment with
   a competitor is directly based on the "Non-Disclosure/Non-Compete" Agreement, which contains
   no "without bond" language, the court concludes that a bond in some amount is required. There
   are very sound policy reasons for the bond requirement, identified in Curtis 1000. Curtis 1000, 878
   F.Supp. at 1275-79. First, the defendant who has been wrongfully enjoined has no recourse for
   damages in the absence of a bond. Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1277-78 (citing W.R. Grace & Co. v.
   Local Union 759, 461 U.S. 757, 770 n. 14, 103 S.Ct. 2177, 2186 n. 14, 76 L.Ed.2d 298 (1983)). Second,
   because a preliminary injunction proceeding is both expedited, resulting in only provisional findings
   of fact, and interlocutory, there is a higher chance that the district court will err in granting the
   preliminary injunction. Id. at 1278 (citing inter alia, Clark v. K-Mart, 979 F.2d 965, 968 (3d Cir.1992)).
   In this case, where the preliminary injunction will deprive O'Rourke of his present employment and
   deprive Brooklyn Bagel Boys of its present manager, both requirements likely to impose some real
   economic burdens on the defendants, even if those burdens are outweighed, as the court concluded,
   by Uncle B's Bakery's potential harm, both of the policy reasons for the bond requirement ring true.
   20 Furthermore, the rule stating the bond requirement is couched in mandatory terms. Fed.R.Civ.P.
   65(c). At the preliminary injunction hearing, Uncle B's Bakery did not press any contention that a
   preliminary injunction in this case, whatever its basis, should issue without bond. For all of these
   reasons, the posting of a bond in some amount will be required before the preliminary injunction in
   this case will issue.

   Although there may be some split in authority as to whether or not imposition of any bond is
   mandatory, there is no split in authority that the amount of any bond actually imposed remains a
   matter of the court's discretion. See Curtis 1000, 878 F.Supp. at 1279-80 (citing cases so holding,
   and identifying some factors to guide the court's discretion). Of some help is the statement of the
   Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals that security should be imposed "in an amount that fairly protects
   the [defendants] should it be ultimately found that the [defendants] [have] been wrongfully enjoined."
   Glenwood Bridge, Inc., 940 F.2d at 373. With this and such other factors as equity suggests in mind, the
   court turns to consideration of the proper amount of the bond to be required in this case.

   First, the court finds that an adequate security would cover O'Rourke's potential loss of salary and
   benefits during the pendency of the preliminary injunction, less any salary and benefits he can

20. These policy reasons would be just as applicable were the present injunction on employment with a competitor based only
    on the ground that such an injunction was the only practical means of enforcing the Confidentiality Agreement. If the
    only barrier to a preliminary injunction to protect fully its trade secrets were a requirement that Uncle B's Bakery provide
    sufficient security to protect defendants from the obvious consequences of wrongly enjoining O'Rourke's employment with
    Brooklyn Bagel Boys, and if the risk of harm to Uncle B's Bakery is as dire as that risk has been portrayed to the court,
    the court thinks it likely that Uncle B's Bakery would accept without hesitation the condition of posting a bond in this
    case. The alternative for Uncle B's Bakery would be the possibility that an appellate court would deem that imposition of a
    preliminary injunction without a bond was improper, and Uncle B's Bakery would thereby lose the protection it claims it so
    desperately needs. Perhaps recognizing these realities, Uncle B's Bakery did not assert that the preliminary injunction should
    issue without bond even when asserting the Confidentiality Agreement alone was adequate to require enjoining O'Rourke's
    continued employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys or any other competitor

                                                                                       25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 441
reasonably be expected to earn from alternative employment. O'Rourke testified that his present
annual salary, exclusive of benefits, is $80,000, and his previous annual salary with Uncle B's Bakery
was $65,000. Second, the court finds that an adequate security would cover Brooklyn Bagel Boys'
inconvenience in seeking an interim or permanent replacement for O'Rourke. The court therefore
considers that, with a reasonable expectation of completion of this litigation within the next two
years, and a reasonable expectation that O'Rourke will find alternative employment at some point
during that period, probably sooner rather than later, a reasonable bond would be in the amount of
$100,000.

The court will therefore issue a preliminary injunction with the scope and bond requirement stated
above.

III. CONCLUSION

The court's application of the Dataphase factors in this case leads it to the conclusion that a
preliminary injunction must issue enjoining disclosure of Uncle B's Bakery's trade secrets by
O'Rourke, misappropriation of those secrets by Brooklyn Bagel Boys, and O'Rourke's continued
employment with Brooklyn Bagel Boys. The court finds that some, at least, of the information at
issue is indeed trade secrets, and that Brooklyn Bagel Boys is indeed a competitor of Uncle B's Bakery
to whom disclosure of its secrets would be detrimental to Uncle B's Bakery. Uncle B's Bakery has
demonstrated a reasonable likelihood of success on its claims of misappropriation of trade secrets
under Iowa statutory and common law that is sufficient basis for a preliminary injunction. Although
finding that Uncle B's Bakery's ultimate success on its claim of violation of a covenant not to compete
may be a very close question, coming down to the trier of fact's weighing of credibility of the
conflicting accounts of the signing or non-signing of the non-competition agreement, the court
nonetheless concludes that Uncle B's Bakery's success on the merits of a claim that O'Rourke is bound
by a non-competition agreement is at least sufficiently likely to support the kind of relief it requests.
In light of the economic value of the trade secrets in question to Uncle B's Bakery or a competitor, the
court concludes that Uncle B's Bakery has also demonstrated a threat of irreparable harm, and that
the balance of this harm to Uncle B's Bakery outweighs the harm to O'Rourke of loss of employment
and to Brooklyn Bagel Boys of losing its present plant manager. The court finds that there is a public
interest in protection of trade secrets articulated in the Iowa Trade Secrets Act and that this public
interest will be vindicated by a preliminary injunction to prevent disclosure of trade secrets. The court
therefore concludes that a preliminary injunction of appropriate scope should issue after the posting
of adequate security.

Uncle B's Bakery's motion for a preliminary injunction is therefore granted.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

                                              PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION

WHEREAS, pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 65(b), the court finds that there is a threat of disclosure of trade
secrets and confidential information of plaintiff Uncle B's Bakery, Inc., and an actual or threatened
violation of a non-competition agreement between Uncle B's Bakery and defendant Kevin O'Rourke,
each of which poses a threat of irreparable harm to plaintiff Uncle B's Bakery, Inc., and whereas, in
light of all of the circumstances known to the court and upon a balance of the equities, the court
concludes that a preliminary injunction should issue, defendants Kevin O'Rourke and Brooklyn Bagel
Boys, Inc., are hereby enjoined as follows:

442 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
1. Defendant Kevin O'Rourke is hereby enjoined from disclosing any and all of Uncle B's Bakery's
past, present, or future raw or processed products, ingredients, formulas, original and unique recipes,
manufacturing, advertising or design techniques, plans, ideas, equipment brands and types, processes,
methods, and operating conditions, including packaging techniques or processes, not previously
publicly known, and such other information as Uncle B's Bakery has sought to maintain as
confidential during Mr. O'Rourke's employment with Uncle B's Bakery. Defendant Brooklyn Bagel
Boys is hereby enjoined from appropriating or obtaining or seeking to appropriate or obtain any
of the above-listed information from Kevin O'Rourke, or utilizing in any way such information
previously obtained from Kevin O'Rourke.
2. Defendant Kevin O'Rourke is hereby enjoined from competing directly or indirectly, or having an
interest in any business, corporation or other entity which competes directly or indirectly, or working
for any person, business, corporation or other entity which competes directly or indirectly with Uncle
B's Bakery, including defendant Brooklyn Bagel Boys, within a 500 mile radius of any of Uncle B's
Bakery's marketing outlets during the pendency of this preliminary injunction. This paragraph of this
preliminary injunction is stayed for the period of thirty days from the date of this order, in order to
allow Kevin O'Rourke a reasonable opportunity to obtain alternative employment, although during
that thirty-day period, the defendants shall remain subject to all other terms of this preliminary
injunction.
3. This preliminary injunction shall be binding upon the parties to this action, their officers, agents,
servants, employees, and attorneys, and upon those persons in active concert or participation with
them who receive actual notice of the order.
4. This preliminary injunction shall issue upon the giving of security of One Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($100,000) by applicant Uncle B's Bakery.
5. This preliminary injunction shall remain in full force and effect until further order of this court.
IT IS SO ORDERED.

                                                                                  25. MISAPPROPRIATION OF TRADE SECRETS 443
                                 26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION

   Learning Objectives: Unit 26

   Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to:
           Explain the concept of federal preemption of state law.
           Describe the analytical frameworks for federal preemption.
           Explain the difference between preemption in copyright, patent and trademark law.

Most of the law we discussed this semester is federal law. However, state law also operates in this
space, either by express statute or by application of common law. These cases address the question of
when federal law supersedes that of the states.

   17 U.S. Code 301. Preemption with respect to other laws (2018)

   (a) On and after January 1, 1978, all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive
   rights within the general scope of copyright as specified by section 106 in works of authorship that are
   fixed in a tangible medium of expression and come within the subject matter of copyright as specified by
   sections 102 and 103, whether created before or after that date and whether published or unpublished, are
   governed exclusively by this title. Thereafter, no person is entitled to any such right or equivalent right in
   any such work under the common law or statutes of any State.
   (b) Nothing in this title annuls or limits any rights or remedies under the common law or statutes of any
   State with respect to--

            (1) subject matter that does not come within the subject matter of copyright as specified by sections
            102 and 103, including works of authorship not fixed in any tangible medium of expression; or
            (2) any cause of action arising from undertakings commenced before January 1, 1978;
            (3) activities violating legal or equitable rights that are not equivalent to any of the exclusive rights
            within the general scope of copyright as specified by section 106; or
            (4) State and local landmarks, historic preservation, zoning, or building codes, relating to
            architectural works protected under section 102(a)(8).

444 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
KEWANEE OIL CO. V. BICRON CORP. (1974)

   READING WITH PURPOSE

   As you read these cases, ask yourself the following questions:
           What is the legal basis for federal preemption of state laws?
           How is preemption analyzed in the patent law context?
           What are the policies that underlie the preemption analysis?
           Read 17 U.S.C.  301. How does it compare to the preemption analysis in Bonito Boats?

                                             Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp.
                                                       416 U.S. 470 (1974)

MR. CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.
We granted certiorari to resolve a question on which there is a conflict in the courts of appeals:
whether state trade secret protection is pre-empted by operation of the federal patent law. In the
instant case the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that there was preemption. The Courts of
Appeals for the Second, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Circuits have reached the opposite conclusion.
I
Harshaw Chemical Co., an unincorporated division of petitioner, is a leading manufacturer of a
type of synthetic crystal which is useful in the detection of ionizing radiation. In 1949 Harshaw
commenced research into the growth of this type crystal and was able to produce one less than two
inches in diameter. By 1966, as the result of expenditures in excess of $1 million, Harshaw was able
to grow a 17-inch crystal, something no one else had done previously. Harshaw had developed many
processes, procedures, and manufacturing techniques in the purification of raw materials and the
growth and encapsulation of the crystals which enabled it to accomplish this feat. Some of these
processes Harshaw considers to be trade secrets.
The individual respondents are former employees of Harshaw who formed or later joined respondent
Bicron. While at Harshaw the individual respondents executed, as a condition of employment, at
least one agreement each, requiring them not to disclose confidential information or trade secrets
obtained as employees of Harshaw. Bicron was formed in August 1969 to compete with Harshaw in
the production of the crystals, and by April 1970, had grown a 17-inch crystal.
Petitioner brought this diversity action in United States District Court for the Northern District of

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 445
  Ohio seeking injunctive relief and damages for the misappropriation of trade secrets. The District
  Court, applying Ohio trade secret law, granted a permanent injunction against the disclosure or use
  by respondents of 20 of the 40 claimed trade secrets until such time as the trade secrets had been
  released to the public, had otherwise generally become available to the public, or had been obtained
  by respondents from sources having the legal right to convey the information.

  The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that the findings of fact by the District Court
  were not clearly erroneous, and that it was evident from the record that the individual respondents
  appropriated to the benefit of Bicron secret information on processes obtained while they were
  employees at Harshaw. Further, the Court of Appeals held that the District Court properly applied
  Ohio law relating to trade secrets. Nevertheless, the Court of Appeals reversed the District Court,
  finding Ohio's trade secret law to be in conflict with the patent laws of the United States. The Court
  of Appeals reasoned that Ohio could not grant monopoly protection to processes and manufacturing
  techniques that were appropriate subjects for consideration under 35 U. S. C.  101 for a federal
  patent but which had been in commercial use for over one year and so were no longer eligible for
  patent protection under 35 U. S. C.  102 (b).

  We hold that Ohio's law of trade secrets is not preempted by the patent laws of the United States, and,
  accordingly, we reverse.

  II

  Ohio has adopted the widely relied-upon definition of a trade secret found at Restatement of Torts 
  757, comment b(1939). B. F. Goodrich Co. v. Wohlgemuth, 117 Ohio App. 493, 498, 192 N. E. 2d 99, 104
  (1963); W. R. Grace & Co. v. Hargadine, 392 F. 2d 9, 14 (CA6 1968). According to the Restatement,

  "[a] trade secret may consist of any formula, pattern, device or compilation of information which is
  used in one's business, and which gives him an opportunity to obtain an advantage over competitors
  who do not know or use it. It may be a formula for a chemical compound, a process of manufacturing,
  treating or preserving materials, a pattern for a machine or other device, or a list of customers."

  The subject of a trade secret must be secret, and must not be of public knowledge or of a general
  knowledge in the trade or business. B. F. Goodrich Co. v. Wohlgemuth, supra, at 499, 192 N. E. 2d, at 104;
  National Tube Co. v. Eastern Tube Co., 3 Ohio C. C. R. (n. s.) 459, 462 (1902), aff'd, 69 Ohio St. 560, 70
  N. E. 1127 (1903). This necessary element of secrecy is not lost, however, if the holder of the trade
  secret reveals the trade secret to another "in confidence, and under an implied obligation not to use or
  disclose it." Cincinnati Bell Foundry Co. v. Dodds, 10 Ohio Dec. Reprint 154, 156, 19 Weekly L. Bull. 84
  (Super. Ct. 1887). These others may include those of the holder's "employees to whom it is necessary
  to confide it, in order to apply it to the uses for which it is intended." National Tube Co. v. Eastern Tube
  Co., supra, at 462. Often the recipient of confidential knowledge of the subject of a trade secret is a
  licensee of its holder. See Lear, Inc.v. Adkins, 395 U. S. 653 (1969).

  The protection accorded the trade secret holder is against the disclosure or unauthorized use of the
  trade secret by those to whom the secret has been confided under the express or implied restriction
  of nondisclosure or nonuse.1 The law also protects the holder of a trade secret against disclosure

1. (fn 4 in original) Ohio Rev. Code Ann.  1333.51 (C) (Supp. 1973) provides: "No person, having obtained possession of an
   article representing a trade secret or access thereto with the owner's consent, shall convert such article to his own use or
   that of another person, or thereafter without the owner's consent make or cause to be made a copy of such article, or exhibit

  446 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
or use when the knowledge is gained, not by the owner's volition, but by some "improper means,"
Restatement of Torts  757 (a), which may include theft, wiretapping, or even aerial reconnaissance.
A trade secret law, however, does not offer protection against discovery by fair and honest means,
such as by independent invention, accidental disclosure, or by so-called reverse engineering, that is
by starting with the known product and working backward to divine the process which aided in its
development or manufacture.

Novelty, in the patent law sense, is not required for a trade secret, W. R. Grace & Co. v. Hargadine, 392
F. 2d, at 14. "Quite clearly discovery is something less than invention." A. O. Smith Corp. v. Petroleum
Iron Works Co., 73 F. 2d 531, 538 (CA6 1934), modified to increase scope of injunction, 74 F. 2d 934
(1935). However, some novelty will be required if merely because that which does not possess novelty
is usually known; secrecy, in the context of trade secrets, thus implies at least minimal novelty.

The subject matter of a patent is limited to a "process, machine, manufacture, or composition of
matter, or . . . improvement thereof," 35 U. S. C.  101, which fulfills the three conditions of novelty
and utility as articulated and defined in 35 U. S. C. ㎣ 101 and 102, and nonobviousness, as set out in
35 U. S. C.  103. If an invention meets the rigorous statutory tests for the issuance of a patent, the
patent is granted, for a period of 17 years, giving what has been described as the "right of exclusion,"
R. Ellis, Patent Assignments and Licenses  4, p. 7 (2d ed. 1943). This protection goes not only to
copying the subject matter, which is forbidden under the Copyright Act, 17 U. S. C.  1 et seq., but also
to independent creation.

III

The first issue we deal with is whether the States are forbidden to act at all in the area of protection of
the kinds of intellectual property which may make up the subject matter of trade secrets.

        Article I,  8, cl. 8, of the Constitution grants to the Congress the power

        "[t]o promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors
        and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries . . . ."

In the 1972 Term, in Goldstein v. California, 412 U. S. 546 (1973), we held that the cl. 8 grant of power
to Congress was not exclusive and that, at least in the case of writings, the States were not prohibited
from encouraging and protecting the efforts of those within their borders by appropriate legislation.
The States could, therefore, protect against the unauthorized rerecording for sale of performances
fixed on records or tapes, even though those performances qualified as "writings" in the constitutional
sense and Congress was empowered to legislate regarding such performances and could pre-empt the
area if it chose to do so. This determination was premised on the great diversity of interests in our
Nation--the essentially nonuniform character of the appreciation of intellectual achievements in the
various States. Evidence for this came from patents granted by the States in the 18th century. 412 U.
S., at 557.

Just as the States may exercise regulatory power over writings so may the States regulate with respect
to discoveries. States may hold diverse viewpoints in protecting intellectual property relating to

such article to another." Ohio Rev. Code Ann.  1333.99 (E) (Supp. 1973) provides: "Whoever violates section 1333.51 of the
Revised Code shall be fined not more than five thousand dollars, imprisoned not less than one nor more than ten years, or
both."

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 447
invention as they do in protecting the intellectual property relating to the subject matter of copyright.
The only limitation on the States is that in regulating the area of patents and copyrights they do not
conflict with the operation of the laws in this area passed by Congress, and it is to that more difficult
question we now turn.

IV

The question of whether the trade secret law of Ohio is void under the Supremacy Clause involves
a consideration of whether that law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of
the full purposes and objectives of Congress." Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67 (1941). See Florida
Avocado Growers v. Paul, 373 U. S. 132, 141 (1963). We stated in Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376
U. S. 225, 229 (1964), that when state law touches upon the area of federal statutes enacted pursuant
to constitutional authority, "it is `familiar doctrine' that the federal policy `may not be set at naught,
or its benefits denied' by the state law. Sola Elec. Co. v. Jefferson Elec. Co., 317 U. S. 173, 176 (1942). This
is true, of course, even if the state law is enacted in the exercise of otherwise undoubted state power."

The laws which the Court of Appeals in this case held to be in conflict with the Ohio law of trade
secrets were the patent laws passed by the Congress in the unchallenged exercise of its clear power
under Art. I,  8, cl. 8, of the Constitution. The patent law does not explicitly endorse or forbid the
operation of trade secret law. However, as we have noted, if the scheme of protection developed by
Ohio respecting trade secrets "clashes with the objectives of the federal patent laws," Sears, Roebuck &
Co. v. Stiffel Co., supra, at 231, then the state law must fall. To determine whether the Ohio law "clashes"
with the federal law it is helpful to examine the objectives of both the patent and trade secret laws.

The stated objective of the Constitution in granting the power to Congress to legislate in the area of
intellectual property is to "promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts." The patent laws promote
this progress by offering a right of exclusion for a limited period as an incentive to inventors to
risk the often enormous costs in terms of time, research, and development. The productive effort
thereby fostered will have a positive effect on society through the introduction of new products and
processes of manufacture into the economy, and the emanations by way of increased employment
and better lives for our citizens. In return for the right of exclusion --this "reward for inventions,"
Universal Oil Co. v. Globe Co.,322 U. S. 471, 484 (1944)--the patent laws impose upon the inventor a
requirement of disclosure. To insure adequate and full disclosure so that upon the expiration of the
17-year period "the knowledge of the invention enures to the people, who are thus enabled without
restriction to practice it and profit by its use," United States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 289 U. S.
178, 187 (1933), the patent laws require that the patent application shall include a full and clear
description of the invention and "of the manner and process of making and using it" so that any
person skilled in the art may make and use the invention. 35 U. S. C.  112. When a patent is granted
and the information contained in it is circulated to the general public and those especially skilled
in the trade, such additions to the general store of knowledge are of such importance to the public
weal that the Federal Government is willing to pay the high price of 17 years of exclusive use for
its disclosure, which disclosure, it is assumed, will stimulate ideas and the eventual development of
further significant advances in the art. The Court has also articulated another policy of the patent law:
that which is in the public domain cannot be removed therefrom by action of the States.

        "[F]ederal law requires that all ideas in general circulation be dedicated to the common good
        unless they are protected by a valid patent." Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, 395 U. S., at 668.

448 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
See also Goldstein v. California, 412 U. S., at 570-571; Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., supra; Compco
Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U. S. 234, 237-238 (1964); International News Service v. Associated
Press, 248 U. S. 215, 250 (1918) (Brandeis, J., dissenting).

The maintenance of standards of commercial ethics and the encouragement of invention are the
broadly stated policies behind trade secret law. "The necessity of good faith and honest, fair dealing, is
the very life and spirit of the commercial world." National Tube Co. v. Eastern Tube Co., 3 Ohio C. C. R.
(n. s.), at 462.[11] In A. O. Smith Corp. v. Petroleum Iron Works Co., 73 F. 2d, at 539, the Court emphasized
that even though a discovery may not be patentable, that does not

        "destroy the value of the discovery to one who makes it, or advantage the competitor who by
        unfair means, or as the beneficiary of a broken faith, obtains the desired knowledge without
        himself paying the price in labor, money, or machines expended by the discoverer."

In Wexler v. Greenberg, 399 Pa. 569, 578-579, 160 A. 2d 430, 434-435 (1960), the Pennsylvania Supreme
Court noted the importance of trade secret protection to the subsidization of research and
development and to increased economic efficiency within large companies through the dispersion of
responsibilities for creative developments.

Having now in mind the objectives of both the patent and trade secret law, we turn to an examination
of the interaction of these systems of protection of intellectual property--one established by the
Congress and the other by a State--to determine whether and under what circumstances the latter
might constitute "too great an encroachment on the federal patent system to be tolerated." Sears,
Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U. S., at 232.

As we noted earlier, trade secret law protects items which would not be proper subjects for
consideration for patent protection under 35 U. S. C.  101. As in the case of the recordings in
Goldstein v. California, Congress, with respect to nonpatentable subject matter, "has drawn no balance;
rather, it has left the area unattended, and no reason exists why the State should not be free to act."
Goldstein v. California, supra, at 570 (footnote omitted).

Since no patent is available for a discovery, however useful, novel, and nonobvious, unless it falls
within one of the express categories of patentable subject matter of 35 U. S. C.  101, the holder of
such a discovery would have no reason to apply for a patent whether trade secret protection existed
or not. Abolition of trade secret protection would, therefore, not result in increased disclosure to
the public of discoveries in the area of nonpatentable subject matter. Also, it is hard to see how the
public would be benefited by disclosure of customer lists or advertising campaigns; in fact, keeping
such items secret encourages businesses to initiate new and individualized plans of operation, and
constructive competition results. This, in turn, leads to a greater variety of business methods than
would otherwise be the case if privately developed marketing and other data were passed illicitly
among firms involved in the same enterprise.

Congress has spoken in the area of those discoveries which fall within one of the categories of
patentable subject matter of 35 U. S. C.  101 and which are, therefore, of a nature that would be
subject to consideration for a patent. Processes, machines, manufactures, compositions of matter,
and improvements thereof, which meet the tests of utility, novelty, and nonobviousness are entitled
to be patented, but those which do not, are not. The question remains whether those items which
are proper subjects for consideration for a patent may also have available the alternative protection
accorded by trade secret law.

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 449
Certainly the patent policy of encouraging invention is not disturbed by the existence of another
form of incentive to invention. In this respect the two systems are not and never would be in conflict.
Similarly, the policy that matter once in the public domain must remain in the public domain is not
incompatible with the existence of trade secret protection. By definition a trade secret has not been
placed in the public domain.

The more difficult objective of the patent law to reconcile with trade secret law is that of disclosure,
the quid pro quo of the right to exclude. Universal Oil Co. v. Globe Co., 322 U. S. at 484. We are helped in
this stage of the analysis by Judge Henry Friendly's opinion in Painton & Co. v. Bourns, Inc., 442 F. 2d
216 (CA2 1971). There the Court of Appeals thought it useful, in determining whether inventors will
refrain because of the existence of trade secret law from applying for patents, thereby depriving the
public from learning of the invention, to distinguish between three categories of trade secrets:

        "(1) the trade secret believed by its owner to constitute a validly patentable invention; (2) the
        trade secret known to its owner not to be so patentable; and (3) the trade secret whose valid
        patentability is considered dubious." Id., at 224.

Trade secret protection in each of these categories would run against breaches of confidence--the
employee and licensee situations--and theft and other forms of industrial espionage.

As to the trade secret known not to meet the standards of patentability, very little in the way
of disclosure would be accomplished by abolishing trade secret protection. With trade secrets of
nonpatentable subject matter, the patent alternative would not reasonably be available to the inventor.
"There can be no public interest in stimulating developers of such [unpatentable] knowhow to flood
an overburdened Patent Office with applications [for] what they do not consider patentable." Ibid. The
mere filing of applications doomed to be turned down by the Patent Office will bring forth no new
public knowledge or enlightenment, since under federal statute and regulation patent applications
and abandoned patent applications are held by the Patent Office in confidence and are not open to
public inspection. 35 U. S. C.  122; 37 CFR  1.14 (b).

Even as the extension of trade secret protection to patentable subject matter that the owner knows
will not meet the standards of patentability will not conflict with the patent policy of disclosure, it will
have a decidedly beneficial effect on society. Trade secret law will encourage invention in areas where
patent law does not reach, and will prompt the independent innovator to proceed with the discovery
and exploitation of his invention. Competition is fostered and the public is not deprived of the use of
valuable, if not quite patentable, invention.

Even if trade secret protection against the faithless employee were abolished, inventive and exploitive
effort in the area of patentable subject matter that did not meet the standards of patentability would
continue, although at a reduced level. Alternatively with the effort that remained, however, would
come an increase in the amount of self-help that innovative companies would employ. Knowledge
would be widely dispersed among the employees of those still active in research. Security precautions
necessarily would be increased, and salaries and fringe benefits of those few officers or employees
who had to know the whole of the secret invention would be fixed in an amount thought sufficient
to assure their loyalty. Smaller companies would be placed at a distinct economic disadvantage, since
the costs of this kind of self-help could be great, and the cost to the public of the use of this invention
would be increased. The innovative entrepreneur with limited resources would tend to confine his
research efforts to himself and those few he felt he could trust without the ultimate assurance of legal

450 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
protection against breaches of confidence. As a result, organized scientific and technological research
could become fragmented, and society, as a whole, would suffer.

Another problem that would arise if state trade secret protection were precluded is in the area of
licensing others to exploit secret processes. The holder of a trade secret would not likely share his
secret with a manufacturer who cannot be placed under binding legal obligation to pay a license fee
or to protect the secret. The result would be to hoard rather than disseminate knowledge. Painton &
Co. v. Bourns, Inc., 442 F. 2d, at 223. Instead, then, of licensing others to use his invention and making
the most efficient use of existing manufacturing and marketing structures within the industry, the
trade secret holder would tend either to limit his utilization of the invention, thereby depriving the
public of the maximum benefit of its use, or engage in the time-consuming and economically wasteful
enterprise of constructing duplicative manufacturing and marketing mechanisms for the exploitation
of the invention. The detrimental misallocation of resources and economic waste that would thus
take place if trade secret protection were abolished with respect to employees or licensees cannot be
justified by reference to any policy that the federal patent law seeks to advance.

Nothing in the patent law requires that States refrain from action to prevent industrial espionage.
In addition to the increased costs for protection from burglary, wiretapping, bribery, and the other
means used to misappropriate trade secrets, there is the inevitable cost to the basic decency of society
when one firm steals from another. A most fundamental human right, that of privacy, is threatened
when industrial espionage is condoned or is made profitable;[16] the state interest in denying profit
to such illegal ventures is unchallengeable.

The next category of patentable subject matter to deal with is the invention whose holder has a
legitimate doubt as to its patentability. The risk of eventual patent invalidity by the courts and the
costs associated with that risk may well impel some with a good-faith doubt as to patentability not
to take the trouble to seek to obtain and defend patent protection for their discoveries, regardless of
the existence of trade secret protection. Trade secret protection would assist those inventors in the
more efficient exploitation of their discoveries and not conflict with the patent law. In most cases
of genuine doubt as to patent validity the potential rewards of patent protection are so far superior
to those accruing to holders of trade secrets, that the holders of such inventions will seek patent
protection, ignoring the trade secret route. For those inventors "on the line" as to whether to seek
patent protection, the abolition of trade secret protection might encourage some to apply for a patent
who otherwise would not have done so. For some of those so encouraged, no patent will be granted
and the result

"will have been an unnecessary postponement in the divulging of the trade secret to persons willing
to pay for it. If [the patent does issue], it may well be invalid, yet many will prefer to pay a modest
royalty than to contest it, even though Lear allows them to accept a license and pursue the contest
without paying royalties while the fight goes on. The result in such a case would be unjustified royalty
payments from many who would prefer not to pay them rather than agreed fees from one or a few
who are entirely willing to do so." Painton & Co. v. Bourns, Inc., 442 F. 2d, at 225.

The point is that those who might be encouraged to file for patents by the absence of trade secret law
will include inventors possessing the chaff as well as the wheat. Some of the chaff--the nonpatentable
discoveries--will be thrown out by the Patent Office, but in the meantime society will have been
deprived of use of those discoveries through trade secret-protected licensing. Some of the chaff may
not be thrown out. This Court has noted the difference between the standards used by the Patent

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 451
Office and the courts to determine patentability. Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 U. S. 1, 18 (1966). In
Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, 395 U. S. 653 (1969), the Court thought that an invalid patent was so serious a
threat to the free use of ideas already in the public domain that the Court permitted licensees of the
patent holder to challenge the validity of the patent. Better had the invalid patent never been issued.
More of those patents would likely issue if trade secret law were abolished. Eliminating trade secret
law for the doubtfully patentable invention is thus likely to have deleterious effects on society and
patent policy which we cannot say are balanced out by the speculative gain which might result from
the encouragement of some inventors with doubtfully patentable inventions which deserve patent
protection to come forward and apply for patents. There is no conflict, then, between trade secret law
and the patent law policy of disclosure, at least insofar as the first two categories of patentable subject
matter are concerned.

The final category of patentable subject matter to deal with is the clearly patentable invention, i. e.,
that invention which the owner believes to meet the standards of patentability. It is here that the
federal interest in disclosure is at its peak; these inventions, novel, useful and nonobvious, are "`the
things which are worth to the public the embarrassment of an exclusive patent.'" Graham v. John Deere
Co., supra, at 9 (quoting Thomas Jefferson). The interest of the public is that the bargain of 17 years
of exclusive use in return for disclosure be accepted. If a State, through a system of protection, were
to cause a substantial risk that holders of patentable inventions would not seek patents, but rather
would rely on the state protection, we would be compelled to hold that such a system could not
constitutionally continue to exist. In the case of trade secret law no reasonable risk of deterrence from
patent application by those who can reasonably expect to be granted patents exists.

Trade secret law provides far weaker protection in many respects than the patent law. While trade
secret law does not forbid the discovery of the trade secret by fair and honest means, e. g., independent
creation or reverse engineering, patent law operates "against the world," forbidding any use of the
invention for whatever purpose for a significant length of time. The holder of a trade secret also
takes a substantial risk that the secret will be passed on to his competitors, by theft or by breach
of a confidential relationship, in a manner not easily susceptible of discovery or proof. Painton &
Co. v. Bourns, Inc., 442 F. 2d, at 224. Where patent law acts as a barrier, trade secret law functions
relatively as a sieve. The possibility that an inventor who believes his invention meets the standards of
patentability will sit back, rely on trade secret law, and after one year of use forfeit any right to patent
protection, 35 U. S. C.  102 (b), is remote indeed.

Nor does society face much risk that scientific or technological progress will be impeded by the rare
inventor with a patentable invention who chooses trade secret protection over patent protection. The
ripeness-of-time concept of invention, developed from the study of the many independent multiple
discoveries in history, predicts that if a particular individual had not made a particular discovery
others would have, and in probably a relatively short period of time. If something is to be discovered
at all very likely it will be discovered by more than one person. Singletons and Multiples in Science
(1961), in R. Merton, The Sociology of Science 343 (1973); J. Cole & S. Cole, Social Stratification
in Science 12-13, 229-230 (1973); Ogburn & Thomas, Are Inventions Inevitable?, 37 Pol. Sci. Q. 83
(1922). Even were an inventor to keep his discovery completely to himself, something that neither
the patent nor trade secret laws forbid, there is a high probability that it will be soon independently
developed. If the invention, though still a trade secret, is put into public use, the competition is alerted
to the existence of the inventor's solution to the problem and may be encouraged to make an extra
effort to independently find the solution thus known to be possible. The inventor faces pressures not

452 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
only from private industry, but from the skilled scientists who work in our universities and our other
great publicly supported centers of learning and research.

We conclude that the extension of trade secret protection to clearly patentable inventions does not
conflict with the patent policy of disclosure. Perhaps because trade secret law does not produce
any positive effects in the area of clearly patentable inventions, as opposed to the beneficial effects
resulting from trade secret protection in the areas of the doubtfully patentable and the clearly
unpatentable inventions, it has been suggested that partial pre-emption may be appropriate, and that
courts should refuse to apply trade secret protection to inventions which the holder should have
patented, and which would have been, thereby, disclosed. However, since there is no real possibility
that trade secret law will conflict with the federal policy favoring disclosure of clearly patentable
inventions partial pre-emption is inappropriate. Partial pre-emption, furthermore, could well create
serious problems for state courts in the administration of trade secret law. As a preliminary matter in
trade secret actions, state courts would be obliged to distinguish between what a reasonable inventor
would and would not correctly consider to be clearly patentable, with the holder of the trade secret
arguing that the invention was not patentable and the misappropriator of the trade secret arguing its
undoubted novelty, utility, and nonobviousness. Federal courts have a difficult enough time trying
to determine whether an invention, narrowed by the patent application procedure and fixed in the
specifications which describe the invention for which the patent has been granted, is patentable.
Although state courts in some circumstances must join federal courts in judging whether an issued
patent is valid, Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, supra, it would be undesirable to impose the almost impossible
burden on state courts to determine the patentability--in fact and in the mind of a reasonable
inventor--of a discovery which has not been patented and remains entirely uncircumscribed by
expert analysis in the administrative process. Neither complete nor partial pre-emption of state trade
secret law is justified.

Our conclusion that patent law does not pre-empt trade secret law is in accord with prior cases of
this Court. Universal Oil Co. v. Globe Co., 322 U. S., at 484; United States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp.,
289 U. S., at 186-187; Becher v. Contoure Laboratories, 279 U. S. 388, 391 (1929); Du Pont Powder Co. v.
Masland, 244 U. S. 100, 102 (1917); Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. Park & Sons Co., 220 U. S. 373, 402-403
(1911); Board of Trade v. Christie Grain & Stock Co., 198 U. S. 236, 250-251 (1905). Trade secret law
and patent law have co-existed in this country for over one hundred years. Each has its particular
role to play, and the operation of one does not take away from the need for the other. Trade secret
law encourages the development and exploitation of those items of lesser or different invention than
might be accorded protection under the patent laws, but which items still have an important part to
play in the technological and scientific advancement of the Nation. Trade secret law promotes the
sharing of knowledge, and the efficient operation of industry; it permits the individual inventor to
reap the rewards of his labor by contracting with a company large enough to develop and exploit it.
Congress, by its silence over these many years, has seen the wisdom of allowing the States to enforce
trade secret protection. Until Congress takes affirmative action to the contrary, States should be free
to grant protection to trade secrets.

Since we hold that Ohio trade secret law is not preempted by the federal patent law, the judgment
of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit is reversed, and the case is remanded to the Court of
Appeals with directions to reinstate the judgment of the District Court.

It is so ordered.

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 453
MR. JUSTICE POWELL took no part in the decision of this case.
MR. JUSTICE MARSHALL, concurring in the result.
***
JUSTICE DOUGLAS, with whom MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN concurs, dissenting.
***

454 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
BONITO BOATS V. THUNDER CRAFT BOATS (1989)

                                   Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc.

                                                       489 U.S. 141 (1989)

JUSTICE O'CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court.

We must decide today what limits the operation of the federal patent system places on the States'
ability to offer substantial protection to utilitarian and design ideas which the patent laws leave
otherwise unprotected. In Interpart Corp.v. Italia, 777 F. 2d 678 (1985), the Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit concluded that a California law prohibiting the use of the "direct molding process"
to duplicate unpatented articles posed no threat to the policies behind the federal patent laws. In this
case, the Florida Supreme Court came to a contrary conclusion. It struck down a Florida statute which
prohibits the use of the direct molding process to duplicate unpatented boat hulls, finding that the
protection offered by the Florida law conflicted with the balance struck by Congress in the federal
patent statute between the encouragement of invention and free competition in unpatented ideas. 515
So. 2d 220 (1987). We granted certiorari to resolve the conflict, 486 U. S. 1004 (1988), and we now
affirm the judgment of the Florida Supreme Court.

I

In September 1976, petitioner Bonito Boats, Inc. (Bonito), a Florida corporation, developed a hull
design for a fiberglass recreational boat which it marketed under the trade name Bonito Boat Model
5VBR. App. 5. Designing the boat hull required substantial effort on the part of Bonito. A set of
engineering drawings was prepared, from which a hardwood model was created. The hardwood
model was then sprayed with fiberglass to create a mold, which then served to produce the finished
fiberglass boats for sale. The 5VBR was placed on the market sometime in September 1976. There is
no indication in the record that a patent application was ever filed for protection of the utilitarian
or design aspects of the hull, or for the process by which the hull was manufactured. The 5VBR was
favorably received by the boating public, and "a broad interstate market" developed for its sale. Ibid.

In May 1983, after the Bonito 5VBR had been available to the public for over six years, the Florida
Legislature enacted Fla. Stat.  559.94 (1987). The statute makes "[i]t . . . unlawful for any person to
use the direct molding process to duplicate for the purpose of sale any manufactured vessel hull or
component part of a vessel made by another without the written permission of that other person."
 559.94(2). The statute also makes it unlawful for a person to "knowingly sell a vessel hull or
component part of a vessel duplicated in violation of subsection (2)."  559.94(3). Damages, injunctive
relief, and attorney's fees are made available to "[a]ny person who suffers injury or damage as the result
of a violation" of the statute.  559.94(4). The statute was made applicable to vessel hulls or component
parts duplicated through the use of direct molding after July 1, 1983.  559.94(5).

On December 21, 1984, Bonito filed this action in the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida.
The complaint alleged that respondent here, Thunder Craft Boats, Inc. (Thunder Craft), a Tennessee

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 455
corporation, had violated the Florida statute by using the direct molding process to duplicate the
Bonito 5VBR fiberglass hull, and had knowingly sold such duplicates in violation of the Florida
statute. Bonito sought "a temporary and permanent injunction prohibiting [Thunder Craft] from
continuing to unlawfully duplicate and sell Bonito Boat hulls or components," as well as an accounting
of profits, treble damages, punitive damages, and attorney's fees. App. 6, 7. Respondent filed a motion
to dismiss the complaint, arguing that under this Court's decisions in Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel
Co., 376 U. S. 225 (1964), and Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U. S. 234 (1964), the Florida
statute conflicted with federal patent law and was therefore invalid under the Supremacy Clause of
the Federal Constitution. App. 8-9. The trial court granted respondent's motion, id., at 10-11, and a
divided Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal of petitioner's complaint. 487 So. 2d 395 (1986).

On appeal, a sharply divided Florida Supreme Court agreed with the lower courts' conclusion that
the Florida law impermissibly interfered with the scheme established by the federal patent laws. See
515 So. 2d 220 (1987). The majority read our decisions in Sears and Compco for the proposition that
"when an article is introduced into the public domain, only a patent can eliminate the inherent risk
of competition and then but for a limited time." 515 So. 2d, at 222. Relying on the Federal Circuit's
decision in the Interpart case, the three dissenting judges argued that the Florida antidirect molding
provision "does not prohibit the copying of an unpatented item. It prohibits one method of copying;
the item remains in the public domain." 515 So. 2d, at 223 (Shaw, J., dissenting).

II

Article I,  8, cl. 8, of the Constitution gives Congress the power "[t]o promote the Progress of
Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right
to their respective Writings and Discoveries." The Patent Clause itself reflects a balance between the
need to encourage innovation and the avoidance of monopolies which stifle competition without
any concomitant advance in the "Progress of Science and useful Arts." As we have noted in the past,
the Clause contains both a grant of power and certain limitations upon the exercise of that power.
Congress may not create patent monopolies of unlimited duration, nor may it "authorize the issuance
of patents whose effects are to remove existent knowledge from the public domain, or to restrict free
access to materials already available." Graham v. John Deere Co. of Kansas City, 383 U. S. 1, 6 (1966).

From their inception, the federal patent laws have embodied a careful balance between the need to
promote innovation and the recognition that imitation and refinement through imitation are both
necessary to invention itself and the very lifeblood of a competitive economy. Soon after the adoption
of the Constitution, the First Congress enacted the Patent Act of 1790, which allowed the grant of a
limited monopoly of 14 years to any applicant that "hath . . . invented or discovered any useful art,
manufacture... or device, or any improvement therein not before known or used." 1 Stat. 109, 110.
In addition to novelty, the 1790 Act required that the invention be "sufficiently useful and important"
to merit the 14-year right of exclusion. Ibid. Section 2 of the Act required that the patentee deposit
with the Secretary of State, a specification and if possible a model of the new invention, "which
specification shall be so particular, and said models so exact, as not only to distinguish the invention
or discovery from other things before known and used, but also to enable a workman or other person
skilled in the art or manufacture . . . to make, construct, or use the same, to the end that the public may
have the full benefit thereof, after the expiration of the patent term." Ibid.

The first Patent Act established an agency known by self-designation as the "Commissioners for the
promotion of Useful Arts," composed of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Department of

456 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
War, and the Attorney General, any two of whom could grant a patent. Thomas Jefferson was the first
Secretary of State, and the driving force behind early federal patent policy. For Jefferson, a central
tenet of the patent system in a free market economy was that "a machine of which we were possessed,
might be applied by every man to any use of which it is susceptible." 13 Writings of Thomas Jefferson
335 (Memorial ed. 1904). He viewed a grant of patent rights in an idea already disclosed to the
public as akin to an ex post facto law, "obstruct[ing] others in the use of what they possessed before."
Id., at 326-327. Jefferson also played a large role in the drafting of our Nation's second Patent Act,
which became law in 1793. The Patent Act of 1793 carried over the requirement that the subject of a
patent application be "not known or used before the application." Ch. 11, 1 Stat. 318, 319. A defense
to an infringement action was created where "the thing, thus secured by patent, was not originally
discovered by the patentee, but had been in use, or had been described in some public work anterior
to the supposed discovery of the patentee." Id., at 322. Thus, from the outset, federal patent law has
been about the difficult business "of drawing a line between the things which are worth to the public
the embarrassment of an exclusive patent, and those which are not." 13 Writings of Thomas Jefferson,
supra, at 335.

Today's patent statute is remarkably similar to the law as known to Jefferson in 1793. Protection
is offered to "[w]hoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture,
or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof." 35 U. S. C.  101. Since
1842, Congress has also made protection available for "any new, original and ornamental design for
an article of manufacture." 35 U. S. C.  171. To qualify for protection, a design must present an
aesthetically pleasing appearance that is not dictated by function alone, and must satisfy the other
criteria of patentability. The novelty requirement of patentability is presently expressed in 35 U. S. C.
㎣ 102(a) and (b), which provide:

        "A person shall be entitled to a patent unless--

        "(a) the invention was known or used by others in this country, or patented or described in a
        printed publication in this or a foreign country, before the invention thereof by the application
        for patent, or

        "(b) the invention was patented or described in a printed publication in this or a foreign country
        or in public use or on sale in this country more than one year prior to the date of application for
        patent in the United States . . . ."

Sections 102(a) and (b) operate in tandem to exclude from consideration for patent protection
knowledge that is already available to the public. They express a congressional determination that
the creation of a monopoly in such information would not only serve no socially useful purpose, but
would in fact injure the public by removing existing knowledge from public use. From the Patent Act
of 1790 to the present day, the public sale of an unpatented article has acted as a complete bar to
federal protection of the idea embodied in the article thus placed in public commerce.

In the case of Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1 (1829), Justice Story applied these principles under the patent
law of 1800. The patentee had developed a new technique for the manufacture of rubber hose for
the conveyance of air and fluids. The invention was reduced to practice in 1811, but letters patent
were not sought and granted until 1818. In the interval, the patentee had licensed a third party to
market the hose, and over 13,000 feet of the new product had been sold in the city of Philadelphia
alone. The Court concluded that the patent was invalid due to the prior public sale, indicating that,

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 457
"if [an inventor] suffers the thing he invented to go into public use, or to be publicly sold for use"
"[h]is voluntary act or acquiescence in the public sale and use is an abandonment of his right." Id., at
23-24. The Court noted that under the common law of England, letters patent were unavailable for
the protection of articles in public commerce at the time of the application, id., at 20, and that this
same doctrine was immediately embodied in the first patent laws passed in this country. Id., at 21-22.

As the holding of Pennock makes clear, the federal patent scheme creates a limited opportunity to
obtain a property right in an idea. Once an inventor has decided to lift the veil of secrecy from his
work, he must choose the protection of a federal patent or the dedication of his idea to the public at
large. As Judge Learned Hand once put it: "[I]t is a condition upon the inventor's right to a patent that
he shall not exploit his discovery competitively after it is ready for patenting; he must content himself
with either secrecy or legal monopoly." Metallizing Engineering Co. v. Kenyon Bearing & Auto Parts Co.,
153 F. 2d 516, 520 (CA2), cert. denied, 328 U. S. 840 (1946).

In addition to the requirements of novelty and utility, the federal patent law has long required that
an innovation not be anticipated by the prior art in the field. Even if a particular combination of
elements is "novel" in the literal sense of the term, it will not qualify for federal patent protection if its
contours are so traced by the existing technology in the field that the "improvement is the work of the
skillful mechanic, not that of the inventor." Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 11 How. 248, 267 (1851). In 1952,
Congress codified this judicially developed requirement in 35 U. S. C.  103, which refuses protection
to new developments where "the differences between the subject matter sought to be patented and
the prior art are such that the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the
invention was made to a person of ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains." The
nonobviousness requirement extends the field of unpatentable material beyond that which is known
to the public under  102, to include that which could readily be deduced from publicly available
material by a person of ordinary skill in the pertinent field of endeavor. See Graham, 383 U. S., at 15.
Taken together, the novelty and nonobviousness requirements express a congressional determination
that the purposes behind the Patent Clause are best served by free competition and exploitation of
either that which is already available to the public or that which may be readily discerned from
publicly available material. See Aronson v. Quick Point Pencil Co., 440 U. S. 257, 262 (1979) ("[T]he
stringent requirements for patent protection seek to ensure that ideas in the public domain remain
there for the use of the public").

The applicant whose invention satisfies the requirements of novelty, nonobviousness, and utility,
and who is willing to reveal to the public the substance of his discovery and "the best mode . . . of
carrying out his invention," 35 U. S. C.  112, is granted "the right to exclude others from making,
using, or selling the invention throughout the United States," for a period of 17 years. 35 U. S. C. 
154. The federal patent system thus embodies a carefully crafted bargain for encouraging the creation
and disclosure of new, useful, and nonobvious advances in technology and design in return for the
exclusive right to practice the invention for a period of years. "[The inventor] may keep his invention
secret and reap its fruits indefinitely. In consideration of its disclosure and the consequent benefit to
the community, the patent is granted. An exclusive enjoyment is guaranteed him for seventeen years,
but upon expiration of that period, the knowledge of the invention inures to the people, who are thus
enabled without restriction to practice it and profit by its use." United Statesv. Dubilier Condenser Corp.,
289 U. S. 178, 186-187 (1933).

The attractiveness of such a bargain, and its effectiveness in inducing creative effort and disclosure of
the results of that effort, depend almost entirely on a backdrop of free competition in the exploitation

458 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
of unpatented designs and innovations. The novelty and nonobviousness requirements of
patentability embody a congressional understanding, implicit in the Patent Clause itself, that free
exploitation of ideas will be the rule, to which the protection of a federal patent is the exception.
Moreover, the ultimate goal of the patent system is to bring new designs and technologies into the
public domain through disclosure. State law protection for techniques and designs whose disclosure
has already been induced by market rewards may conflict with the very purpose of the patent
laws by decreasing the range of ideas available as the building blocks of further innovation. The
offer of federal protection from competitive exploitation of intellectual property would be rendered
meaningless in a world where substantially similar state law protections were readily available. To a
limited extent, the federal patent laws must determine not only what is protected, but also what is free
for all to use. Cf. Arkansas Electric Cooperative Corp. v. Arkansas Public Service Comm'n, 461 U. S. 375,
384 (1983) ("[A] federal decision to forgo regulation in a given area may imply an authoritative federal
determination that the area is best left unregulated, and in that event would have as much pre-emptive
force as a decision to regulate") (emphasis in original).

Thus our past decisions have made clear that state regulation of intellectual property must yield to the
extent that it clashes with the balance struck by Congress in our patent laws. The tension between the
desire to freely exploit the full potential of our inventive resources and the need to create an incentive
to deploy those resources is constant. Where it is clear how the patent laws strike that balance in a
particular circumstance, that is not a judgment the States may second-guess. We have long held that
after the expiration of a federal patent, the subject matter of the patent passes to the free use of the
public as a matter of federal law. See Coats v. Merrick Thread Co., 149 U. S. 562, 572 (1893) ("[P]laintiffs'
right to the use of the embossed periphery expired with their patent, and the public had the same
right to make use of it as if it had never been patented"); Kellogg Co. v. National Biscuit Co., 305 U.
S. 111 (1938); Singer Mfg. Co. v. June Mfg. Co., 163 U. S. 169 (1896). Where the public has paid the
congressionally mandated price for disclosure, the States may not render the exchange fruitless by
offering patent-like protection to the subject matter of the expired patent. "It is self-evident that on
the expiration of a patent the monopoly created by it ceases to exist, and the right to make the thing
formerly covered by the patent becomes public property." Singer, supra, at 185.

In our decisions in Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co., 376 U. S. 225 (1964), and Compco Corp. v. Day-
Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U. S. 234 (1964), we found that publicly known design and utilitarian ideas
which were unprotected by patent occupied much the same position as the subject matter of an
expired patent. The Sears case involved a pole lamp originally designed by the plaintiff Stiffel, who
had secured both design and mechanical patents on the lamp. Sears purchased unauthorized copies
of the lamps, and was able to sell them at a retail price practically equivalent to the wholesale price
of the original manufacturer. Sears, supra, at 226. Stiffel brought an action against Sears in Federal
District Court, alleging infringement of the two federal patents and unfair competition under Illinois
law. The District Court found that Stiffel's patents were invalid due to anticipation in the prior art, but
nonetheless enjoined Sears from further sales of the duplicate lamps based on a finding of consumer
confusion under the Illinois law of unfair competition. The Court of Appeals affirmed, coming to
the conclusion that the Illinois law of unfair competition prohibited product simulation even in the
absence of evidence that the defendant took some further action to induce confusion as to source.

This Court reversed, finding that the unlimited protection against copying which the Illinois law
accorded an unpatentable item whose design had been fully disclosed through public sales conflicted
with the federal policy embodied in the patent laws. The Court stated:

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 459
"In the present case the `pole lamp' sold by Stiffel has been held not to be entitled to the protection of
either a mechanical or a design patent. An unpatentable article, like an article on which the patent has
expired, is in the public domain and may be made and sold by whoever chooses to do so. What Sears
did was to copy Stiffel's design and sell lamps almost identical to those sold by Stiffel. This it had every
right to do under the federal patent laws." 376 U. S., at 231.

A similar conclusion was reached in Compco, where the District Court had extended the protection of
Illinois' unfair competition law to the functional aspects of an unpatented fluorescent lighting system.
The injunction against copying of an unpatented article, freely available to the public, impermissibly
"interfere[d] with the federal policy, found in Art. I,  8, cl. 8, of the Constitution and in the
implementing federal statutes, of allowing free access to copy whatever the federal patent and
copyright laws leave in the public domain." Compco, supra, at 237.

The pre-emptive sweep of our decisions in Sears and Compco has been the subject of heated scholarly
and judicial debate. See, e. g., Symposium, Product Simulation: A Right or a Wrong?, 64 Colum. L.
Rev. 1178 (1964); Lear, Inc. v. Adkins,395 U. S. 653, 676 (1969) (Black, J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part). Read at their highest level of generality, the two decisions could be taken to stand
for the proposition that the States are completely disabled from offering any form of protection to
articles or processes which fall within the broad scope of patentable subject matter. See id., at 677.
Since the potentially patentable includes "anything under the sun that is made by man," Diamond v.
Chakrabarty, 447 U. S. 303, 309 (1980) (citation omitted), the broadest reading of Sears would prohibit
the States from regulating the deceptive simulation of trade dress or the tortious appropriation of
private information.

That the extrapolation of such a broad pre-emptive principle from Sears is inappropriate is clear from
the balance struck in Sears itself. The Sears Court made it plain that the States "may protect businesses
in the use of their trademarks, labels, or distinctive dress in the packaging of goods so as to prevent
others, by imitating such markings, from misleading purchasers as to the source of the goods." Sears,
supra, at 232 (footnote omitted). Trade dress is, of course, potentially the subject matter of design
patents. See W. T. Rogers Co. v. Keene, 778 F. 2d 334, 337 (CA7 1985). Yet our decision in Searsclearly
indicates that the States may place limited regulations on the circumstances in which such designs
are used in order to prevent consumer confusion as to source. Thus, while Sears speaks in absolutist
terms, its conclusion that the States may place some conditions on the use of trade dress indicates an
implicit recognition that all state regulation of potentially patentable but unpatented subject matter is
not ipso facto pre-empted by the federal patent laws.

What was implicit in our decision in Sears, we have made explicit in our subsequent decisions
concerning the scope of federal pre-emption of state regulation of the subject matter of patent. Thus,
in Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U. S. 470 (1974), we held that state protection of trade secrets
did not operate to frustrate the achievement of the congressional objectives served by the patent laws.
Despite the fact that state law protection was available for ideas which clearly fell within the subject
matter of patent, the Court concluded that the nature and degree of state protection did not conflict
with the federal policies of encouragement of patentable invention and the prompt disclosure of such
innovations.

Several factors were critical to this conclusion. First, because the public awareness of a trade secret
is by definition limited, the Court noted that "the policy that matter once in the public domain must
remain in the public domain is not incompatible with the existence of trade secret protection." Id., at

460 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
484. Second, the Kewanee Court emphasized that "[t]rade secret law provides far weaker protection in
many respects than the patent law." Id., at 489-490. This point was central to the Court's conclusion
that trade secret protection did not conflict with either the encouragement or disclosure policies
of the federal patent law. The public at large remained free to discover and exploit the trade secret
through reverse engineering of products in the public domain or by independent creation. Id., at
490. Thus, the possibility that trade secret protection would divert inventors from the creative effort
necessary to satisfy the rigorous demands of patent protection was remote indeed. Ibid. Finally,
certain aspects of trade secret law operated to protect noneconomic interests outside the sphere of
congressional concern in the patent laws. As the Court noted, "[A] most fundamental human right,
that of privacy, is threatened when industrial espionage is condoned or is made profitable." Id., at 487
(footnote omitted). There was no indication that Congress had considered this interest in the balance
struck by the patent laws, or that state protection for it would interfere with the policies behind the
patent system.

We have since reaffirmed the pragmatic approach which Kewanee takes to the pre-emption of state
laws dealing with the protection of intellectual property. See Aronson, 440 U. S., at 262 ("State law
is not displaced merely because the contract relates to intellectual property which may or may not
be patentable; the states are free to regulate the use of such intellectual property in any manner not
inconsistent with federal law"). At the same time, we have consistently reiterated the teaching of Sears
and Compco that ideas once placed before the public without the protection of a valid patent are
subject to appropriation without significant restraint. Aronson, supra, at 263.

At the heart of Sears and Compco is the conclusion that the efficient operation of the federal patent
system depends upon substantially free trade in publicly known, unpatented design and utilitarian
conceptions. In Sears, the state law offered "the equivalent of a patent monopoly," 376 U. S., at 233, in
the functional aspects of a product which had been placed in public commerce absent the protection
of a valid patent. While, as noted above, our decisions since Sears have taken a decidedly less rigid
view of the scope of federal pre-emption under the patent laws, e. g., Kewanee, supra, at 479-480, we
believe that the Sears Court correctly concluded that the States may not offer patent-like protection
to intellectual creations which would otherwise remain unprotected as a matter of federal law. Both
the novelty and the nonobviousness requirements of federal patent law are grounded in the notion
that concepts within the public grasp, or those so obvious that they readily could be, are the tools of
creation available to all. They provide the baseline of free competition upon which the patent system's
incentive to creative effort depends. A state law that substantially interferes with the enjoyment of
an unpatented utilitarian or design conception which has been freely disclosed by its author to the
public at large impermissibly contravenes the ultimate goal of public disclosure and use which is the
centerpiece of federal patent policy. Moreover, through the creation of patent-like rights, the States
could essentially redirect inventive efforts away from the careful criteria of patentability developed by
Congress over the last 200 years. We understand this to be the reasoning at the core of our decisions
in Sears and Compco, and we reaffirm that reasoning today.

III

We believe that the Florida statute at issue in this case so substantially impedes the public use of the
otherwise unprotected design and utilitarian ideas embodied in unpatented boat hulls as to run afoul
of the teaching of our decisions in Sears and Compco. It is readily apparent that the Florida statute
does not operate to prohibit "unfair competition" in the usual sense that the term is understood.
The law of unfair competition has its roots in the common-law tort of deceit: its general concern is

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 461
with protecting consumers from confusion as to source. While that concern may result in the creation
of "quasi-property rights" in communicative symbols, the focus is on the protection of consumers,
not the protection of producers as an incentive to product innovation. Judge Hand captured the
distinction well in Crescent Tool Co. v. Kilborn & Bishop Co., 247 F. 299, 301 (CA2 1917), where he
wrote:

"[T]he plaintiff has the right not to lose his customers through false representations that those are his
wares which in fact are not, but he may not monopolize any design or pattern, however trifling. The
defendant, on the other hand, may copy plaintiff's goods slavishly down to the minutest detail: but he
may not represent himself as the plaintiff in their sale."

With some notable exceptions, including the interpretation of the Illinois law of unfair competition at
issue in Sears and Compco, see Sears, supra, at 227-228, n. 2, the common-law tort of unfair competition
has been limited to protection against copying of nonfunctional aspects of consumer products which
have acquired secondary meaning such that they operate as a designation of source. See generally P.
Kaufmann, Passing Off and Misappropriation, in 9 International Review of Industrial Property and
Copyright Law, Studies in Industrial Property and Copyright Law 100-109 (1986). The "protection"
granted a particular design under the law of unfair competition is thus limited to one context where
consumer confusion is likely to result; the design "idea" itself may be freely exploited in all other
contexts.

In contrast to the operation of unfair competition law, the Florida statute is aimed directly at
preventing the exploitation of the design and utilitarian conceptions embodied in the product itself.
The sparse legislative history surrounding its enactment indicates that it was intended to create
an inducement for the improvement of boat hull designs. See Tr. of Meeting of Transportation
Committee, Florida House of Representatives, May 3, 1983, reprinted at App. 22 ("[T]here is no
inducement for [a] quality boat manufacturer to improve these designs and secondly, if he does, it is
immediately copied. This would prevent that and allow him recourse in circuit court"). To accomplish
this goal, the Florida statute endows the original boat hull manufacturer with rights against the
world, similar in scope and operation to the rights accorded a federal patentee. Like the patentee, the
beneficiary of the Florida statute may prevent a competitor from "making" the product in what is
evidently the most efficient manner available and from "selling" the product when it is produced in
that fashion. Compare 35 U. S. C.  154.[*] The Florida scheme offers this protection for an unlimited
number of years to all boat hulls and their component parts, without regard to their ornamental or
technological merit. Protection is available for subject matter for which patent protection has been
denied or has expired, as well as for designs which have been freely revealed to the consuming public
by their creators.

In this case, the Bonito 5VBR fiberglass hull has been freely exposed to the public for a period in
excess of six years. For purposes of federal law, it stands in the same stead as an item for which a
patent has expired or been denied: it is unpatented and unpatentable. See 35 U. S. C.  102(b). Whether
because of a determination of unpatentability or other commercial concerns, petitioner chose to
expose its hull design to the public in the marketplace, eschewing the bargain held out by the federal
patent system of disclosure in exchange for exclusive use. Yet, the Florida statute allows petitioner
to reassert a substantial property right in the idea, thereby constricting the spectrum of useful public
knowledge. Moreover, it does so without the careful protections of high standards of innovation and
limited monopoly contained in the federal scheme. We think it clear that such protection conflicts

462 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
with the federal policy "that all ideas in general circulation be dedicated to the common good unless
they are protected by a valid patent." Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, 395 U. S., at 668.

That the Florida statute does not remove all means of reproduction and sale does not eliminate the
conflict with the federal scheme. See Kellogg, 305 U. S., at 122. In essence, the Florida law prohibits
the entire public from engaging in a form of reverse engineering of a product in the public domain.
This is clearly one of the rights vested in the federal patent holder, but has never been a part of
state protection under the law of unfair competition or trade secrets. See Kewanee,416 U. S., at 476
("A trade secret law, however, does not offer protection against discovery by . . . so-called reverse
engineering, that is by starting with the known product and working backward to divine the process
which aided in its development or manufacture"); see also Chicago Lock Co. v. Fanberg, 676 F. 2d
400, 405 (CA9 1982) ("A lock purchaser's own reverse-engineering of his own lock, and subsequent
publication of the serial number-key code correlation, is an example of the independent invention
and reverse engineering expressly allowed by trade secret doctrine"). The duplication of boat hulls
and their component parts may be an essential part of innovation in the field of hydrodynamic
design. Variations as to size and combination of various elements may lead to significant advances in
the field. Reverse engineering of chemical and mechanical articles in the public domain often leads
to significant advances in technology. If Florida may prohibit this particular method of study and
recomposition of an unpatented article, we fail to see the principle that would prohibit a State from
banning the use of chromatography in the reconstitution of unpatented chemical compounds, or the
use of robotics in the duplication of machinery in the public domain.

Moreover, as we noted in Kewanee, the competitive reality of reverse engineering may act as a spur
to the inventor, creating an incentive to develop inventions that meet the rigorous requirements
of patentability. 416 U. S., at 489-490. The Florida statute substantially reduces this competitive
incentive, thus eroding the general rule of free competition upon which the attractiveness of the
federal patent bargain depends. The protections of state trade secret law are most effective at the
developmental stage, before a product has been marketed and the threat of reverse engineering
becomes real. During this period, patentability will often be an uncertain prospect, and to a certain
extent, the protection offered by trade secret law may "dovetail" with the incentives created by the
federal patent monopoly. See Goldstein, Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp.: Notes on a Closing Circle,
1974 S. Ct. Rev. 81, 92. In contrast, under the Florida scheme, the would-be inventor is aware
from the outset of his efforts that rights against the public are available regardless of his ability
to satisfy the rigorous standards of patentability. Indeed, it appears that even the most mundane
and obvious changes in the design of a boat hull will trigger the protections of the statute. See Fla.
Stat.  559.94(2) (1987) (protecting "any manufactured vessel hull or component part"). Given the
substantial protection offered by the Florida scheme, we cannot dismiss as hypothetical the possibility
that it will become a significant competitor to the federal patent laws, offering investors similar
protection without the quid pro quo of substantial creative effort required by the federal statute. The
prospect of all 50 States establishing similar protections for preferred industries without the rigorous
requirements of patentability prescribed by Congress could pose a substantial threat to the patent
system's ability to accomplish its mission of promoting progress in the useful arts.

Finally, allowing the States to create patent-like rights in various products in public circulation would
lead to administrative problems of no small dimension. The federal patent scheme provides a basis
for the public to ascertain the status of the intellectual property embodied in any article in general
circulation. Through the application process, detailed information concerning the claims of the patent
holder is compiled in a central location. See 35 U. S. C. ㎣ 111-114. The availability of damages in an

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 463
infringement action is made contingent upon affixing a notice of patent to the protected article. 35
U. S. C.  287. The notice requirement is designed "for the information of the public," Wine Railway
Appliance Co. v. Enterprise Railway Equipment Co., 297 U. S. 387, 397 (1936), and provides a ready
means of discerning the status of the intellectual property embodied in an article of manufacture or
design. The public may rely upon the lack of notice in exploiting shapes and designs accessible to all.
See Devices for Medicine, Inc. v. Boehl, 822 F. 2d 1062, 1066 (CA Fed. 1987) ("Having sold the product
unmarked, [the patentee] could hardly maintain entitlement to damages for its use by a purchaser
uninformed that such use would violate [the] patent").

The Florida scheme blurs this clear federal demarcation between public and private property. One
of the fundamental purposes behind the Patent and Copyright Clauses of the Constitution was to
promote national uniformity in the realm of intellectual property. See The Federalist No. 43, p. 309 (B.
Wright ed. 1961). Since the Patent Act of 1800, Congress has lodged exclusive jurisdiction of actions
"arising under" the patent laws in the federal courts, thus allowing for the development of a uniform
body of law in resolving the constant tension between private right and public access. See 28 U. S. C.
 1338; see also Chisum, The Allocation of Jurisdiction Between State and Federal Courts in Patent
Litigation, 46 Wash. L. Rev. 633, 636 (1971). Recently, Congress conferred exclusive jurisdiction of
all patent appeals on the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, in order to "provide nationwide
uniformity in patent law." H. R. Rep. No. 97-312, p. 20 (1981). This purpose is frustrated by the Florida
scheme, which renders the status of the design and utilitarian "ideas" embodied in the boat hulls it
protects uncertain. Given the inherently ephemeral nature of property in ideas, and the great power
such property has to cause harm to the competitive policies which underlay the federal patent laws,
the demarcation of broad zones of public and private right is "the type of regulation that demands a
uniform national rule." Ray v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 435 U. S. 151, 179 (1978). Absent such a federal
rule, each State could afford patent-like protection to particularly favored home industries, effectively
insulating them from competition from outside the State.

Petitioner and its supporting amici place great weight on the contrary decision of the Court of Appeals
for the Federal Circuit in Interpart Corp. v. Italia. In upholding the application of the California
"antidirect molding" statute to the duplication of unpatented automobile mirrors, the Federal Circuit
stated: "The statute prevents unscrupulous competitors from obtaining a product and using it as the
`plug' for making a mold. The statute does not prohibit copying the design of the product in any other
way; the latter if in the public domain, is free for anyone to make, use or sell." 777 F. 2d, at 685. The
court went on to indicate that "the patent laws `say nothing about the right to copy or the right to use,
they speak only in terms of the right to exclude.'" Ibid., quoting Mine Safety Appliances Co. v. Electric
Storage Battery Co., 56 C. C. P. A. (Pat.) 863, 864, n. 2, 405 F. 2d 901, 902, n. 2 (1969).

We find this reasoning defective in several respects. The Federal Circuit apparently viewed the direct
molding statute at issue in Interpart as a mere regulation of the use of chattels. Yet, the very purpose
of antidirect molding statutes is to "reward" the "inventor" by offering substantial protection against
public exploitation of his or her idea embodied in the product. Such statutes would be an exercise
in futility if they did not have precisely the effect of substantially limiting the ability of the public
to exploit an otherwise unprotected idea. As amicus points out, the direct molding process itself has
been in use since the early 1950's. See Brief for Charles E. Lipsey as Amicus Curiae 3, n. 2. Indeed, U.
S. Patent No. 3,419,646, issued to Robert L. Smith in 1968, explictly discloses and claims a method
for the direct molding of boat hulls. The specifications of the Smith Patent indicate that "[i]t is a
major object of the present invention to provide a method for making large molded boat hull molds
at very low cost, once a prototype hull has been provided." App. to Brief for Charles E. Lipsey as

464 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
Amicus Curiae 15a. In fact, it appears that Bonito employed a similar process in the creation of its own
production mold. See supra, at 144. It is difficult to conceive of a more effective method of creating
substantial property rights in an intellectual creation than to eliminate the most efficient method
for its exploitation. Sears and Compco protect more than the right of the public to contemplate the
abstract beauty of an otherwise unprotected intellectual creation--they assure its efficient reduction
to practice and sale in the marketplace.

Appending the conclusionary label "unscrupulous" to such competitive behavior merely endorses a
policy judgment which the patent laws do not leave the States free to make. Where an item in general
circulation is unprotected by patent, "[r]eproduction of a functional attribute is legitimate competitive
activity." Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives Laboratories, Inc., 456 U. S. 844, 863 (1982) (WHITE, J.,
concurring in result). See also Bailey v. Logan Square Typographers, Inc., 441 F. 2d 47, 51 (CA7 1971)
(Stevens, J.) ("[T]hat which is published may be freely copied as a matter of federal right").

Finally, we are somewhat troubled by the Interpart court's reference to the Mine Safety case for the
proposition that the patent laws say "nothing about the right to copy or the right to use." As noted
above, the federal standards for patentability, at a minimum, express the congressional determination
that patent-like protection is unwarranted as to certain classes of intellectual property. The States are
simply not free in this regard to offer equivalent protections to ideas which Congress has determined
should belong to all. For almost 100 years it has been well established that in the case of an expired
patent, the federal patent laws do create a federal right to "copy and to use." Sears and Compco extended
that rule to potentially patentable ideas which are fully exposed to the public. The Interpart court's
assertion to the contrary is puzzling and flies in the face of the same court's decisions applying the
teaching of Sears and Compco in other contexts. See Power Controls Corp. v. Hybrinetics, Inc., 806 F.
2d 234, 240 (CA Fed. 1986) ("It is well established . . . that an action for unfair competition cannot
be based upon a functional design"); Gemveto Jewelry Co. v. Jeff Cooper Inc., 800 F. 2d 256, 259 (CA
Fed. 1986) (vacating injunction against copying of jewelry designs issued under state law of unfair
competition "in view of the Sears and Compco decisions which hold that copying of the article itself
that is unprotected by the federal patent and copyright laws cannot be protected by state law").

Our decisions since Sears and Compco have made it clear that the Patent and Copyright Clauses do
not, by their own force or by negative implication, deprive the States of the power to adopt rules for
the promotion of intellectual creation within their own jurisdictions. See Aronson, 440 U. S., at 262;
Goldstein v. California, 412 U. S. 546, 552-561 (1973); Kewanee, 416 U. S., at 478-479. Thus, where
"Congress determines that neither federal protection nor freedom from restraint is required by the
national interest," Goldstein, supra, at 559, the States remain free to promote originality and creativity
in their own domains.

Nor does the fact that a particular item lies within the subject matter of the federal patent laws
necessarily preclude the States from offering limited protection which does not impermissibly
interfere with the federal patent scheme. As Searsitself makes clear, States may place limited
regulations on the use of unpatented designs in order to prevent consumer confusion as to source.
In Kewanee, we found that state protection of trade secrets, as applied to both patentable and
unpatentable subject matter, did not conflict with the federal patent laws. In both situations, state
protection was not aimed exclusively at the promotion of invention itself, and the state restrictions
on the use of unpatented ideas were limited to those necessary to promote goals outside the
contemplation of the federal patent scheme. Both the law of unfair competition and state trade secret
law have coexisted harmoniously with federal patent protection for almost 200 years, and Congress

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 465
has given no indication that their operation is inconsistent with the operation of the federal patent
laws. See Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U. S. 132, 144 (1963); United States v. Bass,
404 U. S. 336, 349 (1971).

Indeed, there are affirmative indications from Congress that both the law of unfair competition and
trade secret protection are consistent with the balance struck by the patent laws. Section 43(a) of
the Lanham Act, 60 Stat. 441, 15 U. S. C.  1125(a), creates a federal remedy for making "a false
designation of origin, or any false description or representation, including words or other symbols
tending falsely to describe or represent the same . . . ." Congress has thus given federal recognition to
many of the concerns that underlie the state tort of unfair competition, and the application of Sears
and Compco to nonfunctional aspects of a product which have been shown to identify source must
take account of competing federal policies in this regard. Similarly, as JUSTICE MARSHALL noted in
his concurring opinion in Kewanee: "State trade secret laws and the federal patent laws have co-existed
for many, many, years. During this time, Congress has repeatedly demonstrated its full awareness of
the existence of the trade secret system, without any indication of disapproval. Indeed, Congress has
in a number of instances given explicit federal protection to trade secret information provided to
federal agencies." Kewanee, supra, at 494 (concurring in result) (citation omitted). The case for federal
pre-emption is particularly weak where Congress has indicated its awareness of the operation of state
law in a field of federal interest, and has nonetheless decided to "stand by both concepts and to tolerate
whatever tension there [is] between them." Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U. S. 238, 256 (1984). The
same cannot be said of the Florida statute at issue here, which offers protection beyond that available
under the law of unfair competition or trade secret, without any showing of consumer confusion, or
breach of trust or secrecy.

The Florida statute is aimed directly at the promotion of intellectual creation by substantially
restricting the public's ability to exploit ideas that the patent system mandates shall be free for all
to use. Like the interpretation of Illinois unfair competition law in Sears and Compco, the Florida
statute represents a break with the tradition of peaceful coexistence between state market regulation
and federal patent policy. The Florida law substantially restricts the public's ability to exploit an
unpatented design in general circulation, raising the specter of state-created monopolies in a host of
useful shapes and processes for which patent protection has been denied or is otherwise unobtainable.
It thus enters a field of regulation which the patent laws have reserved to Congress. The patent
statute's careful balance between public right and private monopoly to promote certain creative
activity is a "scheme of federal regulation . . . so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that
Congress left no room for the States to supplement it." Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U. S. 218,
230 (1947).

Congress has considered extending various forms of limited protection to industrial design either
through the copyright laws or by relaxing the restrictions on the availability of design patents. See
generally Brown, Design Protection: An Overview, 34 UCLA L. Rev. 1341 (1987). Congress explicitly
refused to take this step in the copyright laws, see 17 U. S. C.  101; H. R. Rep. No. 94-1476, p.
55 (1976), and despite sustained criticism for a number of years, it has declined to alter the patent
protections presently available for industrial design. See Report of the President's Commission on the
Patent System, S. Doc. No. 5, 90th Cong., 1st Sess., 20-21 (1967); Lindgren, The Sanctity of the Design
Patent: Illusion or Reality?, 10 Okla. City L. Rev. 195 (1985). It is for Congress to determine if the
present system of design and utility patents is ineffectual in promoting the useful arts in the context of
industrial design. By offering patent-like protection for ideas deemed unprotected under the present
federal scheme, the Florida statute conflicts with the "strong federal policy favoring free competition

466 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
in ideas which do not merit patent protection." Lear, Inc., 395 U. S., at 656. We therefore agree with
the majority of the Florida Supreme Court that the Florida statute is preempted by the Supremacy
Clause, and the judgment of that court is hereby affirmed.
It is so ordered.

                                                                                                             26. FEDERAL PREEMPTION 467
                                                TITLE 15

The following sections contain relevant portions of Title 15 of the U.S. Code. Portions have been
omitted for brevity.

468 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
15 U.S.C.  1051. APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; VERIFICATION

(a)Application for use of trademark

        (1) The owner of a trademark used in commerce may request registration of its trademark on
        the principal register hereby established by paying the prescribed fee and filing in the Patent and
        Trademark Office an application and a verified statement, in such form as may be prescribed
        by the Director, and such number of specimens or facsimiles of the mark as used as may be
        required by the Director.

        (2) The application shall include specification of the applicant's domicile and citizenship, the
        date of the applicant's first use of the mark, the date of the applicant's first use of the mark in
        commerce, the goods in connection with which the mark is used, and a drawing of the mark.

        (3) The statement shall be verified by the applicant and specify that--

                (A) the person making the verification believes that he or she, or the juristic person in
                whose behalf he or she makes the verification, to be the owner of the mark sought to be
                registered;

                (B) to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, the facts recited in the application
                are accurate;

                (C) the mark is in use in commerce; and

                (D) to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, no other person has the right to use
                such mark in commerce either in the identical form thereof or in such near resemblance
                thereto as to be likely, when used on or in connection with the goods of such other
                person, to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive, except that, in the case of
                every application claiming concurrent use, the applicant shall--

                (i) state exceptions to the claim of exclusive use; and

                (ii)shall [1] specify, to the extent of the verifier's knowledge--
                        (I) any concurrent use by others;
                        (II) the goods on or in connection with which and the areas in which each
                           concurrent use exists;
                        (III) the periods of each use; and
                        (IV) the goods and area for which the applicant desires registration.

        (4) The applicant shall comply with such rules or regulations as may be prescribed by the
        Director. The Director shall promulgate rules prescribing the requirements for the application
        and for obtaining a filing date herein.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 469
(b) Application for bona fide intention to use trademark

        (1) A person who has a bona fide intention, under circumstances showing the good faith of
        such person, to use a trademark in commerce may request registration of its trademark on the
        principal register hereby established by paying the prescribed fee and filing in the Patent and
        Trademark Office an application and a verified statement, in such form as may be prescribed by
        the Director.

        (2) The application shall include specification of the applicant's domicile and citizenship, the
        goods in connection with which the applicant has a bona fide intention to use the mark, and a
        drawing of the mark.

        (3) The statement shall be verified by the applicant and specify--

                (A) that the person making the verification believes that he or she, or the juristic person in
                whose behalf he or she makes the verification, to be entitled to use the mark in commerce;

                (B) the applicant's bona fide intention to use the mark in commerce;

                (C) that, to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, the facts recited in the
                application are accurate; and

                (D) that, to the best of the verifier's knowledge and belief, no other person has the right
                to use such mark in commerce either in the identical form thereof or in such near
                resemblance thereto as to be likely, when used on or in connection with the goods of such
                other person, to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive.

        Except for applications filed pursuant to section 1126 of this title, no mark shall be registered
        until the applicant has met the requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of this section.

        (4) The applicant shall comply with such rules or regulations as may be prescribed by the
        Director. The Director shall promulgate rules prescribing the requirements for the application
        and for obtaining a filing date herein.

(c) Amendment of application under subsection (b) to conform to requirements of subsection (a)

At any time during examination of an application filed under subsection (b), an applicant who has
made use of the mark in commerce may claim the benefits of such use for purposes of this chapter, by
amending his or her application to bring it into conformity with the requirements of subsection (a).

(d) Verified statement that trademark is used in commerce

(1) Within six months after the date on which the notice of allowance with respect to a mark is issued
under section 1063(b)(2) of this title to an applicant under subsection (b) of this section, the applicant
shall file in the Patent and Trademark Office, together with such number of specimens or facsimiles
of the mark as used in commerce as may be required by the Director and payment of the prescribed
fee, a verified statement that the mark is in use in commerce and specifying the date of the applicant's
first use of the mark in commerce and those goods or services specified in the notice of allowance on
or in connection with which the mark is used in commerce. Subject to examination and acceptance
of the statement of use, the mark shall be registered in the Patent and Trademark Office, a certificate

470 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
of registration shall be issued for those goods or services recited in the statement of use for which the
mark is entitled to registration, and notice of registration shall be published in the Official Gazette
of the Patent and Trademark Office. Such examination may include an examination of the factors set
forth in subsections (a) through (e) of section 1052 of this title. The notice of registration shall specify
the goods or services for which the mark is registered.
(e) Designation of resident for service of process and notices
If the applicant is not domiciled in the United States the applicant may designate, by a document filed
in the United States Patent and Trademark Office, the name and address of a person resident in the
United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the mark. Such
notices or process may be served upon the person so designated by leaving with that person or mailing
to that person a copy thereof at the address specified in the last designation so filed. If the person so
designated cannot be found at the address given in the last designation, or if the registrant does not
designate by a document filed in the United States Patent and Trademark Office the name and address
of a person resident in the United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings
affecting the mark, such notices or process may be served on the Director.
(f) Third-party submission of evidence
A third party may submit for consideration for inclusion in the record of an application evidence
relevant to a ground for refusal of registration. The third-party submission shall identify the ground
for refusal and include a concise description of each piece of evidence submitted in support of each
identified ground for refusal. Not later than 2 months after the date on which the submission is
filed, the Director shall determine whether the evidence should be included in the record of the
application. The Director shall establish by regulation appropriate procedures for the consideration
of evidence submitted by a third party under this subsection and may prescribe a fee to accompany the
submission. If the Director determines that the third-party evidence should be included in the record
of the application, only the evidence and the ground for refusal to which the evidence relates may
be so included. Any determination by the Director whether or not to include evidence in the record
of an application shall be final and non-reviewable, and a determination to include or to not include
evidence in the record shall not prejudice any party's right to raise any issue and rely on any evidence
in any other proceeding.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 471
15 U.S.C.  1052. TRADEMARKS REGISTRABLE ON PRINCIPAL REGISTER;
CONCURRENT REGISTRATION

No trademark by which the goods of the applicant may be distinguished from the goods of others
shall be refused registration on the principal register on account of its nature unless it--

(a) Consists of or comprises immoral, deceptive, or scandalous matter; or matter which may disparage
or falsely suggest a connection with persons, living or dead, institutions, beliefs, or national symbols,
or bring them into contempt, or disrepute; or a geographical indication which, when used on or in
connection with wines or spirits, identifies a place other than the origin of the goods and is first used
on or in connection with wines or spirits by the applicant on or after one year after the date on which
the WTO Agreement (as defined in section 3501(9) of title 19) enters into force with respect to the
United States.

(b) Consists of or comprises the flag or coat of arms or other insignia of the United States, or of any
State or municipality, or of any foreign nation, or any simulation thereof.

(c) Consists of or comprises a name, portrait, or signature identifying a particular living individual
except by his written consent, or the name, signature, or portrait of a deceased President of the United
States during the life of his widow, if any, except by the written consent of the widow.

(d) Consists of or comprises a mark which so resembles a mark registered in the Patent and
Trademark Office, or a mark or trade name previously used in the United States by another and
not abandoned, as to be likely, when used on or in connection with the goods of the applicant, to
cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive: Provided, That if the Director determines that
confusion, mistake, or deception is not likely to result from the continued use by more than one
person of the same or similar marks under conditions and limitations as to the mode or place of use of
the marks or the goods on or in connection with which such marks are used, concurrent registrations
may be issued to such persons when they have become entitled to use such marks as a result of
their concurrent lawful use in commerce prior to (1) the earliest of the filing dates of the applications
pending or of any registration issued under this chapter; (2) July 5, 1947, in the case of registrations
previously issued under the Act of March 3, 1881, or February 20, 1905, and continuing in full force
and effect on that date; or (3) July 5, 1947, in the case of applications filed under the Act of February
20, 1905, and registered after July 5, 1947. Use prior to the filing date of any pending application or
a registration shall not be required when the owner of such application or registration consents to
the grant of a concurrent registration to the applicant. Concurrent registrations may also be issued
by the Director when a court of competent jurisdiction has finally determined that more than one
person is entitled to use the same or similar marks in commerce. In issuing concurrent registrations,
the Director shall prescribe conditions and limitations as to the mode or place of use of the mark or
the goods on or in connection with which such mark is registered to the respective persons.

(e) Consists of a mark which (1) when used on or in connection with the goods of the applicant is
merely descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of them, (2) when used on or in connection with

472 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
the goods of the applicant is primarily geographically descriptive of them, except as indications of
regional origin may be registrable under section 1054 of this title, (3) when used on or in connection
with the goods of the applicant is primarily geographically deceptively misdescriptive of them, (4) is
primarily merely a surname, or (5) comprises any matter that, as a whole, is functional.
(f) Except as expressly excluded in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e)(3), and (e)(5) of this section, nothing
in this chapter shall prevent the registration of a mark used by the applicant which has become
distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce. The Director may accept as prima facie evidence that
the mark has become distinctive, as used on or in connection with the applicant's goods in commerce,
proof of substantially exclusive and continuous use thereof as a mark by the applicant in commerce
for the five years before the date on which the claim of distinctiveness is made. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the registration of a mark which, when used on or in connection with the goods
of the applicant, is primarily geographically deceptively misdescriptive of them, and which became
distinctive of the applicant's goods in commerce before December 8, 1993.
A mark which would be likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment under section
1125(c) of this title, may be refused registration only pursuant to a proceeding brought under section
1063 of this title. A registration for a mark which would be likely to cause dilution by blurring or
dilution by tarnishment under section 1125(c) of this title, may be canceled pursuant to a proceeding
brought under either section 1064 of this title or section 1092 of this title.
...

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 473
15 U.S.C. ㎣ 1053 - 1056

15 U.S.C.  1053. Service marks registrable
Subject to the provisions relating to the registration of trademarks, so far as they are applicable,
service marks shall be registrable, in the same manner and with the same effect as are trademarks,
and when registered they shall be entitled to the protection provided in this chapter in the case of
trademarks. Applications and procedure under this section shall conform as nearly as practicable to
those prescribed for the registration of trademarks.

15 U.S.C.  1054. Collective marks and certification marks registrable
Subject to the provisions relating to the registration of trademarks, so far as they are applicable,
collective and certification marks, including indications of regional origin, shall be registrable under
this chapter, in the same manner and with the same effect as are trademarks, by persons, and nations,
States, municipalities, and the like, exercising legitimate control over the use of the marks sought
to be registered, even though not possessing an industrial or commercial establishment, and when
registered they shall be entitled to the protection provided in this chapter in the case of trademarks,
except in the case of certification marks when used so as to represent falsely that the owner or a user
thereof makes or sells the goods or performs the services on or in connection with which such mark
is used. Applications and procedure under this section shall conform as nearly as practicable to those
prescribed for the registration of trademarks.

15 U.S.C.  1055. Use by related companies affecting validity and registration
Where a registered mark or a mark sought to be registered is or may be used legitimately by related
companies, such use shall inure to the benefit of the registrant or applicant for registration, and
such use shall not affect the validity of such mark or of its registration, provided such mark is not
used in such manner as to deceive the public. If first use of a mark by a person is controlled by the
registrant or applicant for registration of the mark with respect to the nature and quality of the goods
or services, such first use shall inure to the benefit of the registrant or applicant, as the case may be.

15 U.S.C.  1056. Disclaimer of unregistrable matter

(a) Compulsory and voluntary disclaimers

The Director may require the applicant to disclaim an unregistrable component of a mark otherwise
registrable. An applicant may voluntarily disclaim a component of a mark sought to be registered.

(b) Prejudice of rights
No disclaimer, including those made under subsection (e) of section 1057 of this title, shall prejudice
or affect the applicant's or registrant's rights then existing or thereafter arising in the disclaimed

474 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
matter, or his right of registration on another application if the disclaimed matter be or shall have
become distinctive of his goods or services.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 475
15 U.S.C.  1057. CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION

(a) Issuance and form

Certificates of registration of marks registered upon the principal register shall be issued in the name
of the United States of America, under the seal of the United States Patent and Trademark Office,
and shall be signed by the Director or have his signature placed thereon, and a record thereof shall
be kept in the United States Patent and Trademark Office. The registration shall reproduce the mark,
and state that the mark is registered on the principal register under this chapter, the date of the first
use of the mark, the date of the first use of the mark in commerce, the particular goods or services for
which it is registered, the number and date of the registration, the term thereof, the date on which the
application for registration was received in the United States Patent and Trademark Office, and any
conditions and limitations that may be imposed in the registration.

(b) Certificate as prima facie evidence

A certificate of registration of a mark upon the principal register provided by this chapter shall be
prima facie evidence of the validity of the registered mark and of the registration of the mark, of
the owner's ownership of the mark, and of the owner's exclusive right to use the registered mark in
commerce on or in connection with the goods or services specified in the certificate, subject to any
conditions or limitations stated in the certificate.

(c) Application to register mark considered constructive use

Contingent on the registration of a mark on the principal register provided by this chapter, the filing
of the application to register such mark shall constitute constructive use of the mark, conferring a
right of priority, nationwide in effect, on or in connection with the goods or services specified in the
registration against any other person except for a person whose mark has not been abandoned and
who, prior to such filing--

(1) has used the mark;

(2) has filed an application to register the mark which is pending or has resulted in registration of the
mark; or

(3) has filed a foreign application to register the mark on the basis of which he or she has acquired a
right of priority, and timely files an application under section 1126(d) of this title to register the mark
which is pending or has resulted in registration of the mark.

(d) Issuance to assignee

A certificate of registration of a mark may be issued to the assignee of the applicant, but the
assignment must first be recorded in the United States Patent and Trademark Office. In case of change
of ownership the Director shall, at the request of the owner and upon a proper showing and the

476 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
payment of the prescribed fee, issue to such assignee a new certificate of registration of the said mark
in the name of such assignee, and for the unexpired part of the original period.

(e) Surrender, cancellation, or amendment by owner

Upon application of the owner the Director may permit any registration to be surrendered for
cancellation, and upon cancellation appropriate entry shall be made in the records of the United
States Patent and Trademark Office. Upon application of the owner and payment of the prescribed
fee, the Director for good cause may permit any registration to be amended or to be disclaimed in
part: Provided, That the amendment or disclaimer does not alter materially the character of the mark.
Appropriate entry shall be made in the records of the United States Patent and Trademark Office and
upon the certificate of registration.

(f) Copies of United States Patent and Trademark Office records as evidence

Copies of any records, books, papers, or drawings belonging to the United States Patent and
Trademark Office relating to marks, and copies of registrations, when authenticated by the seal of
the United States Patent and Trademark Office and certified by the Director, or in his name by an
employee of the Office duly designated by the Director, shall be evidence in all cases wherein the
originals would be evidence; and any person making application therefor and paying the prescribed
fee shall have such copies.

(g) Correction of United States Patent and Trademark Office mistake

Whenever a material mistake in a registration, incurred through the fault of the United States Patent
and Trademark Office, is clearly disclosed by the records of the Office a certificate stating the fact and
nature of such mistake shall be issued without charge and recorded and a printed copy thereof shall be
attached to each printed copy of the registration and such corrected registration shall thereafter have
the same effect as if the same had been originally issued in such corrected form, or in the discretion
of the Director a new certificate of registration may be issued without charge. All certificates of
correction heretofore issued in accordance with the rules of the United States Patent and Trademark
Office and the registrations to which they are attached shall have the same force and effect as if such
certificates and their issue had been specifically authorized by statute.

(h) Correction of applicant's mistake
Whenever a mistake has been made in a registration and a showing has been made that such mistake
occurred in good faith through the fault of the applicant, the Director is authorized to issue a
certificate of correction or, in his discretion, a new certificate upon the payment of the prescribed
fee: Provided, That the correction does not involve such changes in the registration as to require
republication of the mark.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 477
15 U.S.C.  1058. DURATION, AFFIDAVITS AND FEES

(a) Time periods for required affidavits
Each registration shall remain in force for 10 years, except that the registration of any mark shall be
canceled by the Director unless the owner of the registration files in the United States Patent and
Trademark Office affidavits that meet the requirements of subsection (b), within the following time
periods:

        (1) Within the 1-year period immediately preceding the expiration of 6 years following the date
        of registration under this chapter or the date of the publication under section 1062(c) of this
        title.
        (2) Within the 1-year period immediately preceding the expiration of 10 years following the
        date of registration, and each successive 10-year period following the date of registration.
        (3) The owner may file the affidavit required under this section within the 6-month grace
        period immediately following the expiration of the periods established in paragraphs (1) and
        (2), together with the fee described in subsection (b) and the additional grace period surcharge
        prescribed by the Director.
(b) Requirements for affidavit
The affidavit referred to in subsection (a) shall--
        (1)

                (A) state that the mark is in use in commerce;
                (B) set forth the goods and services recited in the registration on or in connection with
                which the mark is in use in commerce;
                (C) be accompanied by such number of specimens or facsimiles showing current use of
                the mark in commerce as may be required by the Director; and
                (D) be accompanied by the fee prescribed by the Director; or
        (2)
                (A) set forth the goods and services recited in the registration on or in connection with
                which the mark is not in use in commerce;
                (B) include a showing that any nonuse is due to special circumstances which excuse such
                nonuse and is not due to any intention to abandon the mark; and
                (C) be accompanied by the fee prescribed by the Director.

478 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
(c) Deficient affidavit
If any submission filed within the period set forth in subsection (a) is deficient, including that the
affidavit was not filed in the name of the owner of the registration, the deficiency may be corrected
after the statutory time period, within the time prescribed after notification of the deficiency. Such
submission shall be accompanied by the additional deficiency surcharge prescribed by the Director.
(d) Notice of requirement
Special notice of the requirement for such affidavit shall be attached to each certificate of registration
and notice of publication under section 1062(c) of this title.
(e) Notification of acceptance or refusal
The Director shall notify any owner who files any affidavit required by this section of the Director's
acceptance or refusal thereof and, in the case of a refusal, the reasons therefor.
(f) Designation of resident for service of process and notices
If the owner is not domiciled in the United States, the owner may designate, by a document filed
in the United States Patent and Trademark Office, the name and address of a person resident in the
United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the mark. Such
notices or process may be served upon the person so designated by leaving with that person or mailing
to that person a copy thereof at the address specified in the last designation so filed. If the person so
designated cannot be found at the last designated address, or if the owner does not designate by a
document filed in the United States Patent and Trademark Office the name and address of a person
resident in the United States on whom may be served notices or process in proceedings affecting the
mark, such notices or process may be served on the Director.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 479
15 U.S.C.  1064. CANCELLATION OF REGISTRATION

A petition to cancel a registration of a mark, stating the grounds relied upon, may, upon payment
of the prescribed fee, be filed as follows by any person who believes that he is or will be damaged,
including as a result of a likelihood of dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment under section
1125(c) of this title, by the registration of a mark on the principal register established by this chapter,
or under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905:

        (1) Within five years from the date of the registration of the mark under this chapter.

        (2) Within five years from the date of publication under section 1062(c) of this title of a mark
        registered under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905.

        (3) At any time if the registered mark becomes the generic name for the goods or services,
        or a portion thereof, for which it is registered, or is functional, or has been abandoned, or its
        registration was obtained fraudulently or contrary to the provisions of section 1054 of this
        title or of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of section 1052 of this title for a registration under this
        chapter, or contrary to similar prohibitory provisions of such prior Acts for a registration under
        such Acts, or if the registered mark is being used by, or with the permission of, the registrant
        so as to misrepresent the source of the goods or services on or in connection with which the
        mark is used. If the registered mark becomes the generic name for less than all of the goods or
        services for which it is registered, a petition to cancel the registration for only those goods or
        services may be filed. A registered mark shall not be deemed to be the generic name of goods
        or services solely because such mark is also used as a name of or to identify a unique product
        or service. The primary significance of the registered mark to the relevant public rather than
        purchaser motivation shall be the test for determining whether the registered mark has become
        the generic name of goods or services on or in connection with which it has been used.

        (4) At any time if the mark is registered under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February
        20, 1905, and has not been published under the provisions of subsection (c) of section 1062 of
        this title.

        (5) At any time in the case of a certification mark on the ground that the registrant (A) does
        not control, or is not able legitimately to exercise control over, the use of such mark, or (B)
        engages in the production or marketing of any goods or services to which the certification mark
        is applied, or (C) permits the use of the certification mark for purposes other than to certify, or
        (D) discriminately refuses to certify or to continue to certify the goods or services of any person
        who maintains the standards or conditions which such mark certifies.

        (6) At any time after the 3-year period following the date of registration, if the registered mark
        has never been used in commerce on or in connection with some or all of the goods or services
        recited in the registration.

Provided, That the Federal Trade Commission may apply to cancel on the grounds specified in

480 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
paragraphs (3) and (5) of this section any mark registered on the principal register established by
this chapter, and the prescribed fee shall not be required. Nothing in paragraph (5) shall be deemed
to prohibit the registrant from using its certification mark in advertising or promoting recognition
of the certification program or of the goods or services meeting the certification standards of the
registrant. Such uses of the certification mark shall not be grounds for cancellation under paragraph
(5), so long as the registrant does not itself produce, manufacture, or sell any of the certified goods
or services to which its identical certification mark is applied. Nothing in paragraph (6) shall be
construed to limit the timing applicable to any other ground for cancellation. A registration
under section 1126(e) or 1141f of this title shall not be cancelled pursuant to paragraph (6) if the
registrant demonstrates that any nonuse is due to special circumstances that excuse such nonuse.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 481
15 U.S.C.  1065. INCONTESTABILITY OF RIGHT TO USE MARK UNDER
CERTAIN CONDITIONS

Except on a ground for which application to cancel may be filed at any time under paragraphs (3),
(5), and (6) of section 1064 of this title, and except to the extent, if any, to which the use of a mark
registered on the principal register infringes a valid right acquired under the law of any State or
Territory by use of a mark or trade name continuing from a date prior to the date of registration
under this chapter of such registered mark, the right of the owner to use such registered mark in
commerce for the goods or services on or in connection with which such registered mark has been in
continuous use for five consecutive years subsequent to the date of such registration and is still in use
in commerce, shall be incontestable: Provided, That--

        (1) there has been no final decision adverse to the owner's claim of ownership of such mark for
        such goods or services, or to the owner's right to register the same or to keep the same on the
        register; and
        (2) there is no proceeding involving said rights pending in the United States Patent and
        Trademark Office or in a court and not finally disposed of; and
        (3) an affidavit is filed with the Director within one year after the expiration of any such five-
        year period setting forth those goods or services stated in the registration on or in connection
        with which such mark has been in continuous use for such five consecutive years and is still
        in use in commerce, and other matters specified in paragraphs (1) and (2) hereof; and
        (4) no incontestable right shall be acquired in a mark which is the generic name for the goods
        or services or a portion thereof, for which it is registered.
Subject to the conditions above specified in this section, the incontestable right with reference to a
mark registered under this chapter shall apply to a mark registered under the Act of March 3, 1881,
or the Act of February 20, 1905, upon the filing of the required affidavit with the Director within one
year after the expiration of any period of five consecutive years after the date of publication of a mark
under the provisions of subsection (c) of section 1062 of this title.

The Director shall notify any registrant who files the above-prescribed affidavit of the filing thereof.

482 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
15 U.S.C.  1114. REMEDIES; INFRINGEMENT; INNOCENT INFRINGEMENT BY
PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS

(1) Any person who shall, without the consent of the registrant--
        (a) use in commerce any reproduction, counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation of a registered
        mark in connection with the sale, offering for sale, distribution, or advertising of any goods
        or services on or in connection with which such use is likely to cause confusion, or to cause
        mistake, or to deceive; or
        (b) reproduce, counterfeit, copy, or colorably imitate a registered mark and apply such
        reproduction, counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation to labels, signs, prints, packages,
        wrappers, receptacles or advertisements intended to be used in commerce upon or in
        connection with the sale, offering for sale, distribution, or advertising of goods or services on
        or in connection with which such use is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to
        deceive,

shall be liable in a civil action by the registrant for the remedies hereinafter provided. Under
subsection (b) hereof, the registrant shall not be entitled to recover profits or damages unless the acts
have been committed with knowledge that such imitation is intended to be used to cause confusion,
or to cause mistake, or to deceive.
As used in this paragraph, the term "any person" includes the United States, all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof, and all individuals, firms, corporations, or other persons acting for the
United States and with the authorization and consent of the United States, and any State, any
instrumentality of a State, and any officer or employee of a State or instrumentality of a State acting
in his or her official capacity. The United States, all agencies and instrumentalities thereof, and all
individuals, firms, corporations, other persons acting for the United States and with the authorization
and consent of the United States, and any State, and any such instrumentality, officer, or employee,
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as any
nongovernmental entity.
...

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 483
15 U.S.C.  1115. REGISTRATION ON PRINCIPAL REGISTER AS EVIDENCE OF
EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO USE MARK; DEFENSES

(a) Evidentiary value; defenses

Any registration issued under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905, or of
a mark registered on the principal register provided by this chapter and owned by a party to an action
shall be admissible in evidence and shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of the registered
mark and of the registration of the mark, of the registrant's ownership of the mark, and of the
registrant's exclusive right to use the registered mark in commerce on or in connection with the
goods or services specified in the registration subject to any conditions or limitations stated therein,
but shall not preclude another person from proving any legal or equitable defense or defect, including
those set forth in subsection (b), which might have been asserted if such mark had not been registered.

(b) Incontestability; defenses

To the extent that the right to use the registered mark has become incontestable under section 1065
of this title, the registration shall be conclusive evidence of the validity of the registered mark and
of the registration of the mark, of the registrant's ownership of the mark, and of the registrant's
exclusive right to use the registered mark in commerce. Such conclusive evidence shall relate to the
exclusive right to use the mark on or in connection with the goods or services specified in the
affidavit filed under the provisions of section 1065 of this title, or in the renewal application filed
under the provisions of section 1059 of this title if the goods or services specified in the renewal are
fewer in number, subject to any conditions or limitations in the registration or in such affidavit or
renewal application. Such conclusive evidence of the right to use the registered mark shall be subject
to proof of infringement as defined in section 1114 of this title, and shall be subject to the following
defenses or defects:

        (1) That the registration or the incontestable right to use the mark was obtained fraudulently;
        or

        (2) That the mark has been abandoned by the registrant; or

        (3) That the registered mark is being used by or with the permission of the registrant or
        a person in privity with the registrant, so as to misrepresent the source of the goods or services
        on or in connection with which the mark is used; or

        (4) That the use of the name, term, or device charged to be an infringement is a use, otherwise
        than as a mark, of the party's individual name in his own business, or of the individual name of
        anyone in privity with such party, or of a term or device which is descriptive of and used fairly
        and in good faith only to describe the goods or services of such party, or their geographic origin;
        or

        (5) That the mark whose use by a party is charged as an infringement was adopted without

484 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
knowledge of the registrant's prior use and has been continuously used by such party or those
in privity with him from a date prior to (A) the date of constructive use of the mark established
pursuant to section 1057(c) of this title, (B) the registration of the mark under this chapter if the
application for registration is filed before the effective date of the Trademark Law Revision Act
of 1988, or (C) publication of the registered mark under subsection (c) of section 1062 of this
title: Provided, however, That this defense or defect shall apply only for the area in which such
continuous prior use is proved; or
(6) That the mark whose use is charged as an infringement was registered and used prior to the
registration under this chapter or publication under subsection (c) of section 1062 of this title of
the registered mark of the registrant, and not abandoned: Provided, however, That this defense
or defect shall apply only for the area in which the mark was used prior to such registration or
such publication of the registrant's mark; or
(7) That the mark has been or is being used to violate the antitrust laws of the United States; or
(8) That the mark is functional; or
(9) That equitable principles, including laches, estoppel, and acquiescence, are applicable.

                                                                                                                               TITLE 15 485
15 U.S.C.  1117. RECOVERY FOR VIOLATION OF RIGHTS

(a) Profits; damages and costs; attorney fees

When a violation of any right of the registrant of a mark registered in the Patent
and Trademark Office, a violation under section 1125(a) or (d) of this title, or a willful violation
under section 1125(c) of this title, shall have been established in any civil action arising under this
chapter, the plaintiff shall be entitled, subject to the provisions of sections 1111 and 1114 of this title,
and subject to the principles of equity, to recover (1) defendant's profits, (2) any damages sustained
by the plaintiff, and (3) the costs of the action. The court shall assess such profits and damages or
cause the same to be assessed under its direction. In assessing profits the plaintiff shall be required
to prove defendant's sales only; defendant must prove all elements of cost or deduction claimed. In
assessing damages the court may enter judgment, according to the circumstances of the case, for
any sum above the amount found as actual damages, not exceeding three times such amount. If the
court shall find that the amount of the recovery based on profits is either inadequate or excessive the
court may in its discretion enter judgment for such sum as the court shall find to be just, according
to the circumstances of the case. Such sum in either of the above circumstances shall constitute
compensation and not a penalty. The court in exceptional cases may award reasonable attorney fees
to the prevailing party.

(b) Treble damages for use of counterfeit mark

In assessing damages under subsection (a) for any violation of section 1114(1)(a) of this title or section
220506 of title 36, in a case involving use of a counterfeit mark or designation (as defined in section
1116(d) of this title), the court shall, unless the court finds extenuating circumstances, enter judgment
for three times such profits or damages, whichever amount is greater, together with a reasonable
attorney's fee, if the violation consists of--

        (1) intentionally using a mark or designation, knowing such mark or designation is
        a counterfeit mark (as defined in section 1116(d) of this title), in connection with the sale,
        offering for sale, or distribution of goods or services; or

        (2) providing goods or services necessary to the commission of a violation specified in
        paragraph (1), with the intent that the recipient of the goods or services would put the goods or
        services to use in committing the violation.

In such a case, the court may award prejudgment interest on such amount at an annual interest rate
established under section 6621(a)(2) of title 26, beginning on the date of the service of the claimant's
pleadings setting forth the claim for such entry of judgment and ending on the date such entry is
made, or for such shorter time as the court considers appropriate.

(c) Statutory damages for use of counterfeit marks

In a case involving the use of a counterfeit mark (as defined in section 1116(d) of this title) in

486 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
connection with the sale, offering for sale, or distribution of goods or services, the plaintiff may elect,
at any time before final judgment is rendered by the trial court, to recover, instead of actual damages
and profits under subsection (a), an award of statutory damages for any such use in connection with
the sale, offering for sale, or distribution of goods or services in the amount of--
(1) not less than $1,000 or more than $200,000 per counterfeit mark per type of goods or services
sold, offered for sale, or distributed, as the court considers just; or
(2) if the court finds that the use of the counterfeit mark was willful, not more than $2,000,000
per counterfeit mark per type of goods or services sold, offered for sale, or distributed, as the court
considers just.
(d) Statutory damages for violation of section 1125(d)(1)
In a case involving a violation of section 1125(d)(1) of this title, the plaintiff may elect, at any time
before final judgment is rendered by the trial court, to recover, instead of actual damages and profits,
an award of statutory damages in the amount of not less than $1,000 and not more than $100,000
per domain name, as the court considers just.
(e) Rebuttable presumption of willful violation
In the case of a violation referred to in this section, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the
violation is willful for purposes of determining relief if the violator, or a person acting in concert
with the violator, knowingly provided or knowingly caused to be provided materially false contact
information to a domain name registrar, domain name registry, or other domain name registration
authority in registering, maintaining, or renewing a domain name used in connection with the
violation. Nothing in this subsection limits what may be considered a willful violation under this
section.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 487
15 U.S.C.  1125. FALSE DESIGNATIONS OF ORIGIN, FALSE DESCRIPTIONS,
AND DILUTION FORBIDDEN

(a) Civil action

        (1) Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or services, or any container for
        goods, uses in commerce any word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof,
        or any false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact, or false or misleading
        representation of fact, which--

                (A) is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive as to the affiliation,
                connection, or association of such person with another person, or as to the origin,
                sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods, services, or commercial activities by
                another person, or

                (B) in commercial advertising or promotion, misrepresents the nature, characteristics,
                qualities, or geographic origin of his or her or another person's goods, services, or
                commercial activities,

        shall be liable in a civil action by any person who believes that he or she is or is likely to be
        damaged by such act.

        (2) As used in this subsection, the term "any person" includes any State, instrumentality of a
        State or employee of a State or instrumentality of a State acting in his or her official capacity.
        Any State, and any such instrumentality, officer, or employee, shall be subject to the provisions
        of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as any nongovernmental entity.

        (3) In a civil action for trade dress infringement under this chapter for trade dress not registered
        on the principal register, the person who asserts trade dress protection has the burden of
        proving that the matter sought to be protected is not functional.

(b) Importation

Any goods marked or labeled in contravention of the provisions of this section shall not be imported
into the United States or admitted to entry at any customhouse of the United States. The owner,
importer, or consignee of goods refused entry at any customhouse under this section may have any
recourse by protest or appeal that is given under the customs revenue laws or may have the remedy
given by this chapter in cases involving goods refused entry or seized.

(c) Dilution by blurring; dilution by tarnishment

        (1) Injunctive relief

        Subject to the principles of equity, the owner of a famous mark that is distinctive, inherently or
        through acquired distinctiveness, shall be entitled to an injunction against another person who,

488 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
at any time after the owner's mark has become famous, commences use of a mark or trade
name in commerce that is likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment of
the famous mark, regardless of the presence or absence of actual or likely confusion, of
competition, or of actual economic injury.

(2) Definitions

        (A) For purposes of paragraph (1), a mark is famous if it is widely recognized by the
        general consuming public of the United States as a designation of source of the goods
        or services of the mark's owner. In determining whether a mark possesses the requisite
        degree of recognition, the court may consider all relevant factors, including the following:

                (i) The duration, extent, and geographic reach of advertising and publicity of
                the mark, whether advertised or publicized by the owner or third parties.

                (ii) The amount, volume, and geographic extent of sales of goods or services offered
                under the mark.

                (iii) The extent of actual recognition of the mark.

                (iv) Whether the mark was registered under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act
                of February 20, 1905, or on the principal register.

        (B) For purposes of paragraph (1), "dilution by blurring" is association arising from
        the similarity between a mark or trade name and a famous mark that impairs the
        distinctiveness of the famous mark. In determining whether a mark or trade name is
        likely to cause dilution by blurring, the court may consider all relevant factors, including
        the following:

                (i) The degree of similarity between the mark or trade name and the famous mark.

                (ii) The degree of inherent or acquired distinctiveness of the famous mark.

                (iii) The extent to which the owner of the famous mark is engaging in substantially
                exclusive use of the mark.

                (iv) The degree of recognition of the famous mark.

                (v) Whether the user of the mark or trade name intended to create an association
                with the famous mark.

                (vi) Any actual association between the mark or trade name and the famous mark.

        (C) For purposes of paragraph (1), "dilution by tarnishment" is association arising from
        the similarity between a mark or trade name and a famous mark that harms the
        reputation of the famous mark.

(3) Exclusions The following shall not be actionable as dilution by blurring or dilution by
tarnishment under this subsection:

        (A) Any fair use, including a nominative or descriptive fair use, or facilitation of such

                                                                                                                               TITLE 15 489
                fair use, of a famous mark by another person other than as a designation of source for
                the person's own goods or services, including use in connection with--

                        (i) advertising or promotion that permits consumers to compare goods or services;
                        or

                        (ii) identifying and parodying, criticizing, or commenting upon the
                        famous mark owner or the goods or services of the famous mark owner.

                (B) All forms of news reporting and news commentary.

                (C) Any noncommercial use of a mark.

        (4) Burden of proofIn a civil action for trade dress dilution under this chapter for trade dress
        not registered on the principal register, the person who asserts trade dress protection has the
        burden of proving that--

                (A) the claimed trade dress, taken as a whole, is not functional and is famous; and

                (B) if the claimed trade dress includes any mark or marks registered on the principal
                register, the unregistered matter, taken as a whole, is famous separate and apart from any
                fame of such registered marks.

        (5) Additional remedies In an action brought under this subsection, the owner of the
        famous mark shall be entitled to injunctive relief as set forth in section 1116 of this title. The
        owner of the famous mark shall also be entitled to the remedies set forth in sections 1117(a) and
        1118 of this title, subject to the discretion of the court and the principles of equity if--

                (A) the mark or trade name that is likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by
                tarnishment was first used in commerce by the person against whom the injunction is
                sought after October 6, 2006; and

                (B) in a claim arising under this subsection--

                        (i) by reason of dilution by blurring, the person against whom the injunction is
                        sought willfully intended to trade on the recognition of the famous mark; or

                        (ii) by reason of dilution by tarnishment, the person against whom the injunction is
                        sought willfully intended to harm the reputation of the famous mark.

        (6) Ownership of valid registration a complete bar to action The ownership by a person of
        a valid registration under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905, or on
        the principal register under this chapter shall be a complete bar to an action against
        that person, with respect to that mark, that--

                (A) is brought by another person under the common law or a statute of a State; and

                (B)

                        (i) seeks to prevent dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment; or

490 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                (ii) asserts any claim of actual or likely damage or harm to the distinctiveness or
                reputation of a mark, label, or form of advertisement.
(7) Savings clause Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impair, modify, or supersede
the applicability of the patent laws of the United States.

                                                                                                                               TITLE 15 491
15 U.S.C.  1127. CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS; INTENT OF CHAPTER

In the construction of this chapter, unless the contrary is plainly apparent from the context--

The United States includes and embraces all territory which is under its jurisdiction and control.

The word "commerce" means all commerce which may lawfully be regulated by Congress.

The term "principal register" refers to the register provided for by sections 1051 to 1072 of this title,
and the term "supplemental register" refers to the register provided for by sections 1091 to 1096 of
this title.

The term "person" and any other word or term used to designate the applicant or other entitled to a
benefit or privilege or rendered liable under the provisions of this chapter includes a juristic person as
well as a natural person. The term "juristic person" includes a firm, corporation, union, association, or
other organization capable of suing and being sued in a court of law.

The term "person" also includes the United States, any agency or instrumentality thereof, or any
individual, firm, or corporation acting for the United States and with the authorization and consent
of the United States. The United States, any agency or instrumentality thereof, and any individual,
firm, or corporation acting for the United States and with the authorization and consent of the United
States, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as
any nongovernmental entity.

The term "person" also includes any State, any instrumentality of a State, and any officer or employee
of a State or instrumentality of a State acting in his or her official capacity. Any State, and any such
instrumentality, officer, or employee, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same
manner and to the same extent as any nongovernmental entity.

The terms "applicant" and "registrant" embrace the legal representatives, predecessors, successors and
assigns of such applicant or registrant.

The term "Director" means the Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property
and Director of the United States Patent and Trademark Office.

The term "related company" means any person whose use of a mark is controlled by the owner of
the mark with respect to the nature and quality of the goods or services on or in connection with
which the mark is used.

The terms "trade name" and "commercial name" mean any name used by a person to identify his or
her business or vocation.

The term "trademark" includes any word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof--

        (1) used by a person, or

492 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        (2) which a person has a bona fide intention to use in commerce and applies to register on the
        principal register established by this chapter,

to identify and distinguish his or her goods, including a unique product, from those manufactured or
sold by others and to indicate the source of the goods, even if that source is unknown.

The term "service mark" means any word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof--

        (1) used by a person, or

        (2) which a person has a bona fide intention to use in commerce and applies to register on
        the principal register established by this chapter, to identify and distinguish the services of
        one person, including a unique service, from the services of others and to indicate the source
        of the services, even if that source is unknown. Titles, character names, and other distinctive
        features of radio or television programs may be registered as service marks notwithstanding
        that they, or the programs, may advertise the goods of the sponsor.

The term "certification mark" means any word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination
thereof--

        (1) used by a person other than its owner, or

        (2) which its owner has a bona fide intention to permit a person other than the owner
        to use in commerce and files an application to register on the principal register established
        by this chapter, to certify regional or other origin, material, mode of manufacture, quality,
        accuracy, or other characteristics of such person's goods or services or that the work or labor
        on the goods or services was performed by members of a union or other organization.

The term "collective mark" means a trademark or service mark--

        (1) used by the members of a cooperative, an association, or other collective group or
        organization, or

        (2) which such cooperative, association, or other collective group or organization has a bona
        fide intention to use in commerce and applies to register on the principal register established
        by this chapter, and includes marks indicating membership in a union, an association, or other
        organization.

The term "mark" includes any trademark, service mark, collective mark, or certification mark.

The term "use in commerce" means the bona fide use of a mark in the ordinary course of trade, and
not made merely to reserve a right in a mark. For purposes of this chapter, a mark shall be deemed to
be in use in commerce--

        (1) on goods when--

                (A) it is placed in any manner on the goods or their containers or the displays associated
                therewith or on the tags or labels affixed thereto, or if the nature of the goods makes such
                placement impracticable, then on documents associated with the goods or their sale, and

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 15 493
                (B) the goods are sold or transported in commerce, and

        (2) on services when it is used or displayed in the sale or advertising of services and the services
        are rendered in commerce, or the services are rendered in more than one State or in the United
        States and a foreign country and the person rendering the services is engaged in commerce in
        connection with the services.

A mark shall be deemed to be "abandoned" if either of the following occurs:

        (1) When its use has been discontinued with intent not to resume such use. Intent not to resume
        may be inferred from circumstances. Nonuse for 3 consecutive years shall be prima facie
        evidence of abandonment. "Use" of a mark means the bona fide use of such mark made in the
        ordinary course of trade, and not made merely to reserve a right in a mark.

        (2) When any course of conduct of the owner, including acts of omission as well as commission,
        causes the mark to become the generic name for the goods or services on or in connection with
        which it is used or otherwise to lose its significance as a mark. Purchaser motivation shall not
        be a test for determining abandonment under this paragraph.

The term "colorable imitation" includes any mark which so resembles a registered mark as to be likely
to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive.

The term "registered mark" means a mark registered in the United States Patent and Trademark
Office under this chapter or under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905,
or the Act of March 19, 1920. The phrase "marks registered in the Patent and Trademark
Office" means registered marks.

The term "Act of March 3, 1881", "Act of February 20, 1905", or "Act of March 19, 1920", means the
respective Act as amended.

A "counterfeit" is a spurious mark which is identical with, or substantially indistinguishable from,
a registered mark.

The term "domain name" means any alphanumeric designation which is registered with or assigned
by any domain name registrar, domain name registry, or other domain name registration authority as
part of an electronic address on the Internet.

The term "Internet" has the meaning given that term in section 230(f)(1) of title 47.

Words used in the singular include the plural and vice versa.

The intent of this chapter is to regulate commerce within the control of Congress by making
actionable the deceptive and misleading use of marks in such commerce; to protect registered
marks used in such commerce from interference by State, or territorial legislation; to
protect persons engaged in such commerce against unfair competition; to prevent fraud and
deception in such commerce by the use of reproductions, copies, counterfeits, or colorable
imitations of registered marks; and to provide rights and remedies stipulated by treaties and
conventions respecting trademarks, trade names, and unfair competition entered into between the
United States and foreign nations.

494 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                                                TITLE 17

The following sections contain relevant portions of Title 15 of the U.S. Code. Portions have been
omitted for brevity.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 495
17 U.S.C.  101. DEFINITIONS

Except as otherwise provided in this title, as used in this title, the following terms and their variant
forms mean the following:

An "anonymous work" is a work on the copies or phonorecords of which no natural person is
identified as author.

An "architectural work" is the design of a building as embodied in any tangible medium of expression,
including a building, architectural plans, or drawings. The work includes the overall form as well
as the arrangement and composition of spaces and elements in the design, but does not include
individual standard features.

"Audiovisual works" are works that consist of a series of related images which are intrinsically
intended to be shown by the use of machines, or devices such as projectors, viewers, or electronic
equipment, together with accompanying sounds, if any, regardless of the nature of the material
objects, such as films or tapes, in which the works are embodied.

The "Berne Convention" is the Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, signed
at Berne, Switzerland, on September 9, 1886, and all acts, protocols, and revisions thereto.

The "best edition" of a work is the edition, published in the United States at any time before the date
of deposit, that the Library of Congress determines to be most suitable for its purposes.

A person's "children" are that person's immediate offspring, whether legitimate or not, and any
children legally adopted by that person.

A "collective work" is a work, such as a periodical issue, anthology, or encyclopedia, in which a
number of contributions, constituting separate and independent works in themselves, are assembled
into a collective whole.

A "compilation" is a work formed by the collection and assembling of preexisting materials or of data
that are selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a way that the resulting work as a whole constitutes
an original work of authorship. The term "compilation" includes collective works.

A "computer program" is a set of statements or instructions to be used directly or indirectly in a
computer in order to bring about a certain result.

"Copies" are material objects, other than phonorecords, in which a work is fixed by any method now
known or later developed, and from which the work can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise
communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. The term "copies" includes the
material object, other than a phonorecord, in which the work is first fixed.

"Copyright owner", with respect to any one of the exclusive rights comprised in a copyright, refers to
the owner of that particular right.

496 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
A "Copyright Royalty Judge" is a Copyright Royalty Judge appointed under section 802 of this title,
and includes any individual serving as an interim Copyright Royalty Judge under such section.

A work is "created" when it is fixed in a copy or phonorecord for the first time; where a work is
prepared over a period of time, the portion of it that has been fixed at any particular time constitutes
the work as of that time, and where the work has been prepared in different versions, each version
constitutes a separate work.

A "derivative work" is a work based upon one or more preexisting works, such as a translation,
musical arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture version, sound recording, art
reproduction, abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which a work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted. A work consisting of editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other
modifications which, as a whole, represent an original work of authorship, is a "derivative work".

A "device", "machine", or "process" is one now known or later developed.

A "digital transmission" is a transmission in whole or in part in a digital or other non-analog format.

To "display" a work means to show a copy of it, either directly or by means of a film, slide, television
image, or any other device or process or, in the case of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, to
show individual images nonsequentially.

An "establishment" is a store, shop, or any similar place of business open to the general public for
the primary purpose of selling goods or services in which the majority of the gross square feet of
space that is nonresidential is used for that purpose, and in which nondramatic musical works are
performed publicly.

The term "financial gain" includes receipt, or expectation of receipt, of anything of value, including
the receipt of other copyrighted works.

A work is "fixed" in a tangible medium of expression when its embodiment in a copy or phonorecord,
by or under the authority of the author, is sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived,
reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of more than transitory duration. A work
consisting of sounds, images, or both, that are being transmitted, is "fixed" for purposes of this title if
a fixation of the work is being made simultaneously with its transmission.

A "food service or drinking establishment" is a restaurant, inn, bar, tavern, or any other similar place
of business in which the public or patrons assemble for the primary purpose of being served food or
drink, in which the majority of the gross square feet of space that is nonresidential is used for that
purpose, and in which nondramatic musical works are performed publicly.

The "Geneva Phonograms Convention" is the Convention for the Protection of Producers of
Phonograms Against Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms, concluded at Geneva,
Switzerland, on October 29, 1971.

The "gross square feet of space" of an establishment means the entire interior space of that
establishment, and any adjoining outdoor space used to serve patrons, whether on a seasonal basis or
otherwise.

The terms "including" and "such as" are illustrative and not limitative.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 497
An "international agreement" is-

        (1) the Universal Copyright Convention;

        (2) the Geneva Phonograms Convention;

        (3) the Berne Convention;

        (4) the WTO Agreement;

        (5) the WIPO Copyright Treaty;

        (6) the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty; and

        (7) any other copyright treaty to which the United States is a party.

A "joint work" is a work prepared by two or more authors with the intention that their contributions
be merged into inseparable or interdependent parts of a unitary whole.

"Literary works" are works, other than audiovisual works, expressed in words, numbers, or other
verbal or numerical symbols or indicia, regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as books,
periodicals, manuscripts, phonorecords, film, tapes, disks, or cards, in which they are embodied.

The term "motion picture exhibition facility" means a movie theater, screening room, or other venue
that is being used primarily for the exhibition of a copyrighted motion picture, if such exhibition is
open to the public or is made to an assembled group of viewers outside of a normal circle of a family
and its social acquaintances.

"Motion pictures" are audiovisual works consisting of a series of related images which, when shown
in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.

To "perform" a work means to recite, render, play, dance, or act it, either directly or by means of any
device or process or, in the case of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, to show its images in
any sequence or to make the sounds accompanying it audible.

A "performing rights society" is an association, corporation, or other entity that licenses the public
performance of nondramatic musical works on behalf of copyright owners of such works, such as the
American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), Broadcast Music, Inc. (BMI), and
SESAC, Inc.

"Phonorecords" are material objects in which sounds, other than those accompanying a motion
picture or other audiovisual work, are fixed by any method now known or later developed, and from
which the sounds can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with
the aid of a machine or device. The term "phonorecords" includes the material object in which the
sounds are first fixed.

"Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works" include two-dimensional and three-dimensional works
of fine, graphic, and applied art, photographs, prints and art reproductions, maps, globes, charts,
diagrams, models, and technical drawings, including architectural plans. Such works shall include
works of artistic craftsmanship insofar as their form but not their mechanical or utilitarian aspects

498 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
are concerned; the design of a useful article, as defined in this section, shall be considered a pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural work only if, and only to the extent that, such design incorporates pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural features that can be identified separately from, and are capable of existing
independently of, the utilitarian aspects of the article.

For purposes of section 513, a "proprietor" is an individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity,
as the case may be, that owns an establishment or a food service or drinking establishment, except
that no owner or operator of a radio or television station licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission, cable system or satellite carrier, cable or satellite carrier service or programmer,
provider of online services or network access or the operator of facilities therefor,
telecommunications company, or any other such audio or audiovisual service or programmer now
known or as may be developed in the future, commercial subscription music service, or owner
or operator of any other transmission service, shall under any circumstances be deemed to be a
proprietor.

A "pseudonymous work" is a work on the copies or phonorecords of which the author is identified
under a fictitious name.

"Publication" is the distribution of copies or phonorecords of a work to the public by sale or other
transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or lending. The offering to distribute copies or
phonorecords to a group of persons for purposes of further distribution, public performance, or
public display, constitutes publication. A public performance or display of a work does not of itself
constitute publication.

To perform or display a work "publicly" means-

        (1) to perform or display it at a place open to the public or at any place where a substantial
        number of persons outside of a normal circle of a family and its social acquaintances is gathered;
        or

        (2) to transmit or otherwise communicate a performance or display of the work to a place
        specified by clause (1) or to the public, by means of any device or process, whether the members
        of the public capable of receiving the performance or display receive it in the same place or in
        separate places and at the same time or at different times.

"Registration", for purposes of sections 205(c)(2), 405, 406, 410(d), 411, 412, and 506(e), means a
registration of a claim in the original or the renewed and extended term of copyright.

"Sound recordings" are works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other
sounds, but not including the sounds accompanying a motion picture or other audiovisual work,
regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as disks, tapes, or other phonorecords, in which
they are embodied.

"State" includes the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territories
to which this title is made applicable by an Act of Congress.

A "transfer of copyright ownership" is an assignment, mortgage, exclusive license, or any other
conveyance, alienation, or hypothecation of a copyright or of any of the exclusive rights comprised in

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 499
a copyright, whether or not it is limited in time or place of effect, but not including a nonexclusive
license.

A "transmission program" is a body of material that, as an aggregate, has been produced for the sole
purpose of transmission to the public in sequence and as a unit.

To "transmit" a performance or display is to communicate it by any device or process whereby images
or sounds are received beyond the place from which they are sent.

A "treaty party" is a country or intergovernmental organization other than the United States that is a
party to an international agreement.

The "United States", when used in a geographical sense, comprises the several States, the District of
Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the organized territories under the jurisdiction
of the United States Government.

For purposes of section 411, a work is a "United States work" only if-

        (1) in the case of a published work, the work is first published-

                (A) in the United States;

                (B) simultaneously in the United States and another treaty party or parties, whose law
                grants a term of copyright protection that is the same as or longer than the term provided
                in the United States;

                (C) simultaneously in the United States and a foreign nation that is not a treaty party; or

                (D) in a foreign nation that is not a treaty party, and all of the authors of the work are
                nationals, domiciliaries, or habitual residents of, or in the case of an audiovisual work
                legal entities with headquarters in, the United States;

        (2) in the case of an unpublished work, all the authors of the work are nationals, domiciliaries,
        or habitual residents of the United States, or, in the case of an unpublished audiovisual work, all
        the authors are legal entities with headquarters in the United States; or

        (3) in the case of a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work incorporated in a building or structure,
        the building or structure is located in the United States.

A "useful article" is an article having an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not merely to portray the
appearance of the article or to convey information. An article that is normally a part of a useful article
is considered a "useful article".

The author's "widow" or "widower" is the author's surviving spouse under the law of the author's
domicile at the time of his or her death, whether or not the spouse has later remarried.

The "WIPO Copyright Treaty" is the WIPO Copyright Treaty concluded at Geneva, Switzerland, on
December 20, 1996.

The "WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty" is the WIPO Performances and Phonograms
Treaty concluded at Geneva, Switzerland, on December 20, 1996.

500 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
A "work of visual art" is-

        (1) a painting, drawing, print, or sculpture, existing in a single copy, in a limited edition of
        200 copies or fewer that are signed and consecutively numbered by the author, or, in the
        case of a sculpture, in multiple cast, carved, or fabricated sculptures of 200 or fewer that are
        consecutively numbered by the author and bear the signature or other identifying mark of the
        author; or

        (2) a still photographic image produced for exhibition purposes only, existing in a single copy
        that is signed by the author, or in a limited edition of 200 copies or fewer that are signed and
        consecutively numbered by the author.

A work of visual art does not include-

        (A)

                (i) any poster, map, globe, chart, technical drawing, diagram, model, applied art, motion
                picture or other audiovisual work, book, magazine, newspaper, periodical, data base,
                electronic information service, electronic publication, or similar publication;

                (ii) any merchandising item or advertising, promotional, descriptive, covering, or
                packaging material or container;

                (iii) any portion or part of any item described in clause (i) or (ii);

        (B) any work made for hire; or

        (C) any work not subject to copyright protection under this title.

A "work of the United States Government" is a work prepared by an officer or employee of the United
States Government as part of that person's official duties.

A "work made for hire" is-

        (1) a work prepared by an employee within the scope of his or her employment; or

        (2) a work specially ordered or commissioned for use as a contribution to a collective work,
        as a part of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, as a translation, as a supplementary
        work, as a compilation, as an instructional text, as a test, as answer material for a test, or as an
        atlas, if the parties expressly agree in a written instrument signed by them that the work shall be
        considered a work made for hire. For the purpose of the foregoing sentence, a "supplementary
        work" is a work prepared for publication as a secondary adjunct to a work by another author
        for the purpose of introducing, concluding, illustrating, explaining, revising, commenting upon,
        or assisting in the use of the other work, such as forewords, afterwords, pictorial illustrations,
        maps, charts, tables, editorial notes, musical arrangements, answer material for tests,
        bibliographies, appendixes, and indexes, and an "instructional text" is a literary, pictorial, or
        graphic work prepared for publication and with the purpose of use in systematic instructional
        activities.

In determining whether any work is eligible to be considered a work made for hire under paragraph

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 501
(2), neither the amendment contained in section 1011(d) of the Intellectual Property and
Communications Omnibus Reform Act of 1999, as enacted by section 1000(a)(9) of Public Law
106-113, nor the deletion of the words added by that amendment-

        (A) shall be considered or otherwise given any legal significance, or
        (B) shall be interpreted to indicate congressional approval or disapproval of, or acquiescence in,
        any judicial determination,

                by the courts or the Copyright Office. Paragraph (2) shall be interpreted as if both
                section 2(a)(1) of the Work Made For Hire and Copyright Corrections Act of 2000 and
                section 1011(d) of the Intellectual Property and Communications Omnibus Reform Act
                of 1999, as enacted by section 1000(a)(9) of Public Law 106-113, were never enacted, and
                without regard to any inaction or awareness by the Congress at any time of any judicial
                determinations.
        The terms "WTO Agreement" and "WTO member country" have the meanings given those
        terms in paragraphs (9) and (10), respectively, of section 2 of the Uruguay Round Agreements
        Act.

502 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S.C. 102. SUBJECT MATTER OF COPYRIGHT: IN GENERAL

(a) Copyright protection subsists, in accordance with this title, in original works of authorship fixed in
any tangible medium of expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be perceived,
reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. Works
of authorship include the following categories:

   (1) literary works;
(2) musical works, including any accompanying words;

   (3) dramatic works, including any accompanying music;
   (4) pantomimes and choreographic works;
   (5) pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works;
   (6) motion pictures and other audiovisual works;
   (7) sound recordings; and
   (8) architectural works.
(b) In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea,
procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the
form in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 503
17 U.S.C. ㎣ 103, 104, 105. SUBJECT MATTER OF COPYRIGHT: COMPILATIONS
AND DERIVATIVE WORKS

17 U.S.C.  103. Subject matter of copyright: Compilations and derivative works

(a) The subject matter of copyright as specified by section 102 includes compilations and derivative
works, but protection for a work employing preexisting material in which copyright subsists does not
extend to any part of the work in which such material has been used unlawfully.
(b) The copyright in a compilation or derivative work extends only to the material contributed by the
author of such work, as distinguished from the preexisting material employed in the work, and does
not imply any exclusive right in the preexisting material. The copyright in such work is independent
of, and does not affect or enlarge the scope, duration, ownership, or subsistence of, any copyright
protection in the preexisting material.

17 U.S.C. 104. Subject matter of copyright: National origin

(a) Unpublished Works.--

The works specified by sections 102 and 103, while unpublished, are subject to protection under this
title without regard to the nationality or domicile of the author.

(b) Published Works.--The works specified by sections 102 and 103, when published, are subject to
protection under this title if--

        (1) on the date of first publication, one or more of the authors is a national or domiciliary of
        the United States, or is a national, domiciliary, or sovereign authority of a treaty party, or is a
        stateless person, wherever that person may be domiciled; or

        (2) the work is first published in the United States or in a foreign nation that, on the date of
        first publication, is a treaty party; or

        (3) the work is a sound recording that was first fixed in a treaty party; or

        (4) the work is a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work that is incorporated in a building or other
        structure, or an architectural work that is embodied in a building and the building or structure
        is located in the United States or a treaty party; or

        (5) the work is first published by the United Nations or any of its specialized agencies, or by
        the Organization of American States; or

        (6) the work comes within the scope of a Presidential proclamation. Whenever the President
        finds that a particular foreign nation extends, to works by authors who are nationals or
        domiciliaries of the United States or to works that are first published in the United States,

504 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        copyright protection on substantially the same basis as that on which the foreign nation extends
        protection to works of its own nationals and domiciliaries and works first published in that
        nation, the President may by proclamation extend protection under this title to works of
        which one or more of the authors is, on the date of first publication, a national, domiciliary, or
        sovereign authority of that nation, or which was first published in that nation. The President
        may revise, suspend, or revoke any such proclamation or impose any conditions or limitations
        on protection under a proclamation.
For purposes of paragraph (2), a work that is published in the United States or a treaty party within
30 days after publication in a foreign nation that is not a treaty party shall be considered to be first
published in the United States or such treaty party, as the case may be.
(c) Effect of Berne Convention.--
No right or interest in a work eligible for protection under this title may be claimed by virtue of, or in
reliance upon, the provisions of the Berne Convention, or the adherence of the United States thereto.
Any rights in a work eligible for protection under this title that derive from this title, other Federal
or State statutes, or the common law, shall not be expanded or reduced by virtue of, or in reliance
upon, the provisions of the Berne Convention, or the adherence of the United States thereto.
(d) Effect of Phonograms Treaties.--
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), no works other than sound recordings shall be
eligible for protection under this title solely by virtue of the adherence of the United States to
the Geneva Phonograms Convention or the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty.

17 U.S.C.  105. Subject matter of copyright: United States Government works
(a) In General.-- Copyright protection under this title is not available for any work of the United
States Government, but the United States Government is not precluded from receiving and holding
copyrights transferred to it by assignment, bequest, or otherwise.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 505
17 U.S.C. 106. EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS IN COPYRIGHTED WORKS

Subject to sections 107 through 122, the owner of copyright under this title has the exclusive rights to
do and to authorize any of the following:

        1) to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;
        2) to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work;
        3) to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public by sale or other
        transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or lending;
        4) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and motion
        pictures and other audiovisual works, to perform the copyrighted work publicly;
        5) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and
        pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works, including the individual images of a motion picture or
        other audiovisual work, to display the copyrighted work publicly; and in the case of sound
        recordings, to perform the copyrighted work publicly by means of a digital audio transmission.
        (6) in the case of sound recordings, to perform the copyrighted work publicly by means of a
        digital audio transmission.

506 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S.C. 106A. RIGHTS OF CERTAIN AUTHORS TO ATTRIBUTION AND
INTEGRITY.

(a) Rights of Attribution and Integrity.--Subject to section 107 and independent of the exclusive
rights provided in section 106, the author of a work of visual art--

        (1) shall have the right--

                (A) to claim authorship of that work, and

                (B) to prevent the use of his or her name as the author of any work of visual art which he
                or she did not create;

        (2) shall have the right to prevent the use of his or her name as the author of the work of visual
        art in the event of a distortion, mutilation, or other modification of the work which would be
        prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation; and

        (3) subject to the limitations set forth in section 113(d), shall have the right--

                (A) to prevent any intentional distortion, mutilation, or other modification of that work
                which would be prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation, and any intentional
                distortion, mutilation, or modification of that work is a violation of that right, and

                (B) to prevent any destruction of a work of recognized stature, and any intentional or
                grossly negligent destruction of that work is a violation of that right.

(b) Scope and Exercise of Rights.-- Only the author of a work of visual art has the rights conferred
by subsection (a) in that work, whether or not the author is the copyright owner. The authors of a
joint work of visual art are coowners of the rights conferred by subsection (a) in that work.

(c) Exceptions.--

        (1) The modification of a work of visual art which is a result of the passage of time or the
        inherent nature of the materials is not a distortion, mutilation, or other modification described
        in subsection (a)(3)(A).

        (2) The modification of a work of visual art which is the result of conservation, or of the public
        presentation, including lighting and placement, of the work is not a destruction, distortion,
        mutilation, or other modification described in subsection (a)(3) unless the modification is
        caused by gross negligence.

        (3) The rights described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) shall not apply to any
        reproduction, depiction, portrayal, or other use of a work in, upon, or in any connection with
        any item described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of the definition of "work of visual art" in section

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 507
        101, and any such reproduction, depiction, portrayal, or other use of a work is not a destruction,
        distortion, mutilation, or other modification described in paragraph (3) of subsection (a).
(d) Duration of Rights.--
        (1) With respect to works of visual art created on or after the effective date set forth in section
        610(a) of the Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, the rights conferred by subsection (a) shall
        endure for a term consisting of the life of the author.
        (2) With respect to works of visual art created before the effective date set forth in section 610(a)
        of the Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, but title to which has not, as of such effective date, been
        transferred from the author, the rights conferred by subsection (a) shall be coextensive with, and
        shall expire at the same time as, the rights conferred by section 106.
        (3) In the case of a joint work prepared by two or more authors, the rights conferred by
        subsection (a) shall endure for a term consisting of the life of the last surviving author.
        (4) All terms of the rights conferred by subsection (a) run to the end of the calendar year in
        which they would otherwise expire.
(e) Transfer and Waiver.--
        (1) The rights conferred by subsection (a) may not be transferred, but those rights may be
        waived if the author expressly agrees to such waiver in a written instrument signed by the
        author. Such instrument shall specifically identify the work, and uses of that work, to which the
        waiver applies, and the waiver shall apply only to the work and uses so identified. In the case of
        a joint work prepared by two or more authors, a waiver of rights under this paragraph made by
        one such author waives such rights for all such authors.
        (2) Ownership of the rights conferred by subsection (a) with respect to a work of visual art is
        distinct from ownership of any copy of that work, or of a copyright or any exclusive right
        under a copyright in that work. Transfer of ownership of any copy of a work of visual art, or
        of a copyright or any exclusive right under a copyright, shall not constitute a waiver of the
        rights conferred by subsection (a). Except as may otherwise be agreed by the author in a written
        instrument signed by the author, a waiver of the rights conferred by subsection (a) with respect
        to a work of visual art shall not constitute a transfer of ownership of any copy of that work, or
        of ownership of a copyright or of any exclusive right under a copyright in that work.

508 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S.C. 107. LIMITATIONS ON EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS: FAIR USE

Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work,
including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that
section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies
for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.
In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to be
considered shall include

        (1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature
        or is for nonprofit educational purposes;
        (2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
        (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a
        whole; and
        (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.
The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made
upon consideration of all the above factors.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 509
17 U.S.C. 109. LIMITATIONS ON EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS: EFFECT OF TRANSFER
OF PARTICULAR COPY OR PHONORECORD

(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106(3), the owner of a particular copy or phonorecord
lawfully made under this title, or any person authorized by such owner, is entitled, without the
authority of the copyright owner, to sell or otherwise dispose of the possession of that copy or
phonorecord. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, copies or phonorecords of works subject to
restored copyright under section 104A that are manufactured before the date of restoration of
copyright or, with respect to reliance parties, before publication or service of notice under section
104A(e), may be sold or otherwise disposed of without the authorization of the owner of the restored
copyright for purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage only during the 12-month period
beginning on--

        (1) the date of the publication in the Federal Register of the notice of intent filed with the
        Copyright Office under section 104A(d)(2)(A), or

        (2) the date of the receipt of actual notice served under section 104A(d)(2)(B),

whichever occurs first.

(b)

        (1)

        (A) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), unless authorized by the owners of
        copyright in the sound recording or the owner of copyright in a computer
        program (including any tape, disk, or other medium embodying such program), and in the
        case of a sound recording in the musical works embodied therein, neither the owner of a
        particular phonorecord nor any person in possession of a particular copy of a computer
        program (including any tape, disk, or other medium embodying such program), may, for the
        purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage, dispose of, or authorize the disposal of,
        the possession of that phonorecord or computer program (including any tape, disk, or other
        medium embodying such program) by rental, lease, or lending, or by any other act or practice
        in the nature of rental, lease, or lending. Nothing in the preceding sentence shall apply to
        the rental, lease, or lending of a phonorecord for nonprofit purposes by a nonprofit library
        or nonprofit educational institution. The transfer of possession of a lawfully made copy of
        a computer program by a nonprofit educational institution to another nonprofit educational
        institution or to faculty, staff, and students does not constitute rental, lease, or lending for direct
        or indirect commercial purposes under this subsection.

        (B) This subsection does not apply to--

                (i) a computer program which is embodied in a machine or product and which cannot be
                copied during the ordinary operation or use of the machine or product; or

510 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                (ii) a computer program embodied in or used in conjunction with a limited purpose
                computer that is designed for playing video games and may be designed for other
                purposes.
        (C) Nothing in this subsection affects any provision of chapter 9 of this title.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106(5), the owner of a particular copy lawfully made
under this title, or any person authorized by such owner, is entitled, without the authority of the
copyright owner, to display that copy publicly, either directly or by the projection of no more than
one image at a time, to viewers present at the place where the copy is located.
(d) The privileges prescribed by subsections (a) and (c) do not, unless authorized by the copyright
owner, extend to any person who has acquired possession of the copy or phonorecord from the
copyright owner, by rental, lease, loan, or otherwise, without acquiring ownership of it.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106(4) and 106(5), in the case of an electronic
audiovisual game intended for use in coin-operated equipment, the owner of a particular copy of
such a game lawfully made under this title, is entitled, without the authority of the copyright owner
of the game, to publicly perform or display that game in coin-operated equipment, except that this
subsection shall not apply to any work of authorship embodied in the audiovisual game if the
copyright owner of the electronic audiovisual game is not also the copyright owner of the work of
authorship.
The privileges prescribed by subsections (a) and (c) do not, unless authorized by the copyright owner,
extend to any person who has acquired possession of the copy or phonorecord from the copyright
owner, by rental, lease, loan, or otherwise, without acquiring ownership of it.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 511
17 U.S.C.  110. LIMITATIONS ON EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS: EXEMPTION OF
CERTAIN PERFORMANCES AND DISPLAYS

Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106, the following are not infringements of copyright:

(1) performance or display of a work by instructors or pupils in the course of face-to-face teaching
activities of a nonprofit educational institution, in a classroom or similar place devoted to instruction,
unless, in the case of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, the performance, or the display of
individual images, is given by means of a copy that was not lawfully made under this title, and that the
person responsible for the performance knew or had reason to believe was not lawfully made;

(2) except with respect to a work produced or marketed primarily for performance or display as part
of mediated instructional activities transmitted via digital networks, or a performance or display that
is given by means of a copy or phonorecord that is not lawfully made and acquired under this title,
and the transmitting government body or accredited nonprofit educational institution knew or had
reason to believe was not lawfully made and acquired, the performance of a nondramatic literary or
musical work or reasonable and limited portions of any other work, or display of a work in an amount
comparable to that which is typically displayed in the course of a live classroom session, by or in the
course of a transmission, if--

        (A) the performance or display is made by, at the direction of, or under the actual supervision
        of an instructor as an integral part of a class session offered as a regular part of the
        systematic mediated instructional activities of a governmental body or an accredited nonprofit
        educational institution;

        (B) the performance or display is directly related and of material assistance to the teaching
        content of the transmission;

        (C) the transmission is made solely for, and, to the extent technologically feasible, the reception
        of such transmission is limited to--

                (i) students officially enrolled in the course for which the transmission is made; or

                (ii) officers or employees of governmental bodies as a part of their official duties or
                employment; and

        (D) the transmitting body or institution--

                (i) institutes policies regarding copyright, provides informational materials to faculty,
                students, and relevant staff members that accurately describe, and promote compliance
                with, the laws of the United States relating to copyright, and provides notice to students
                that materials used in connection with the course may be subject to copyright protection;
                and

512 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                (ii) in the case of digital transmissions--
                        (I) applies technological measures that reasonably prevent--
                                         (aa) retention of the work in accessible form by recipients of the
                                         transmission from the transmitting body or institution for longer than
                                         the class session; and
                                         (bb) unauthorized further dissemination of the work in accessible form
                                         by such recipients to others; and
                        (II) does not engage in conduct that could reasonably be expected to interfere with
                        technological measures used by copyright owners to prevent such retention or
                        unauthorized further dissemination;

(3) performance of a nondramatic literary or musical work or of a dramatico-musical work of a
religious nature, or display of a work, in the course of services at a place of worship or other religious
assembly;
...

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 513
17 U.S.C.  113. SCOPE OF EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS IN PICTORIAL, GRAPHIC, AND
SCULPTURAL WORKS

(a) Subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the exclusive right to reproduce
a copyrighted pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work in copies under section 106 includes the right to
reproduce the work in or on any kind of article, whether useful or otherwise.

(b) This title does not afford, to the owner of copyright in a work that portrays a useful article as such,
any greater or lesser rights with respect to the making, distribution, or display of the useful article so
portrayed than those afforded to such works under the law, whether title 17 or the common law or
statutes of a State, in effect on December 31, 1977, as held applicable and construed by a court in an
action brought under this title.

(c) In the case of a work lawfully reproduced in useful articles that have been offered for sale
or other distribution to the public, copyright does not include any right to prevent the making,
distribution, or display of pictures or photographs of such articles in connection with advertisements
or commentaries related to the distribution or display of such articles, or in connection with news
reports.

(d)

        (1) In a case in which--

                (A) a work of visual art has been incorporated in or made part of a building in such a
                way that removing the work from the building will cause the destruction, distortion,
                mutilation, or other modification of the work as described in section 106A(a)(3), and

                (B) the author consented to the installation of the work in the building either before the
                effective date set forth in section 610(a) of the Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, or in a
                written instrument executed on or after such effective date that is signed by the owner
                of the building and the author and that specifies that installation of the work may subject
                the work to destruction, distortion, mutilation, or other modification, by reason of its
                removal,

        then the rights conferred by paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 106A(a) shall not apply.

        (2) If the owner of a building wishes to remove a work of visual art which is a part of such
        building and which can be removed from the building without the destruction, distortion,
        mutilation, or other modification of the work as described in section 106A(a)(3), the author's
        rights under paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 106A(a) shall apply unless--

                (A) the owner has made a diligent, good faith attempt without success to notify the author
                of the owner's intended action affecting the work of visual art, or

514 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        (B) the owner did provide such notice in writing and the person so notified failed, within
        90 days after receiving such notice, either to remove the work or to pay for its removal.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), an owner shall be presumed to have made a diligent, good
faith attempt to send notice if the owner sent such notice by registered mail to the author at the
most recent address of the author that was recorded with the Register of Copyrights pursuant
to paragraph (3). If the work is removed at the expense of the author, title to that copy of the
work shall be deemed to be in the author.
(3) The Register of Copyrights shall establish a system of records whereby any author of a work
of visual art that has been incorporated in or made part of a building, may record his or her
identity and address with the Copyright Office. The Register shall also establish procedures
under which any such author may update the information so recorded, and procedures under
which owners of buildings may record with the Copyright Office evidence of their efforts to
comply with this subsection.

                                                                                                                               TITLE 17 515
17 U.S.C.  201. OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHT

(a) Initial Ownership.-- Copyright in a work protected under this title vests initially in the author or
authors of the work. The authors of a joint work are co-owners of copyright in the work.
(b) Works Made for Hire.--In the case of a work made for hire, the employer or other person for
whom the work was prepared is considered the author for purposes of this title, and, unless the
parties have expressly agreed otherwise in a written instrument signed by them, owns all of the rights
comprised in the copyright.
(c) Contributions to collective works.-- Copyright in each separate contribution to a collective work
is distinct from copyright in the collective work as a whole, and vests initially in the author of the
contribution. In the absence of an express transfer of the copyright or of any rights under it, the owner
of copyright in the collective work is presumed to have acquired only the privilege of reproducing and
distributing the contribution as part of that particular collective work, any revision of that collective
work, and any later collective work in the same series.(d)
(d) Transfer of ownership. --

        (1) The ownership of a copyright may be transferred in whole or in part by any means of
        conveyance or by operation of law, and may be bequeathed by will or pass as personal property
        by the applicable laws of intestate succession.
        (2) Any of the exclusive rights comprised in a copyright, including any subdivision of any of
        the rights specified by section 106, may be transferred as provided by clause (1) and owned
        separately. The owner of any particular exclusive right is entitled, to the extent of that right, to
        all of the protection and remedies accorded to the copyright owner by this title.

(e) Involuntary transfer. -- When an individual author's ownership of a copyright, or of any of the
exclusive rights under a copyright, has not previously been transferred voluntarily by that individual
author, no action by any governmental body or other official or organization purporting to seize,
expropriate, transfer, or exercise rights of ownership with respect to the copyright, or any of the
exclusive rights under a copyright, shall be given effect under this title, except as provided under title
11.

516 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S.C.  202. OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHT AS DISTINCT FROM
OWNERSHIP OF MATERIAL OBJECT

Ownership of a copyright, or of any of the exclusive rights under a copyright, is distinct from
ownership of any material object in which the work is embodied. Transfer of ownership of any
material object, including the copy or phonorecord in which the work is first fixed, does not of
itself convey any rights in the copyrighted work embodied in the object; nor, in the absence of an
agreement, does transfer of ownership of a copyright or of any exclusive rights under a copyright
convey property rights in any material object.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 517
17 U.S.C.  203. TERMINATION OF TRANSFERS AND LICENSES GRANTED BY
THE AUTHOR

(a) Conditions for Termination.--In the case of any work other than a work made for hire, the
exclusive or nonexclusive grant of a transfer or license of copyright or of any right under a copyright,
executed by the author on or after January 1, 1978, otherwise than by will, is subject to termination
under the following conditions:

        (1) In the case of a grant executed by one author, termination of the grant may be effected
        by that author or, if the author is dead, by the person or persons who, under clause (2) of
        this subsection, own and are entitled to exercise a total of more than one-half of that author's
        termination interest. In the case of a grant executed by two or more authors of a joint work,
        termination of the grant may be effected by a majority of the authors who executed it; if any of
        such authors is dead, the termination interest of any such author may be exercised as a unit by
        the person or persons who, under clause (2) of this subsection, own and are entitled to exercise
        a total of more than one-half of that author's interest.

        (2) Where an author is dead, his or her termination interest is owned, and may be exercised, as
        follows:

                (A) The widow or widower owns the author's entire termination interest unless there
                are any surviving children or grandchildren of the author, in which case the widow or
                widower owns one-half of the author's interest.

                (B) The author's surviving children, and the surviving children of any dead child of the
                author, own the author's entire termination interest unless there is a widow or widower,
                in which case the ownership of one-half of the author's interest is divided among them.

                (C) The rights of the author's children and grandchildren are in all cases divided among
                them and exercised on a per stirpes basis according to the number of such author's
                children represented; the share of the children of a dead child in a termination interest
                can be exercised only by the action of a majority of them.

                (D) In the event that the author's widow or widower, children, and grandchildren are not
                living, the author's executor, administrator, personal representative, or trustee shall own
                the author's entire termination interest.

        (3) Termination of the grant may be effected at any time during a period of five years beginning
        at the end of thirty-five years from the date of execution of the grant; or, if the grant covers
        the right of publication of the work, the period begins at the end of thirty-five years from the
        date of publication of the work under the grant or at the end of forty years from the date of
        execution of the grant, whichever term ends earlier.

        (4) The termination shall be effected by serving an advance notice in writing, signed by the

518 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        number and proportion of owners of termination interests required under clauses (1) and (2) of
        this subsection, or by their duly authorized agents, upon the grantee or the grantee's successor
        in title.

                (A) The notice shall state the effective date of the termination, which shall fall within the
                five-year period specified by clause (3) of this subsection, and the notice shall be served
                not less than two or more than ten years before that date. A copy of the notice shall be
                recorded in the Copyright Office before the effective date of termination, as a condition
                to its taking effect.

                (B) The notice shall comply, in form, content, and manner of service, with requirements
                that the Register of Copyrights shall prescribe by regulation.

                (5) Termination of the grant may be effected notwithstanding any agreement to the
                contrary, including an agreement to make a will or to make any future grant.

(b) Effect of Termination.--Upon the effective date of termination, all rights under this title that
were covered by the terminated grants revert to the author, authors, and other persons owning
termination interests under clauses (1) and (2) of subsection (a), including those owners who did not
join in signing the notice of termination under clause (4) of subsection (a), but with the following
limitations:

        (1) A derivative work prepared under authority of the grant before its termination may continue
        to be utilized under the terms of the grant after its termination, but this privilege does not
        extend to the preparation after the termination of other derivative works based upon the
        copyrighted work covered by the terminated grant.

        (2) The future rights that will revert upon termination of the grant become vested on the
        date the notice of termination has been served as provided by clause (4) of subsection (a). The
        rights vest in the author, authors, and other persons named in, and in the proportionate shares
        provided by, clauses (1) and (2) of subsection (a).

        (3) Subject to the provisions of clause (4) of this subsection, a further grant, or agreement to
        make a further grant, of any right covered by a terminated grant is valid only if it is signed by
        the same number and proportion of the owners, in whom the right has vested under clause (2)
        of this subsection, as are required to terminate the grant under clauses (1) and (2) of subsection
        (a). Such further grant or agreement is effective with respect to all of the persons in whom the
        right it covers has vested under clause (2) of this subsection, including those who did not join
        in signing it. If any person dies after rights under a terminated grant have vested in him or her,
        that person's legal representatives, legatees, or heirs at law represent him or her for purposes of
        this clause.

        (4) A further grant, or agreement to make a further grant, of any right covered by a terminated
        grant is valid only if it is made after the effective date of the termination. As 0an exception,
        however, an agreement for such a further grant may be made between the persons provided by
        clause (3) of this subsection and the original grantee or such grantee's successor in title, after the
        notice of termination has been served as provided by clause (4) of subsection (a).

        (5) Termination of a grant under this section affects only those rights covered by the grants

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 519
        that arise under this title, and in no way affects rights arising under any other Federal, State, or
        foreign laws.
        (6) Unless and until termination is effected under this section, the grant, if it does not provide
        otherwise, continues in effect for the term of copyright provided by this title.

520 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
17 U.S.C.  301. PREEMPTION WITH RESPECT TO OTHER LAWS

(a) On and after January 1, 1978, all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive
rights within the general scope of copyright as specified by section 106 in works of authorship that
are fixed in a tangible medium of expression and come within the subject matter of copyright as
specified by sections 102 and 103, whether created before or after that date and whether published or
unpublished, are governed exclusively by this title. Thereafter, no person is entitled to any such right
or equivalent right in any such work under the common law or statutes of any State.

(b) Nothing in this title annuls or limits any rights or remedies under the common law or statutes of
any State with respect to--

        (1) subject matter that does not come within the subject matter of copyright as specified by
        sections 102 and 103, including works of authorship not fixed in any tangible medium of
        expression; or

        (2) any cause of action arising from undertakings commenced before January 1, 1978;

        (3) activities violating legal or equitable rights that are not equivalent to any of the exclusive
        rights within the general scope of copyright as specified by section 106; or

        (4) State and local landmarks, historic preservation, zoning, or building codes, relating to
        architectural works protected under section 102(a)(8).

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 303, and in accordance with chapter 14, no sound
recording fixed before February 15, 1972, shall be subject to copyright under this title. With respect
to sound recordings fixed before February 15, 1972, the preemptive provisions of subsection (a) shall
apply to activities that are commenced on and after the date of enactment of the Classics Protection
and Access Act. Nothing in this subsection may be construed to affirm or negate the preemption of
rights and remedies pertaining to any cause of action arising from the nonsubscription broadcast
transmission of sound recordings under the common law or statutes of any State for activities that
do not qualify as covered activities under chapter 14 undertaken during the period between the
date of enactment of the Classics Protection and Access Act and the date on which the term of
prohibition on unauthorized acts under section 1401(a)(2) expires for such sound recordings. Any
potential preemption of rights and remedies related to such activities undertaken during that period
shall apply in all respects as it did the day before the date of enactment of the Classics Protection and
Access Act.

...

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 521
17 U.S.C.  302. DURATION OF COPYRIGHT: WORKS CREATED ON OR AFTER
JANUARY 1, 1978.

(a) In General.--

Copyright in a work created on or after January 1, 1978, subsists from its creation and, except as
provided by the following subsections, endures for a term consisting of the life of the author and 70
years after the author's death.

(b) Joint Works.--

In the case of a joint work prepared by two or more authors who did not work for hire, the copyright
endures for a term consisting of the life of the last surviving author and 70 years after such last
surviving author's death.

(c) Anonymous Works, Pseudonymous Works, and Works Made for Hire.--

In the case of an anonymous work, a pseudonymous work, or a work made for hire, the copyright
endures for a term of 95 years from the year of its first publication, or a term of 120 years from the
year of its creation, whichever expires first. If, before the end of such term, the identity of one or more
of the authors of an anonymous or pseudonymous work is revealed in the records of a registration
made for that work under subsections (a) or (d) of section 408, or in the records provided by this
subsection, the copyright in the work endures for the term specified by subsection (a) or (b), based
on the life of the author or authors whose identity has been revealed. Any person having an interest
in the copyright in an anonymous or pseudonymous work may at any time record, in records to be
maintained by the Copyright Office for that purpose, a statement identifying one or more authors of
the work; the statement shall also identify the person filing it, the nature of that person's interest, the
source of the information recorded, and the particular work affected, and shall comply in form and
content with requirements that the Register of Copyrights shall prescribe by regulation.

(d) Records Relating to Death of Authors.--

Any person having an interest in a copyright may at any time record in the Copyright Office a
statement of the date of death of the author of the copyrighted work, or a statement that the author
is still living on a particular date. The statement shall identify the person filing it, the nature of that
person's interest, and the source of the information recorded, and shall comply in form and content
with requirements that the Register of Copyrights shall prescribe by regulation. The Register shall
maintain current records of information relating to the death of authors of copyrighted works, based
on such recorded statements and, to the extent the Register considers practicable, on data contained
in any of the records of the Copyright Office or in other reference sources.

(e) Presumption as to Author's Death.--

After a period of 95 years from the year of first publication of a work, or a period of 120 years from

522 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
the year of its creation, whichever expires first, any person who obtains from the Copyright Office a
certified report that the records provided by subsection (d) disclose nothing to indicate that the author
of the work is living, or died less than 70 years before, is entitled to the benefits of a presumption that
the author has been dead for at least 70 years. Reliance in good faith upon this presumption shall be a
complete defense to any action for infringement under this title.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 523
17 U.S.C.  305, 401, 402, 405, 407, 412

17 U.S.C.  305. Duration of copyright: Terminal date
All terms of copyright provided by sections 302 through 304 run to the end of the calendar year in
which they would otherwise expire.
17 U.S.C.  401. Notice of copyright: Visually perceptible copies

(a) General Provisions.--Whenever a work protected under this title is published in the United States
or elsewhere by authority of the copyright owner, a notice of copyright as provided by this section
may be placed on publicly distributed copies from which the work can be visually perceived, either
directly or with the aid of a machine or device.
(b) Form of Notice.--If a notice appears on the copies, it shall consist of the following three
elements:(1) the symbol  (the letter C in a circle), or the word "Copyright", or the abbreviation "Copr."

...

17 U.S.C. 402. Notice of copyright: Phonorecords of sound recordings
(a) General Provisions.--Whenever a sound recording protected under this title is published in the
United States or elsewhere by authority of the copyright owner, a notice of copyright as provided by
this section may be placed on publicly distributed phonorecords of the sound recording.

...

17 U.S.C. 405. Notice of copyright: Omission of notice on certain copies and phonorecords

(a) Effect of Omission on Copyright.

With respect to copies and phonorecords publicly distributed by authority of the copyright owner
before the effective date of the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988, the omission of
the copyright notice described in sections 401 through 403 from copies or phonorecords publicly
distributed by authority of the copyright owner does not invalidate the copyright in a work if--

(1) the notice has been omitted from no more than a relatively small number of copies or
phonorecords distributed to the public; or

(2) registration for the work has been made before or is made within five years after the publication
without notice, and a reasonable effort is made to add notice to all copies or phonorecords that are
distributed to the public in the United States after the omission has been discovered; or

(3) the notice has been omitted in violation of an express requirement in writing that, as a condition
of the copyright owner's authorization of the public distribution of copies or phonorecords, they bear
the prescribed notice.

524 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
(b) Effect of Omission on Innocent Infringers.--

Any person who innocently infringes a copyright, in reliance upon an authorized copy or
phonorecord from which the copyright notice has been omitted and which was publicly distributed
by authority of the copyright owner before the effective date of the Berne Convention
Implementation Act of 1988, incurs no liability for actual or statutory damages under section 504
for any infringing acts committed before receiving actual notice that registration for the work has
been made under section 408, if such person proves that he or she was misled by the omission
of notice. In a suit for infringement in such a case the court may allow or disallow recovery of
any of the infringer's profits attributable to the infringement, and may enjoin the continuation of
the infringing undertaking or may require, as a condition for permitting the continuation of the
infringing undertaking, that the infringer pay the copyright owner a reasonable license fee in an
amount and on terms fixed by the court.

(c) Removal of Notice.--
Protection under this title is not affected by the removal, destruction, or obliteration of the notice,
without the authorization of the copyright owner, from any publicly distributed copies or
phonorecords.

17 U.S.C. 407. Deposit of copies or phonorecords for Library of Congress

(a) Except as provided by subsection (c), and subject to the provisions of subsection (e), the owner
of copyright or of the exclusive right of publication in a work published in the United States shall
deposit, within three months after the date of such publication--

(1) two complete copies of the best edition; or

      (2) if the work is a sound recording, two complete phonorecords of the best edition, together
         with any printed or other visually perceptible material published with such phonorecords

...

17 U.S.C. 412. Registration as prerequisite to certain remedies for infringement

In any action under this title, other than an action brought for a violation of the rights of the
author under section 106A(a), an action for infringement of the copyright of a work that has been
preregistered under section 408(f) before the commencement of the infringement and that has an
effective date of registration not later than the earlier of 3 months after the first publication of the
work or 1 month after the copyright owner has learned of the infringement, or an action instituted
under section 411(c), no award of statutory damages or of attorney's fees, as provided by sections 504
and 505, shall be made for--

        1) any infringement of copyright in an unpublished work commenced before the effective date
        of its registration; or

        2) any infringement of copyright commenced after first publication of the work and before the
        effective date of its registration, unless such registration is made within three months after the
        first publication of the work.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 525
17 U.S.C.  504. REMEDIES FOR INFRINGEMENT: DAMAGES AND PROFITS

(a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided by this title, an infringer of copyright is liable for
either--

        (1) the copyright owner's actual damages and any additional profits of the infringer, as provided
        by subsection (b); or

        (2) statutory damages, as provided by subsection (c).

(b) Actual Damages and Profits.--

The copyright owner is entitled to recover the actual damages suffered by him or her as a result of
the infringement, and any profits of the infringer that are attributable to the infringement and are
not taken into account in computing the actual damages. In establishing the infringer's profits, the
copyright owner is required to present proof only of the infringer's gross revenue, and the infringer
is required to prove his or her deductible expenses and the elements of profit attributable to factors
other than the copyrighted work.

(c) Statutory Damages.--

        (1) Except as provided by clause (2) of this subsection, the copyright owner may elect, at any
        time before final judgment is rendered, to recover, instead of actual damages and profits, an
        award of statutory damages for all infringements involved in the action, with respect to any one
        work, for which any one infringer is liable individually, or for which any two or more infringers
        are liable jointly and severally, in a sum of not less than $750 or more than $30,000 as the court
        considers just. For the purposes of this subsection, all the parts of a compilation or derivative
        work constitute one work.

        (2) In a case where the copyright owner sustains the burden of proving, and the court finds,
        that infringement was committed willfully, the court in its discretion may increase the award of
        statutory damages to a sum of not more than $150,000. In a case where the infringer sustains
        the burden of proving, and the court finds, that such infringer was not aware and had no
        reason to believe that his or her acts constituted an infringement of copyright, the court in
        its discretion may reduce the award of statutory damages to a sum of not less than $200. The
        court shall remit statutory damages in any case where an infringer believed and had reasonable
        grounds for believing that his or her use of the copyrighted work was a fair use under section
        107, if the infringer was: (i) an employee or agent of a nonprofit educational institution, library,
        or archives acting within the scope of his or her employment who, or such institution, library,
        or archives itself, which infringed by reproducing the work in copies or phonorecords; or
        (ii) a public broadcasting entity which or a person who, as a regular part of the nonprofit
        activities of a public broadcasting entity (as defined in section 118(f)) infringed by performing a
        published nondramatic literary work or by reproducing a transmission program embodying a
        performance of such a work.

526 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
        (3)
                (A) In a case of infringement, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the infringement
                was committed willfully for purposes of determining relief if the violator, or a person
                acting in concert with the violator, knowingly provided or knowingly caused to be
                provided materially false contact information to a domain name registrar, domain
                name registry, or other domain name registration authority in registering, maintaining,
                or renewing a domain name used in connection with the infringement.
                (B) Nothing in this paragraph limits what may be considered willful infringement under
                this subsection.
                (C) For purposes of this paragraph, the term "domain name" has the meaning given
                that term in section 45 of the Act entitled "An Act to provide for the registration and
                protection of trademarks used in commerce, to carry out the provisions of certain
                international conventions, and for other purposes" approved July 5, 1946 (commonly
                referred to as the "Trademark Act of 1946"; 15 U.S.C. 1127).

(d) Additional Damages in Certain Cases.--
In any case in which the court finds that a defendant proprietor of an establishment who claims as a
defense that its activities were exempt under section 110(5) did not have reasonable grounds to believe
that its use of a copyrighted work was exempt under such section, the plaintiff shall be entitled to, in
addition to any award of damages under this section, an additional award of two times the amount
of the license fee that the proprietor of the establishment concerned should have paid the plaintiff for
such use during the preceding period of up to 3 years.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 17 527
                                                TITLE 18

The following sections contain relevant portions of Title 18 of the U.S. Code. Portions have been
omitted for brevity.

528 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
18 U.S.C.  1831. ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE

(a) In General.--Whoever, intending or knowing that the offense will benefit any foreign
government, foreign instrumentality, or foreign agent, knowingly--

        (1) steals, or without authorization appropriates, takes, carries away, or conceals, or by fraud,
        artifice, or deception obtains a trade secret;
        (2) without authorization copies, duplicates, sketches, draws, photographs, downloads, uploads,
        alters, destroys, photocopies, replicates, transmits, delivers, sends, mails, communicates, or
        conveys a trade secret;
        (3) receives, buys, or possesses a trade secret, knowing the same to have been stolen or
        appropriated, obtained, or converted without authorization;
        (4) attempts to commit any offense described in any of paragraphs (1) through (3); or
        (5) conspires with one or more other persons to commit any offense described in any of
        paragraphs (1) through (3), and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of
        the conspiracy,
shall, except as provided in subsection (b), be fined not more than $5,000,000 or imprisoned not more
than 15 years, or both.
(b) Organizations.--
Any organization that commits any offense described in subsection (a) shall be fined not more than
the greater of $10,000,000 or 3 times the value of the stolen trade secret to the organization, including
expenses for research and design and other costs of reproducing the trade secret that the organization
has thereby avoided.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 18 529
18 U.S.C.  1832. THEFT OF TRADE SECRETS

(a) Whoever, with intent to convert a trade secret, that is related to a product or service used in or
intended for use in interstate or foreign commerce, to the economic benefit of anyone other than
the owner thereof, and intending or knowing that the offense will, injure any owner of that trade
secret, knowingly--

        (1) steals, or without authorization appropriates, takes, carries away, or conceals, or by fraud,
        artifice, or deception obtains such information;
        (2) without authorization copies, duplicates, sketches, draws, photographs, downloads, uploads,
        alters, destroys, photocopies, replicates, transmits, delivers, sends, mails, communicates, or
        conveys such information;
        (3) receives, buys, or possesses such information, knowing the same to have been stolen or
        appropriated, obtained, or converted without authorization;
        (4) attempts to commit any offense described in paragraphs (1) through (3); or
        (5) conspires with one or more other persons to commit any offense described in paragraphs (1)
        through (3), and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy,
shall, except as provided in subsection (b), be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10
years, or both.
(b) Any organization that commits any offense described in subsection (a) shall be fined not more than
the greater of $5,000,000 or 3 times the value of the stolen trade secret to the organization, including
expenses for research and design and other costs of reproducing the trade secret that the organization
has thereby avoided.

530 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
18 U.S.C.  1833. EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITIONS

(a) In General.--This chapter does not prohibit or create a private right of action for--
        (1) any otherwise lawful activity conducted by a governmental entity of the United States, a
        State, or a political subdivision of a State; or
        (2) the disclosure of a trade secret in accordance with subsection (b).

(b)Immunity From Liability for Confidential Disclosure of a Trade Secret to the Government or
in a Court Filing.--

        (1) Immunity.--An individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable under any Federal or
        State trade secret law for the disclosure of a trade secret that--

                (A) is made--
                        (i) in confidence to a Federal, State, or local government official, either directly or
                        indirectly, or to an attorney; and
                        (ii) solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law;
                        or

                (B) is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or other proceeding, if
                such filing is made under seal.
        (2) Use of trade secret information in anti-retaliation lawsuit.--An individual who files a
        lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a suspected violation of law may disclose
        the trade secret to the attorney of the individual and use the trade secret information in the
        court proceeding, if the individual--
                (A) files any document containing the trade secret under seal; and
                (B) does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order.
(3) Notice.--
        (A) In general.-- An employer shall provide notice of the immunity set forth in this subsection
        in any contract or agreement with an employee that governs the use of a trade secret or other
        confidential information.
        (B) Policy document.-- An employer shall be considered to be in compliance with the notice
        requirement in subparagraph (A) if the employer provides a cross-reference to a policy
        document provided to the employee that sets forth the employer's reporting policy for a
        suspected violation of law.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 18 531
        (C) Non-compliance-.-- If an employer does not comply with the notice requirement in
        subparagraph (A), the employer may not be awarded exemplary damages or attorney fees under
        subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 1836(b)(3) in an action against an employee to whom notice
        was not provided.
        (D) Applicability.-- This paragraph shall apply to contracts and agreements that are entered into
        or updated after the date of enactment of this subsection.
(4) Employee defined.-- For purposes of this subsection, the term "employee" includes any individual
performing work as a contractor or consultant for an employer.
(5) Rule of construction.-- Except as expressly provided for under this subsection, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to authorize, or limit liability for, an act that is otherwise prohibited by
law, such as the unlawful access of material by unauthorized means.

532 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
18 U.S.C.  1836. CIVIL PROCEEDINGS

(a) The Attorney General may, in a civil action, obtain appropriate injunctive relief against any
violation of this chapter.
(b) Private Civil Actions.--

        (1) In general.--
        An owner of a trade secret that is misappropriated may bring a civil action under this
        subsection if the trade secret is related to a product or service used in, or intended for use in,
        interstate or foreign commerce.
        (2) Civil seizure.--

                (A) In general.--
                (i) Application.--
                Based on an affidavit or verified complaint satisfying the requirements of this paragraph,
                the court may, upon ex parte application but only in extraordinary circumstances, issue
                an order providing for the seizure of property necessary to prevent the propagation or
                dissemination of the trade secret that is the subject of the action.
...
        (3) Remedies.--In a civil action brought under this subsection with respect to
        the misappropriation of a trade secret, a court may--
                (A) grant an injunction--

                                 (i) to prevent any actual or threatened misappropriation described in
                                 paragraph (1) on such terms as the court deems reasonable, provided the
                                 order does not--
                                 (I) prevent a person from entering into an employment relationship, and
                                 that conditions placed on such employment shall be based on evidence of
                                 threatened misappropriation and not merely on the information the person
                                 knows; or
                                 (II) otherwise conflict with an applicable State law prohibiting restraints on
                                 the practice of a lawful profession, trade, or business;
                        (ii) if determined appropriate by the court, requiring affirmative actions to be taken
                        to protect the trade secret; and

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 18 533
                        (iii) in exceptional circumstances that render an injunction inequitable, that
                        conditions future use of the trade secret upon payment of a reasonable royalty for
                        no longer than the period of time for which such use could have been prohibited;
                (B) award--
                        (i)

                                 (I) damages for actual loss caused by the misappropriation of the trade
                                 secret; and
                                 (II) damages for any unjust enrichment caused by the misappropriation of
                                 the trade secret that is not addressed in computing damages for actual loss;
                                 or
                        (ii) in lieu of damages measured by any other methods, the damages caused by
                        the misappropriation measured by imposition of liability for a reasonable royalty
                        for the misappropriator's unauthorized disclosure or use of the trade secret;
                (C) if the trade secret is willfully and maliciously misappropriated, award exemplary
                damages in an amount not more than 2 times the amount of the damages awarded under
                subparagraph (B); and
                (D) if a claim of the misappropriation is made in bad faith, which may be established by
                circumstantial evidence, a motion to terminate an injunction is made or opposed in bad
                faith, or the trade secret was willfully and maliciously misappropriated, award reasonable
                attorney's fees to the prevailing party.
(c) Jurisdiction.--
The district courts of the United States shall have original jurisdiction of civil actions brought under
this section.
(d) Period of Limitations.--
A civil action under subsection (b) may not be commenced later than 3 years after the date on
which the misappropriation with respect to which the action would relate is discovered or by the
exercise of reasonable diligence should have been discovered. For purposes of this subsection, a
continuing misappropriation constitutes a single claim of misappropriation.

534 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
18 U.S.C.  1838. CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER LAWS

Except as provided in section 1833(b), this chapter shall not be construed to preempt or displace any
other remedies, whether civil or criminal, provided by United States Federal, State, commonwealth,
possession, or territory law for the misappropriation of a trade secret, or to affect the otherwise
lawful disclosure of information by any Government employee under section 552 of title
5 (commonly known as the Freedom of Information Act).

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 18 535
18 U.S.C.  1839. DEFINITIONS

As used in this chapter--

(1) the term "foreign instrumentality" means any agency, bureau, ministry, component, institution,
association, or any legal, commercial, or business organization, corporation, firm, or entity that
is substantially owned, controlled, sponsored, commanded, managed, or dominated by a foreign
government;

(2) the term "foreign agent" means any officer, employee, proxy, servant, delegate, or representative of
a foreign government;

(3) the term "trade secret" means all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical,
economic, or engineering information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices,
formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes,
whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized physically,
electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing if--

        (A) the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and

        (B) the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being
        generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, another
        person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the information;

(4) the term "owner", with respect to a trade secret, means the person or entity in whom or in which
rightful legal or equitable title to, or license in, the trade secret is reposed;

(5) the term "misappropriation" means--

        (A) acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows or has reason to know that
        the trade secret was acquired by improper means; or

        (B) disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent by a person
        who--

                (i) used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret;

                (ii) at the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know that the knowledge of
                the trade secret was--

                (I) derived from or through a person who had used improper means to acquire the trade
                secret;

                        (II) acquired under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain the secrecy of
                        the trade secret or limit the use of the trade secret; or

536 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
                        (III) derived from or through a person who owed a duty to the person seeking relief
                        to maintain the secrecy of the trade secret or limit the use of the trade secret; or
                (iii) before a material change of the position of the person, knew or had reason to know
                that--
                        (I) the trade secret was a trade secret; and
                        (II) knowledge of the trade secret had been acquired by accident or mistake;
(6) the term "improper means"--
        (A) includes theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach or inducement of a breach of a duty to
        maintain secrecy, or espionage through electronic or other means; and
        (B) does not include reverse engineering, independent derivation, or any other lawful means of
        acquisition; and
(7) the term "Trademark Act of 1946" means the Act entitled "An Act to provide for the registration
and protection of trademarks used in commerce, to carry out the provisions of certain international
conventions, and for other purposes [1], approved July 5, 1946 (15 U.S.C. 1051 et seq.) (commonly
referred to as the `Trademark Act of 1946' or the `Lanham Act')".

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 18 537
                                                TITLE 35

The following sections contain relevant portions of Title 35 of the U.S. Code. Portions have been
omitted for brevity.

538 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
35 U.S.C.  100. DEFINITIONS

When used in this title unless the context otherwise indicates--

(a) The term "invention" means invention or discovery.

(b) The term "process" means process, art or method, and includes a new use of a known process,
machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material.

(c) The terms "United States" and "this country" mean the United States of America, its territories and
possessions.

(d) The word "patentee" includes not only the patentee to whom the patent was issued but also the
successors in title to the patentee.

(e) The term "third-party requester" means a person requesting ex parte reexamination under section
302 who is not the patent owner.

(f) The term "inventor" means the individual or, if a joint invention, the individuals collectively who
invented or discovered the subject matter of the invention.

(g) The terms "joint inventor" and "coinventor" mean any 1 of the individuals who invented or
discovered the subject matter of a joint invention.

(h) The term "joint research agreement" means a written contract, grant, or cooperative agreement
entered into by 2 or more persons or entities for the performance of experimental, developmental, or
research work in the field of the claimed invention.

(i)

        (1) The term "effective filing date" for a claimed invention in a patent or application for patent
        means--

                (A) if subparagraph (B) does not apply, the actual filing date of the patent or the
                application for the patent containing a claim to the invention; or

                (B) the filing date of the earliest application for which the patent or application is entitled,
                as to such invention, to a right of priority under section 119, 365(a), 365(b), 386(a),
                or 386(b) or to the benefit of an earlier filing date under section 120, 121, 365(c), or 386(c).

        (2) The effective filing date for a claimed invention in an application for reissue or reissued
        patent shall be determined by deeming the claim to the invention to have been contained in the
        patent for which reissue was sought.
(j) The term "claimed invention" means the subject matter defined by a claim in a patent or an
application for a patent.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 539
35 U.S.C.  101. INVENTIONS PATENTABLE

Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition
of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the
conditions and requirements of this title.

540 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
35 U.S.C.  102. CONDITIONS FOR PATENTABILITY; NOVELTY

(a) Novelty; Prior Art.--A person shall be entitled to a patent unless--

        (1) the claimed invention was patented, described in a printed publication, or in public use,
        on sale, or otherwise available to the public before the effective filing date of the claimed
        invention; or

        (2) the claimed invention was described in a patent issued under section 151, or in an
        application for patent published or deemed published under section 122(b), in which the patent
        or application, as the case may be, names another inventor and was effectively filed before
        the effective filing date of the claimed invention.

(b) Exceptions.--

        (1) Disclosures made 1 year or less before the effective filing date of the claimed
        invention.--A disclosure made 1 year or less before the effective filing date of a claimed
        invention shall not be prior art to the claimed invention under subsection (a)(1) if--

                (A) the disclosure was made by the inventor or joint inventor or by another who obtained
                the subject matter disclosed directly or indirectly from the inventor or a joint inventor;
                or

                (B) the subject matter disclosed had, before such disclosure, been publicly disclosed by
                the inventor or a joint inventor or another who obtained the subject matter disclosed
                directly or indirectly from the inventor or a joint inventor.

        (2) Disclosures appearing in applications and patents.--A disclosure shall not be prior art to
        a claimed invention under subsection (a)(2) if--

                (A) the subject matter disclosed was obtained directly or indirectly from the inventor or
                a joint inventor;

                (B) the subject matter disclosed had, before such subject matter was effectively filed under
                subsection (a)(2), been publicly disclosed by the inventor or a joint inventor or another
                who obtained the subject matter disclosed directly or indirectly from the inventor or
                a joint inventor; or

                (C) the subject matter disclosed and the claimed invention, not later than the effective
                filing date of the claimed invention, were owned by the same person or subject to an
                obligation of assignment to the same person.

(c) Common Ownership Under Joint Research Agreements.--Subject matter disclosed and
a claimed invention shall be deemed to have been owned by the same person or subject to an
obligation of assignment to the same person in applying the provisions of subsection (b)(2)(C) if--

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 541
        (1) the subject matter disclosed was developed and the claimed invention was made by, or
        on behalf of, 1 or more parties to a joint research agreement that was in effect on or before
        the effective filing date of the claimed invention;
        (2) the claimed invention was made as a result of activities undertaken within the scope of
        the joint research agreement; and
        (3) the application for patent for the claimed invention discloses or is amended to disclose the
        names of the parties to the joint research agreement.
(d) Patents and Published Applications Effective as Prior Art.--For purposes of determining
whether a patent or application for patent is prior art to a claimed invention under subsection (a)(2),
such patent or application shall be considered to have been effectively filed, with respect to any subject
matter described in the patent or application--
        (1) if paragraph (2) does not apply, as of the actual filing date of the patent or the application for
        patent; or
        (2) if the patent or application for patent is entitled to claim a right of priority under section
        119, 365(a), 365(b), 386(a), or 386(b), or to claim the benefit of an earlier filing date under section
        120, 121, 365(c), or 386(c), based upon 1 or more prior filed applications for patent, as of the
        filing date of the earliest such application that describes the subject matter.

542 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
35 U.S.C.  103. CONDITIONS FOR PATENTABILITY; NON-OBVIOUS SUBJECT
MATTER

A patent for a claimed invention may not be obtained, notwithstanding that the claimed invention is
not identically disclosed as set forth in section 102, if the differences between the claimed
invention and the prior art are such that the claimed invention as a whole would have been obvious
before the effective filing date of the claimed invention to a person having ordinary skill in the art
to which the claimed invention pertains. Patentability shall not be negated by the manner in which
the invention was made.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 543
35 U.S.C.  112. SPECIFICATION

(a) In General.--
The specification shall contain a written description of the invention, and of the manner and process
of making and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled
in the art to which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly connected, to make and use the same,
and shall set forth the best mode contemplated by the inventor or joint inventor of carrying out the
invention.
(b) Conclusion.--
The specification shall conclude with one or more claims particularly pointing out and distinctly
claiming the subject matter which the inventor or a joint inventor regards as the invention.
(c) Form.--
A claim may be written in independent or, if the nature of the case admits, in dependent or multiple
dependent form.
(d) Reference in Dependent Forms.--
Subject to subsection (e), a claim in dependent form shall contain a reference to a claim previously set
forth and then specify a further limitation of the subject matter claimed. A claim in dependent form
shall be construed to incorporate by reference all the limitations of the claim to which it refers.
(e) Reference in Multiple Dependent Form.--
A claim in multiple dependent form shall contain a reference, in the alternative only, to more than
one claim previously set forth and then specify a further limitation of the subject matter claimed. A
multiple dependent claim shall not serve as a basis for any other multiple dependent claim. A multiple
dependent claim shall be construed to incorporate by reference all the limitations of the particular
claim in relation to which it is being considered.
(f) Element in Claim for a Combination.--
An element in a claim for a combination may be expressed as a means or step for performing a
specified function without the recital of structure, material, or acts in support thereof, and such
claim shall be construed to cover the corresponding structure, material, or acts described in the
specification and equivalents thereof.

544 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
35 U.S.C.  154. CONTENTS AND TERM OF PATENT; PROVISIONAL RIGHTS

(1) Contents.--Every patent shall contain a short title of the invention and a grant to the patentee,
his heirs or assigns, of the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the
invention throughout the United States or importing the invention into the United States, and, if the
invention is a process, of the right to exclude others from using, offering for sale or selling throughout
the United States, or importing into the United States, products made by that process, referring to the
specification for the particulars thereof.
(2) Term.--Subject to the payment of fees under this title, such grant shall be for a term beginning on
the date on which the patent issues and ending 20 years from the date on which the application for
the patent was filed in the United States or, if the application contains a specific reference to an earlier
filed application or applications under section 120, 121, 365(c), or 386(c), from the date on which the
earliest such application was filed.
(3) Priority.--Priority under section 119, 365(a)(b), 386(a)(b) shall not be taken into account in
determining the term of a patent.
(4) Specification and Drawing.--A copy of the specification and drawing shall be annexed to the
patent and be a part of such patent.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 545
35 U.S.C.  171. PATENTS FOR DESIGNS

a) In General.--
Whoever invents any new, original and ornamental design for an article of manufacture may obtain a
patent therefor, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title.
(b) Applicability of This Title.--
The provisions of this title relating to patents for inventions shall apply to patents for designs, except
as otherwise provided.
(c) Filing Date.--
The filing date of an application for patent for design shall be the date on which the specification as
prescribed by section 112 and any required drawings are filed.
...
35 U.S.C.  173. Term of design patent
Patents for designs shall be granted for the term of 15 years from the date of grant.

546 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
35 U.S.C.  271. INFRINGEMENT OF PATENT

a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, whoever without authority makes, uses, offers to sell, or
sells any patented invention, within the United States or imports into the United States any patented
invention during the term of the patent therefor, infringes the patent.
b) Whoever actively induces infringement of a patent shall be liable as an infringer.
c) Whoever offers to sell or sells within the United States or imports into the United States a
component of a patented machine, manufacture, combination or composition, or a material or
apparatus for use in practicing a patented process, constituting a material part of the invention,
knowing the same to be especially made or especially adapted for use in an infringement of such
patent, and not a staple article or commodity of commerce suitable for substantial noninfringing use,
shall be liable as a contributory infringer.
...

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 547
35 U.S.C.  282. PRESUMPTION OF VALIDITY; DEFENSES

(a) In General.--

A patent shall be presumed valid. Each claim of a patent (whether in independent, dependent, or
multiple dependent form) shall be presumed valid independently of the validity of other claims;
dependent or multiple dependent claims shall be presumed valid even though dependent upon an
invalid claim. The burden of establishing invalidity of a patent or any claim thereof shall rest on the
party asserting such invalidity.

(b) Defenses.--The following shall be defenses in any action involving the validity or infringement of
a patent and shall be pleaded:

        (1) Noninfringement, absence of liability for infringement or unenforceability.

        (2) Invalidity of the patent or any claim in suit on any ground specified in part II as a condition
        for patentability.

        (3) Invalidity of the patent or any claim in suit for failure to comply with--

                (A) any requirement of section 112, except that the failure to disclose the best mode shall
                not be a basis on which any claim of a patent may be canceled or held invalid or otherwise
                unenforceable; or

                (B) any requirement of section 251.

(4) Any other fact or act made a defense by this title.

(c) Notice of Actions; Actions During Extension of Patent Term.--In an action involving the
validity or infringement of a patent the party asserting invalidity or noninfringement shall give notice
in the pleadings or otherwise in writing to the adverse party at least thirty days before the trial, of the
country, number, date, and name of the patentee of any patent, the title, date, and page numbers of any
publication to be relied upon as anticipation of the patent in suit or, except in actions in the United
States Court of Federal Claims, as showing the state of the art, and the name and address of any person
who may be relied upon as the prior inventor or as having prior knowledge of or as having previously
used or offered for sale the invention of the patent in suit. In the absence of such notice proof of the
said matters may not be made at the trial except on such terms as the court requires. Invalidity of the
extension of a patent term or any portion thereof under section 154(b) or 156 because of the material
failure--

(1) by the applicant for the extension, or

(2) by the Director, to comply with the requirements of such section shall be a defense in any action
involving the infringement of a patent during the period of the extension of its term and shall be

548 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
pleaded. A due diligence determination under section 156(d)(2) is not subject to review in such an
action.
...

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 549
35 U.S.C. ㎣ 283, 284, 285, 286, & 289

35 U.S.C.  283. Injunction
The several courts having jurisdiction of cases under this title may grant injunctions in accordance
with the principles of equity to prevent the violation of any right secured by patent, on such terms as
the court deems reasonable.

35 U.S.C.  284. Damages
Upon finding for the claimant the court shall award the claimant damages adequate to compensate
for the infringement, but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention
by the infringer, together with interest and costs as fixed by the court.

When the damages are not found by a jury, the court shall assess them. In either event the court may
increase the damages up to three times the amount found or assessed. Increased damages under this
paragraph shall not apply to provisional rights under section 154(d).

The court may receive expert testimony as an aid to the determination of damages or of what royalty
would be reasonable under the circumstances.

35 U.S.C.  285. Attorney fees
The court in exceptional cases may award reasonable attorney fees to the prevailing party.

35 U.S.C.  286. Time limitation of damages

Except as otherwise provided by law, no recovery shall be had for any infringement committed more
than six years prior to the filing of the complaint or counterclaim for infringement in the action.
In the case of claims against the United States Government for use of a patented invention, the period
before bringing suit, up to six years, between the date of receipt of a written claim for compensation
by the department or agency of the Government having authority to settle such claim, and the date
of mailing by the Government of a notice to the claimant that his claim has been denied shall not be
counted as part of the period referred to in the preceding paragraph.

35 U.S.C.  289. Additional remedy for infringement of design patent

Whoever during the term of a patent for a design, without license of the owner, (1) applies the
patented design, or any colorable imitation thereof, to any article of manufacture for the purpose
of sale, or (2) sells or exposes for sale any article of manufacture to which such design or colorable
imitation has been applied shall be liable to the owner to the extent of his total profit, but not less than
$250, recoverable in any United States district court having jurisdiction of the parties.
Nothing in this section shall prevent, lessen, or impeach any other remedy which an owner of an

550 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
infringed patent has under the provisions of this title, but he shall not twice recover the profit made
from the infringement.

                                                                                                                                         TITLE 35 551
35 U.S.C.  311. INTER PARTES REVIEW

(a) In General.--
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a person who is not the owner of a patent may file with
the Office a petition to institute an inter partes review of the patent. The Director shall establish,
by regulation, fees to be paid by the person requesting the review, in such amounts as the Director
determines to be reasonable, considering the aggregate costs of the review.
(b) Scope.--
A petitioner in an inter partes review may request to cancel as unpatentable 1 or more claims of a
patent only on a ground that could be raised under section 102 or 103 and only on the basis of prior
art consisting of patents or printed publications.
(c) Filing Deadline.--A petition for inter partes review shall be filed after the later of either--

        (1) the date that is 9 months after the grant of a patent; or
        (2) if a post-grant review is instituted under chapter 32, the date of the termination of such post-
        grant review.

552 INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW
