                A law workbook
                  with a colorful
                                 twist.

                         Written by
             Nicole Dyszlewski

               and Raquel Ortiz

Illustrated by Liz Gotauco
By Nicole Dyszlewski and Raquel Ortiz
          Illustrated by Liz Gotauco

   Published by CALI eLangdell Press

                                                                                                                    2
Notices

This is the first edition of this casebook, updated August, 2016. Visit http://
elangdell.cali.org/ for the latest version and for revision history.

This work by Nicole Dyszlewski, Raquel Ortiz, and Liz Gotauco is licensed
and published by CALI eLangdell Press under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial- ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC- SA
4.0). CALI and CALI eLangdell Press reserve under copyright all rights not
expressly granted bythis Creative Commons license. CALI and CALI
eLangdell Press do not assert copyright in US Government works or other
public domain material included herein. Permissions beyond the scope of
this license may be available through feedback@cali.org.

In brief, the terms of that license are that you may copy, distribute, and
display this work, or make derivative works, so long as

 you give CALI eLangdell Press and the author credit;
 you do not use this work for commercial purposes; and
 you distribute any works derived from this one under the same licensing

    terms as this.

Suggested attribution format for original work:

Nicole Dyszlewski, Raquel Ortiz, and Liz Gotauco, What Color is Your C.F.R.?,
Published by CALI eLangdell Press. Available under a Creative Commons BY-
NC- SA 4.0 License.

CALI® and eLangdell® are United States federally registered trademarks
owned by the Center for Computer-Assisted Legal Instruction. The cover art
design is a copyrighted work of CALI, all rights reserved. The CALI
graphical logo is a trademark and may not be used without permission.

Should you create derivative works based on the text of this book or other
Creative Commons materials therein, you may not use this book's cover art
and the aforementioned logos, or any derivative thereof, to imply
endorsement or otherwise without written permission from CALI.

This material does not contain nor is intended to be legal advice. Users
seeking legal advice should consult with a licensed attorney in their
jurisdiction. The editors have endeavored to provide complete and accurate
information in this book. However, CALI does not warrant that the
information provided is complete and accurate. CALI disclaims all liability
to any person for any loss caused by errors or omissions in this collection of
information.

                                                                                                                                          3
Permissions

CALI gratefully acknowledges permission from the following individuals
and organizations to reprint materials:
"A Typewriter For Me" font created by Zachary Lucier on http://
www.dafont.com/atypewriterforme.font. Used throughout book.
"Suplexmentary Comic NC" font created by Jayvee Enaguas on http://
www.dafont.com/suplexmentary-comic-nc.font. Used in "The Peeping Tom."
"Comick Book" font created by Joe Buckingham on http://www.dafont.com/
comickbook.font. Used in "The Peeping Tom."
US Map image created by ClkerFreeVectorImages on Pixabay.com. Used in
"Federal Reporter System: Exercise."

                                                                                                                                           4
    This coloring book is going to take a non-
traditional approach to legal research. We are
going to feature short legal research exercises
and coloring. We hope you can start to see that

     legal research, like coloring, can be fun!

                                                                                                                                          5
 Coloring might
    be something
   you associate

with childhood,
     but it is also

associated with
       relaxation,

creativity, and
increased focus

          in adults.

                                     6
Legal research, on the other hand, is not typically
     associated with relaxation. It is, however, a

 fundamental legal skill needed for law practice.

                                                                                                                                      7
The exercises in this workbook
can be completed using print
books in your library or using
subscription-based online
resources available through
your law library. Because legal
research is complex, we have
tried to simplify the ideas in
this coloring book. This
resource is a fun start to
learning legal research but it
is by no means all you need to
know. If you have questions,
need more information about a
topic, or need some help on an
exercise, stop by and see your
local law librarian.
Let's begin!

                                                                                                                                           8
      What is the Law?

         A fundamental thing to
 understand when you have a

      legal research question is
that the law is very large and

          sometimes very murky.
   Sometimes when people talk

     about "the law" they mean
       case law. Sometimes they
                       mean statutes.
      The "law" includes both of
         these things, and more.

             When you are trying
             to find "the law" it is

                         important to
                   understand that
                   "the law" you are
            looking for could be a
                   case, a statute, a

                          regulation, a
                  constitution, or a

                             court rule.

                                                                     9
           What is a Statute?

       A statute is a law passed by a state or federal
legislature. Statutes are generally published yearly in

  numerical order and also published, or codified, by
       subject into a code. Codes can be annotated or

   unannotated and official or unofficial. Annotated
 statutes include the text of the law as well as useful
  features for research, such as references to related

     sources and summaries of cases interpreting the
                                      statute.

                                                                                                                        10
                   Finding a State Statute

      The easiest way to find a state statute is by using the statute's
  citation. For example, the citation D.C. Code Ann. §1-171 (West 2012)
refers to title 1, section 171 of the D.C. Code, published by West in 2012.
If you don't have a citation for a statute, find your state's code and go
 to the code's index. An index is a research tool found at the back of a
  book (or at the end of a set of books) that lists words or phrases that
 indicate where information is located within the book or set. If your
state's code is not available in print, Westlaw has code indexes in their
database. Lexis Advance offers indexes for selected state codes, while

            Bloomberg Law does not offer indexes for any statutes.

                                                                                                                                         11
                Finding a State Statute: Exercise

Justin has decided to purchase a home in Connecticut. Unfortunately,
  he insists on bringing Molly, his pet reindeer, down from Canada to
    live with him in Connecticut. Your firm represents Justin and is
                        advising him on the legality of his plan.
     Using the Connecticut statutes and the index to the Connecticut
 statutes, identify a law or regulation which can help you determine
    the legality of your client bringing and keeping Molly in his new
                                          Connecticut home.

                                                                                                                                        12
            What is a Popular Name Table?

Another common way to look up a statute is by its "popular
name". While not all statutes have a popular name, many of

  them do. Statutes may be named or referred to in popular
culture by the names of the legislators who are working on

   their passage, by the name of a particularly noteworthy
victim, or after a catchy phrase. Examples of statutes with

     popular names are the Patriot Act, the Mann Act, and
    Jessica's Law. Many statutory codes, most notably the
   United States Code, contain a tool at the end of the code
 which allows researchers to locate a statute by its popular
  name. The Popular Names Table allows you to look up the
popular name of a statute and find a citation for the session

                          law and/or the code section.

                                                                                                                                        13
 Go to http://codes.ohio.gov.
 Select Ohio Revised Code. Search
 "Peeping Tom." What code
 section(s) do you find?

Next, sign onto Westlaw. go to Ohio Statutes and Court Rules and
Locate the Ohio Statutes Popular Names Table. Search for "Peeping
Tom" in the Table. What code section(s) do you find?

                                                        How do the results from the Popular
                                                        Name Table search compare with the
                                                        results from searching the statutes?

                                                                                                                                         14
     What Are Reporters and Why Do They
                            Matter?

     Case law is published in reporters, which contain
      published cases for one or more jurisdictions in
   chronological order. While official reporters contain
  only the text of the case as issued by the court, some
reporters include additional features such as headnotes
and topics and key numbers. Headnotes are summaries
 of the points of law in the case written by editors, not
the court. Reporters can be jurisdictional, geographical,
 or subject-based. They can also be official or unofficial.

                                                                                                                                        15
             Federal Reporter System: Exercise

 The Federal Reporter is one example of a case reporter. The current
     Federal Reporter contains cases from 1993 to present from the

thirteen judicial circuits of the United States Court of Appeals. Below
    is a map of the United States. Using the Federal Reporter, please
    choose one color for each circuit and color the map based on the
                         geographic boundaries of each circuit.

                                                                                                                                       16
   What is a Digest?

 A digest collects all of the
  headnotes for cases and

arranges them by topic and
   key number. There are
  regional digests, federal

digests, state digests, and a
         national digest.

                                                                                                    17
Finding a Case Using a Digest: Exercise

                                                                       An elementary
                                                                school in New York

                                                                     is sponsoring an
                                                             after school program

                                                                where students are
                                                               working together to

                                                                      build a unicorn
                                                              statue. A parent has

                                                                  challenged this as
                                                                 she believes this is

                                                                     akin to teaching
                                                                 religion in schools.

                                                                         Using the key
                                                                        number digest
                                                                        system, find a
                                                             relevant key number
                                                                     and case in New
                                                                  York on this topic.

                                                                                                                18
                Updating Your Research in Print

Whether you are researching in a code, a reporter, a digest, a treatise
or any other legal resource, the final step to your research is updating

   your work. If you are using print materials, the document you are
         reading is only as up-to-date as when the book was printed.

  Because law is constantly changing, you should make sure to check
  the book's pocket part or supplement (if there is one). A pocket part
  (or a supplement) is a necessary update to a print book which takes
  the legal information in the book and updates it from the day it was
   published to the day the supplement was published. Always update

                                              your research!

                                                                                                                                         19
                   Using a Citator Service

  If you are reading a case, an administrative decision, a statute or a
rule, the final step to your research is updating your work. If you are
reading a case, you should use a citator service to verify that the case
has not been overturned or the law on which the case is based has not

                                   been significantly changed.
      The most well-known citator service is called Shepard's and is
 available on Lexis Advance. Other legal subscription databases have
  their own citator services. You may be familiar with these services
    from your experiences researching online. Citators use different
      colors, flags, and symbols to show you how a legal concept has

              progressed and changed since it was first announced.

                                                                                                                                         20
Secondary Sources: A Valid Shortcut for Legal
                               Research

   When you are first confronted with a legal research question you
know very little about, the most efficient way to attack the problem is

       to use a secondary source. Examples of secondary sources are
 treatises, practice books, law review articles, or legal encyclopedias.
  These resources are not law, but they explain law and can help you

      find primary sources on your research topic. If you can find a
secondary source on your research topic, you can use that resource as

          a gateway to other information in your research journey.

                                                                                                                                         21
                             Study Aids

Sometimes it feels like the most important resource in your
   law library is a study aid. There are different types of

study aids for different types of learners. Some study aids
 have checklists and some have example questions, but all

    study aids attempt to present difficult legal principles
    covered in your classes in an abbreviated and easy-to
  understand way. Some libraries have study aids in print
    and some libraries have study aids online, but all law

         libraries have some study aids for your review.

                                                                                                                                        22
                      The 10-Minute Rule

Have you ever gotten stuck on a research question? Did you
 start to sweat and feel anxious? Did you freak out? Don't!
  Contact a law librarian. Ask for help before the freak out
          starts! At our school, we have a 10 minute rule.
   If you have been looking for a resource or researching a
  question in good faith for ten minutes and you don't feel

like you have found anything or made any progress, stop by
 and speak with your law librarian. After ten minutes, you
  probably aren't making any progress on anything except

                    progressively frustrating yourself!

                                                                                                                                        23
    How To Contact a Law Librarian: Exercise

 Law librarians are here for you. We want to help you! You
can call us, email us, or stop by and speak with us. Some law

  libraries also have a chat service. Take a moment to find
and jot down contact information for your law librarians on

                                         this page.

                                    Call us at:

                                                    Email us at:

                                                                                                                                        24
25
  Acknowledgments

 The authors would like to thank
   Lucinda Harrison-Cox for her
  patience and support. We would

also like to thank our students for
      being a constant source of
                  inspiration.

                                                                                                                26
 About Us

Nicole Dyszlewski is the Research/Access Services
Librarian at Roger Williams University School of
Law Library. She is most passionate about
meaningful public access to legal information, her
new puppy (Boaty McBoatface), fresh brewed iced
tea from Tim Hortons, providing excellent
customer service to all library patrons, flip-flops,
increasing the public profile of law librarianship,
mass incarceration scholarship, and the inanity of
pop culture. Feel free to contact her with questions
about law librarianship or to discuss reality tv
at ndyszlewski@rwu.edu

Raquel M. Ortiz has been in library services for 27
years and is currently the law library dean and a
faculty member at the Roger Williams University
School of Law. Since arriving at RWU Law, Raquel
has implemented services and programs to support
and enhance student learning. In the process she
has learned that a bit of "learntertainment" can go
a long way. Always teetering at the intersection of
librarianship, legal research, and technology,
Raquel has discovered that coloring and other
crafts help engage her creative side and create
relaxing moments.

Liz Gotauco is the Head of Youth Services at the
Merrimack Public Library in New Hampshire.
Having grown up in a family of musicians, artists,
and teachers, she decided to be an overachiever
and do all of those things. This has left her with an
eclectic resume that includes professional acting
and costume design, an obsession with comics and
cosplay, rocking lead vocals in a cover band,
teaching theatre to young aspiring overachievers,
librarianship for kids and teens, and illustrating
this coloring book. She's utterly fulfilled and uber-
exhausted.

                                                                                          27
