Additive Manufacturing
Essentials

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

TIMOTHY E. SIMPSON, PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY
JOHN E. BARNES, THE BARNES GLOBAL ADVISORS
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2025 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). Under this license, any
user of this textbook or the textbook contents herein can share, remix, and build upon the content for
noncommercial purposes only. Any adaptations must be shared under the same type of license. In any case of
sharing the original or adapted material, whether in whole or in part, the user must provide proper attribution
as follows:

  - If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and
       HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution:
       "Access for free at openstax.org."

  - If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every
       physical page the following attribution:
       "Access for free at openstax.org."

  - If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format
       page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following
       attribution:
       "Access for free at openstax.org."

  - If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
       https://openstax.org/details/books/additive-manufacturing-essentials in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

Kendall Hunt and the Kendall Hunt Logo are trademarks of Kendall Hunt. The Kendall Hunt mark is registered
in the United States, Canada, and the European Union. These trademarks may not be used without the prior
and express written consent of Kendall Hunt.

COLOR PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-975076-55-9
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13    978-1-711494-07-4
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13       978-1-961584-65-5
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR     2025
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 RS 25
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                         When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                                Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                   Get started at openstax.org/details/books/additive-manufacturing-essentials

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Fundamentals of Additive Manufacturing 3

         Introduction 3
         1.1 The Components and Processes of of Additive Manufacturing 4
         1.2 Additive Manufacturing Processes 6
         1.3 The TBGA AM Maturity Model 7
         1.4 Reasons for Using AM 9
         Summary 12
         Review Questions 12
         Discussion Questions 15
         Key Terms 15

2 Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes 17

         Introduction 17
         2.1 Processes and Process Organization 17
         2.2 Vat-based Processes 21
         2.3 Powder Bed Processes 23
         2.4 Liquid-Addition Processes 27
         2.5 Molten Material-Addition Processes 29
         2.6 Solid Material-Addition Processes 33
         2.7 Supporting Processes 35
         Summary 38
         Review Questions 38
         Discussion Questions 38
         Case Questions 39
         Key Terms 39

3 AM Materials 41

         Introduction 41
         3.1 Polymer Materials 41
         3.2 Metallic Materials 50
         3.3 Metallic Materials Characteristics 55
         3.4 Ceramics and Other Materials 63
         Summary 65
         Review Questions 65
         Key Terms 66

4 Design for Additive Manufacturing 67

         Introduction 67
         4.1 Design Approach 68
         4.2 Design Optimization: Implementation while Considering Build Constraints 82
         4.3 AM Industry Design Challenges & Strategic Solutions 87
         Summary 91
              Review Questions 91
              Discussion Questions 92
              Case Questions 92
              Key Terms 92

   5 Certification 93

              Introduction 93
              5.1 Certification 94
              5.2 Nondestructive Testing (NDT) 98
              Summary 105
              Review Questions 105
              Key Terms 105

   6 Additive Manufacturing Qualification 107

              Introduction 107
              6.1 Qualification 107
              6.2 Production Acceptance Testing 117
              6.3 Fixed Designs and Processes, Change Management, and the Future of Certification and Qualification 118
              Summary 121
              Review Questions 121
              Key Terms 122

   7 The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread 123

              Introduction 123
              7.1 Digital Trends Throughout Manufacturing 124
              7.2 The Digital Thread in Design for Additive Manufacturing 127
              7.3 Processing a file for 3D printing 130
              7.4 Simulation 134
              7.5 The Digital Thread in AM Quality Assurance, Post-Processing, and Standards Alignment 138
              Summary 143
              Review Questions 143
              Discussion Questions 143
              Key Terms 143

   8 The Business of Additive Manufacturing 145

              Introduction 145
              8.1 Managing AM in Your Business 146
              8.2 Pre-Production to Production: Factors to Consider in a Business Case 148
              8.3 The Business Case: Definitions and Considerations 151
              8.4 AM Economics 157
              8.5 Sustainability Impacts of AM 165
              Summary 168
              Key Terms 168

         Index 169

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational initiative, it's
our mission to improve educational access and learning for everyone. Through our partnerships with philanthropic
organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies, we're breaking down the most common
barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax resources

Customization

Additive Manufacturing Essentials is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial ShareAlike 4.0
International (CC BY-NC-SA) license, which means that you can non-commercially distribute, remix, and build upon the
content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, under the same license.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or select only the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in
the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. Visit the Instructor Resources
section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art Attribution

In Additive Manufacturing Essentials, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and
license within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same
attribution to its original source. To maximize readability and content flow, some art does not include attribution in the
text. If you reuse art from this text that does not have attribution provided, use the following attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license. (Commercial entities should contact OpenStax to discuss reuse
rights and permissions.)

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. In addition, the rapidly changing field of additive manufacturing may result in portions of the textbook
becoming out of date. Since our books are web-based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past and pending errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print. The web view
is the recommended format because it is the most accessible - including being WCAG 2.2 AA compliant - and most
current. Print versions are available for individual purchase, or they may be ordered through your campus bookstore.

About Additive Manufacturing Essentials

Additive Manufacturing Essentials provides a clear, effective introduction to the core principles, technologies, and
methods in the field of additive manufacturing. Rooted in industry practice and innovation, the material presents
examples and approaches from an array of additive manufacturing companies, equipment producers, and software
developers. Additive Manufacturing Essentials provides new entrants to the field with a working knowledge of the
concepts and key applications of this critically important domain. Whether readers are engineers, scientists, fabricators,
production/operations managers, entrepreneurs, educators, or career-changers, additive manufacturing can play a
significant role in their studies and future careers. This offering is designed to help those students and professionals
grow conversant in additive manufacturing, so that they can use their knowledge in further studies and organizational
decision making.

Coverage and Scope

Additive Manufacturing Essentials begins with an overall introduction to the key characteristics, applications, and
industrial-organizational uses AM. The first chapter also introduces the AM maturity model, developed by The Barnes
Global Advisors, which serves as a theme throughout the course. The book then presents various AM methods, including
illustrated discussions of the main manufacturing approaches and 3D printing types. Subsequent chapters explore
materials, design, certification, qualification, and the digital thread. The book concludes with the business of AM, which
2 Preface

    aims to help readers apply what they've learned to their own organizations and workflows.

   Answers to questions in the book

    The answers to the end-of-chapter questions are intended for homework and assignments, and are therefore provided
    to instructors as instructor resources.

   About the authors

   Senior Contributing Authors

    Timothy E. Simpson, Pennsylvania State University
    John E. Barnes, The Barnes Global Advisors

   Contributing Authors

    Jennifer Coyne, The Barnes Global Advisors
    Chelsea Cummings, The Barnes Global Advisors
    David Dietrich, PADT, inc. Laura Ely, The Barnes Global Advisors
    Michael Hickner, Ph.D., Michigan State University and The Barnes Global Advisors
    Kirk Rogers, Ph.D., The Barnes Global Advisors
    Kevin Slattery, D.Sc., The Barnes Global Advisors

     Access for free at openstax.org
                             1 · Introduction 3

1  FUNDAMENTALS OF ADDITIVE
   MANUFACTURING

Figure 1.1 Additive manufacturing can take place in many types of spaces, using machines of almost any size. (credit:
Modification of "Maker Space Post-Finishing an Additive Manufacturing Part Made with a Formlabs Form 2 SLA 3D
Printer V2" by Formlabs/Flickr, CC-BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 The Components and Processes of of Additive Manufacturing
  1.2 Additive Manufacturing Processes
  1.3 The TBGA AM Maturity Model
  1.4 Reasons for Using AM

      Introduction

Humans are quite good at subtractive manufacturing. For millennia, we have been removing material to make things,
such shaping tools by striking stones together or carving pieces of wood to form a useful or artistic object. We developed
these techniques through trial and error, and passed knowledge first from generation to generation and eventually
across cultures. Later, humans learned how to isolate metal from rock, how to form it and combine it into alloys to meet
increasingly advanced needs. As you likely know, the history of humanity is often described in terms of these materials
and knowledge - the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age. Most of the items you see and use every day - from pens
to keyboards to cooking pots to contact lenses - are created based on techniques that, even if highly complex, are
considered to be "legacy" manufacturing. As humans have many times in our history, we have developed a new series of
techniques, known as advanced manufacturing. Additive Manufacturing is one of those forms of advanced
manufacturing, distinguished by the process of building an object one layer at a time.
4 1 · Fundamentals of Additive Manufacturing

  1.1 The Components and Processes of of Additive Manufacturing

   Learning Objectives

    By the end of this section, students will be able to:

       · Define commonly used terms.
       · Understand the building blocks of additive manufacturing.
       · Understand the digital workflow required for 3d printing a part.
       · Describe the STL file format

    Additive manufacturing is often referred to as "3D printing," which is an important component of the domain, but does
    not describe the entire process. 3D Printing is the act of making a 3-dimensional shape via a "printer," while additive
    manufacturing is everything needed to make that shape into a "part." Parts have requirements where form, fit and
    function are critical.

    To make a shape, the 3D printer adds the material where it is needed, most likely in a thin, essentially 2-dimensional
    layer. The printer only concerns itself with a 2D layer at any point in time. It creates a stack of these layers, incorporating
    spaces and other details to build a 3-dimensional shape that can have complexity, internal details, and doesn't typically
    require additional tooling to be considered complete. 3D printing is that additive approach, which is a major shift in
    innovation from legacy manufacturing. But as the box below demonstrates, 3D printing is only one aspect of additive
    manufacturing.

      The Four Building Blocks of AM

      Four building blocks are necessary for success in the world of AM: Machines, Materials, Digital, and People.

      Machines are the easiest to focus on, specifically the 3D printers, but our definition expands beyond the printers to
      include the machinery required to meet the part requirements.

      Materials
      The building block of materials includes material science, metallurgy, polymers, ceramics, welding, powder, wire
      manufacture, finishing steps, and possibly heat treatment. How we manufacture the materials and the changes they
      will undergo both as a feedstock and subsequently as a printed object are very important.

      Digital
      Within the building block of Digital, we encompass design, simulation, sensing, and essentially any data input or
      output.

      People
      The management and organization of people is an essential skill to be successful in AM due to the multidisciplinary
      and complex nature of AM. Skilling to include AM thinking alongside traditional design for manufacture has to be
      recognized and permeating those skills throughout a company is a challenge.

    Additive manufacturing has diverse process technologies. This diversity creates unique design spaces for shapes, sizes,
    materials, mechanical performance, etc. When we couple the mechanical operations with design, business, and
    qualification guidance, we need to seek a more overall comprehensive appreciation. For example, for a part to be
    qualified, we must first understand the requirements for that part. These requirements likely include both technical and
    commercial considerations. These requirements will eliminate some of the manufacturing processes as candidates. We
    then may need to consider what material is appropriate and the properties of that material in the manufacturing
    process. Now we get into the design of the part and the design of the build which will critically determine the cost of the
    part as well as the strength. And while design for manufacturing (DFM) is not a new topic, designing for additive
    manufacturing can be quite counterintuitive to those versed in legacy manufacturing. In this book, we weave together
    important topics to gain a strong, holistic understanding of additive manufacturing - which we'll often abbreviate as AM
    - including how it is done and where it can be used.

   Process Steps: Concept to Part

    The best place to start thinking about using AM is at the concept stage. Often, this is not a luxury afforded to an
    engineer working on a part, because they need to replace a part that is already designed. However, the concept stage is
    the most fertile because we are still conceiving the product requirements and because AM enables complexity. The

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               1.1 · The Components and Processes of of Additive Manufacturing 5

concept is the first opportunity to design to the requirements before we have a constraint of a specific manufacturing
method.
The AM journey requires a 3D file and follows a similar digital workflow regardless of the AM process employed. The
source for the future 3D object can originate from Computer Aided Design (CAD) or from a 3D scanning source such as
structured light, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), or Computed Tomography (CT). Once available in a 3D file, the
source data will be turned into an STL file.
The STL file format originally hails from stereolithography and can only describe the surface geometry of a three-
dimensional object. It does not relay any other information, including color, material, or texture. The STL file describes an
unstructured, triangulated surface by unit, and vertices of the triangles use a three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate
system. STL files contain no scale information and have arbitrary units. There are many efforts afoot to replace the STL
file because, while simple, it contains little real information making the task of tracking and documenting changes
difficult. One approach is to stay in the native CAD format which has the advantage that, if changes are made to the file
for printing, they could be traced back to the design file.
The build file is the next step in the workflow. The build file can be just a single part or part number but could also be
multiple parts, part numbers, test coupons, etc. It is very important to remember that the original engineering design
may or may not specify items like orientation during the build, but this a requirement for the build file. The build file is
very important to ensure consistent results, expected results, economic results and compliance. The build file should be
treated like a released engineering or manufacturing drawing. It is akin to a forging die that is employed to manufacture
parts over and over.
From here our build file will be sliced into finite 2D layers. Recall that the computers in 3D printing typically only concern
themselves with a layer at a time, so each slice represents a build layer. Once sliced, a tool path is generated, and the
shape can be printed.

Figure 1.2 From CAD to part. The 3D CAD model is saved as an STL file, which is processed by the slicing software. The
layer slices and tool path are next, followed by the actual printing via a 3D printer to produce the final, physical 3D
object.
Post-processing is the name given to a host of manufacturing processes employed after the 3D printing step. These
processes serve to finish an AM part by improving the appearance or material properties after it has been printed. These
processes could be, but are not limited to, material removal, thermal processing, and surface treatments. The printed
shape can be dimensionally measured to ensure consistency to the original drawing or source file.

  What Does STL Stand For?

  Similar to JPEG or GIF, the STL file name (or extension) is regularly used without much consideration to what it means.
  In the case of STL, this is helpful because there are several accepted terms associated with it. The abbreviation initially
  stood for stereolithography, a common additive manufacturing technique. But since STL files are used for other
  processes within additive manufacturing, it has been re-associated with two other terms. "Standard triangle
  language" refers to the surface of an object being broken into a series of triangles. And "standard tesselation
  language" refers to the surface being made up of a series of shapes (or tiles) that do not overlap. None of these
  perfectly describe all of the potential use cases of the STL file, so most people in the field simply use the abbreviation
  - just like other file extensions.
6 1 · Fundamentals of Additive Manufacturing

  1.2 Additive Manufacturing Processes

   Learning Objectives

    By the end of this section, students will be able to:
       · Define seven standard AM processes.
       · Describe the similarities and differences between the seven processes.

    Additive manufacturing has matured into a diverse set of technologies all of which share an adding, or layer by layer,
    approach. While AM can be segmented into seven broad categories, innovation is occurring so rapidly that hybrids and
    combinations of AM processes are frequently being brought to market.

    Figure 1.3 Selecting the AM process depends on the requirements of the part and the ability to answer three core
    questions: How is the layer created? How is the energy applied? How is the material applied? (credit: Modification of "3D
    Printed Objects" by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC-BY 2.0)
    Any AM process can be described with just three questions: How is the layer created? How is the energy applied? How is
    the material applied? If you can describe the process with this simplified view of AM, you can easily move to the next
    layer of detail.
    With the simplified view in mind, the seven broad methods employed in AM are:
    Binder Jetting - A manufacturing process in which a liquid bonding agent is selectively deposited to join powder
    materials.
    Layer - The layer is made by spreading powder across a bed and stepwise lowering the bed defined by the slice
    thickness.
    Energy - Two forms of energy are used: print ejectant which is deployed through a print head and contains a polymer
    adhesive to bind the particles together. Thermal energy is used to cure the adhesive in subsequent steps. In metals, a
    sintering or infiltration step is required.
    Material - The materials used must be in powder form but may be metal, ceramic or polymer.
    Directed Energy Deposition - A family of processes in which focused energy is used to fuse materials as they are being
    deposited.
    Layer - The layer is made by depositing one or more beads onto a substrate, which could be an existing part, with new
    deposits building either beside or on top of the previous beads.
    Energy - Two forms of energy are used: Thermal energy is used to melt the material in a fusion DED process akin to

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           1.3 · The TBGA AM Maturity Model 7

traditional welding. In a solid state DED process, kinetic energy accelerates powder particles to a high velocity splatting
them into the previous layer, creating a solid state metallurgical bond.

Material - The materials used may be in powder or wire form and are predominantly metal.

Material Extrusion - A process in which material is heated and delivered precisely through a nozzle or an orifice.

Layer - The layer is made by layering new deposits over the previous.
Energy - Two forms of energy can be used: Heat is applied to cause the material to flow through the nozzle. This is true
for all materials. For metals, a sintering step is required for bound particles but not for friction-based processes.

Material - The materials used can be polymer and/or metal where the polymer is a filament and the metal is a
particulate bound in the filament. The metal may also be a wire or particulate in the friction-based version.

Material Jetting - A process that selectively deposits droplets of build material through a print head.

Layer - The layer is made by selectively and precisely depositing the material in a desired location in an X-Y manner and
then stepping is defined by the slice thickness.

Energy - Two forms of energy are used. Print ejectant is deployed through a print head and contains a fluid to deliver the
target material. Thermal energy is used to cure the deposit. In metals, a sintering step is also required.

Material - The materials used can be polymer, metal or ceramic in solution with a liquid delivery agent.

Powder Bed Fusion - A process in which thermal energy selectively fuses regions of a bed or build area made of powder
particles.

Layer - The layer is made by spreading powder across a bed and stepwise lowering the bed as defined by the slice
thickness.

Energy - A beam of energy is used to fuse the particles together which could be a laser or an electron beam.
Material - The materials used must be in powder form but may be metal, ceramic or polymer.

Sheet lamination - An additive manufacturing process in which sheets of material are bonded to form an object

Layer - The layer is created by joining sheets of a material.
Energy - Flexible: ranges from a bonding agent to welding techniques like ultrasonics.
Material - Sheets of polymer, metal, paper & fibers

Vat Photopolymerization - An additive manufacturing process in which liquid photopolymer in a vat is selectively cured
by light-activated polymerization

Layer - The layer is created where the energy intersects the material to create the shape in a step wise fashion.
Energy - Focused energy in the form of a laser or focused light.
Material - Polymers, composites, and metals in photo curable polymers

1.3 The TBGA AM Maturity Model

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe a maturity model for AM adoption.
  · Understand the technological and people requirements for AM adoption.

The AM Maturity Model, used throughout the book, is a way to approach marrying the product requirements to the skills
and knowledge of AM. The Barnes Global Advisors (TBGA) pioneered the use of a maturity model to describe an
approach to adopting AM throughout a product or design lifecycle. The scenarios on the Y axis describe increasing
product or design complexity and therefore increasing product requirements. The X axis contemplates the necessary
learning to be able to deploy, make, or manufacture a part to meet the requirements.

It is normal for one to see the culmination of an organization's efforts in AM and want to replicate that success. Often,
this success was built on years of development and trial and error. Jumping straight into making complex parts (e.g.
Level 4) requires the highest level of skill and training. This is analogous to running a marathon. A runner trains
extensively to be prepared to finish a marathon race. Without training, you introduce a high risk which could include
8 1 · Fundamentals of Additive Manufacturing

    injury or worse.

    The AM Maturity Model contemplates both direct and indirect use of AM. At the lower levels, the indirect methods
    include prototypes (Level 0) and tooling (Level 1). In these efforts, AM is being deployed to support some other goal, but
    the AM part is not the part to be put in service. Prototyping and tooling are great places to begin an organization's
    journey in AM because of the reduced requirements.

    In the direct use of AM, the part made by AM is intended to go into service. This begins with replacing a legacy part with
    a part made by AM (Level 2) and is typically very restrictive from a design flexibility standpoint. Progressing to Level 3,
    the ability for AM to integrate complexity comes into play as several parts are unitized into a single assembly or part. At
    Level 4, the organization's design, materials, people, and equipment knowledge is so extensive they can make a part with
    unrivaled performance that is not only complex and unitized but also is multi-functional. Perhaps it is a structural part
    that carries a load but also serves to exchange heat or employ a sensor.

   Level 0

    Prototypes for product development or system testing describes parts made at this level. We may be interested in form,
    fit or function but not all three. Making pieces for product development assist us in visualizing how the product could be
    used, for example. In other scenarios, AM pieces are made as stand ins for limited duration testing. Level 0 is a great
    place to gain experience initially, because the requirements are often not as tough, the risk is lower, and the learning
    opportunity is greater. At this level, it is expected you will start to explore the types of AM equipment and materials but
    neither may be critical to success.

   Level 1

    As we continue the path of indirect parts, Level 1 use of AM is oriented at making tools or fixtures which are assistive in
    manufacturing or assembly of the final system. Making tooling has been a successful path for many organizations to
    reduce the cost of manufacturing for legacy processes that can have expensive or lengthy lead times for tooling, such as
    casting or reinforced polymer composites. The exploration of the machine type and mode narrows, and materials
    selection is more critical. In addition, traceability and/or configuration control increase in importance. You will also find
    that other entities like supply chain players become stakeholders in the outcome. Lastly, design thinking and AM
    thinking is starting to mature, as there is now more experience manufacturing components and using different types of
    machines.

   Level 2

    Now we begin the journey into direct application of AM, as these parts will enter service. At Level 2, the parts look very
    much like they did with legacy manufacturing methods. This could be due to many reasons such as AM being used to
    support spare parts, obsolescence or a very restrictive design space where the ability to make changes are minimal.
    There could be larger objectives to achieve, such as simply reducing risk by employing a new manufacturing method and
    seeing different materials performance. Whatever the reason, Level 2 presents a significant challenge, because the
    designer has little room to maneuver and the design was likely optimized for a different process. Later, we will describe
    the restrictive and opportunistic design space with modify for AM (MfAM) and design for AM (DfAM), but at Level 2,
    MfAM skills are more dominant than DfAM.

    The broader organization will become more involved in Level 2 as you will have to build a strategy for AM adoption and
    assess things like the supply chain as you are using a new technology, likely with new vendors, and/or new suppliers of
    materials or feedstock. Inspection, material specifications, process specifications and design allowables may also be
    important considerations to support manufacturing. The supply chain implications are discussed in more depth in
    Chapter 8 The Business of Additive Manufacturing.

   Level 3

    At this level, the AM skills are becoming more critical. As parts are being consolidated and joints or interfaces are being
    eliminated, likely a structural efficiency benefit is being sought. This efficiency will give rise to weight savings or better
    performance and endurance.

    Financially, the AM part will likely have fewer manufacturing steps and decreased assembly time, thus collapsing the Bill
    of Material (BOM), drawing count, vendors and touch labor to assemble.

    DfAM skills are now quite high, and you will understand that you may now have to start making design considerations
    for the additive manufacturing process. For example, if you redesign the part and make it too light, other considerations
    will come into play.

    The organization will continue to lean in to support the design and manufacture; computers and algorithms can

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              1.4 · Reasons for Using AM 9

mathematically design and optimize, but they have no consideration for practical aspects, such as a part's surrounding
environment. MfAM is still very relevant when it comes time to print the part successfully or meet the final part
dimensional requirements by adding stock during printing, for example, to be able to machine to final tolerances.

Level 4

At this Level, a part can only be made economically through use of AM. There are less examples of Level 4 parts today
due to the merging of the need for world class DfAM, supply chain support, marketing awareness and general
management support to acknowledge the need to integrate organizational awareness. The Level 4 part will have
unrivaled performance and will likely impact the system it sits within, thus driving the need for organization wide AM
awareness. There will be a need to fully appreciate the system level tradeoffs in design for additive manufacturing.

1.4 Reasons for Using AM

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Enumerate common reasons for using additive manufacturing.
  · Describe the requirements for choosing an AM process.
  · Enumerate industries where AM is in common use.

There are numerous reasons that people and organizations employ AM. Typically, we refer to the Project Management
Triple Constraint of Schedule, Scope (or Performance) and Cost as the fundamental considerations. Digging further into
the trinity, there are many sub-elements to consider.

      Schedule - Reducing production time or working inventory, compressing test or product development cycles,
      printing tools versus legacy means.
      Scope - Improving system and/or part performance through complexity or part count reduction, added
      functionality, improving durability, reducing CO2 emissions.
      Cost - Reducing cost of parts by improving assembly time and/or repeatability, reducing and/or expediting tooling
      time, design for AM improvements in part cost, reducing the number of parts that need to be produced, reducing
      the touch labor and processes in assembly, reducing cost to produce generally, and increasing revenue through
      enhanced performance.

To expand the Triple Constraints further, let's explore some additional characteristics of AM design:

Speed         Cost     Performance       Complexity  Design       Durability Lightweight   What
            Savings    Improvement                                                         Else?

no tooling   multiple  precise features  optimized    organic     design for  value added  supply
net shape       PCs     eliminate leak    internal    designs        stress     material    chain
 reduced      fewer                       fluid/air  geometric                     only      eco-
machining                    points      passages    flexibility                           friendly
            resources

Table 1.1 Why Use Additive Manufacturing? Additive manufacturing fulfills many business, product, and project goals.

Speed

Additive manufacturing improves time to market. AM provides a fast track from concept to production where complex
objects can be manufactured in a single process step. Innovations are designed, developed and tested more rapidly,
eliminating the need for expensive and time-consuming prototype fabrication.

Cost

Inevitably, designers and engineers learn that taking weight out of a part leads to faster printing or faster build times.
With traditional machining, more time on the mill often means lighter parts, but it costs more because of the time it
takes to produce the part. With additive manufacturing, as we are adding material in a layer wise fashion, we think about
weight and cost differently.

Complexity

This simply means that, with AM, parts can be designed with more complexity than before. As with all things, however,
there are limitations. These parts can more closely follow a load path and, therefore, be lighter or more efficient in
carrying load or stiffness.
10 1 · Fundamentals of Additive Manufacturing

    Design

     Sometimes this means adding design details in the form of functional features like cooling channels for tooling. Complex
     passages can be utilized, because there is no drilling required; therefore, you can manage the critical things like
     turbulent flow and pressure drops. This can lead to performance advantages when truly optimized. Other performance
     advantages allow the designer to include features that would otherwise have to be added in a secondary operation.

    Durability

     The durability of parts can be enhanced primarily through elimination of mating parts or surfaces. Elimination of
     weldments, brazes, fasteners, etc. create structural inefficiency. Unitization, or the combination of multiple parts via AM,
     is more efficient and therefore more durable. Increasing durability is also possible through local or bulk additions of new
     material. Repairing, locally supporting, or adding material has the benefit of making parts that may come in contact with
     other parts more durable. In some cases, the ability to add material to a specific location efficiently will improve the
     longevity of the part.

    Light Weighting

     The ability to make parts lighter than their legacy designs is one of the most exciting elements for engineers when first
     introduced to AM. Because we are adding material layer by layer, we can achieve lightweight structures. Conventional
     manufacturing is largely subtractive, meaning it continues to add cost the more we remove material. In AM, you don't
     pay for material that you don't add.

    Social

     AM has benefits to society and the environment. Using less material and fewer operations reduces energy consumption,
     transportation, and logistics costs which have a direct benefit on the environment primarily through the reduction of
     CO2 emissions.

   AM Process Selection

     How does an individual or an organization decide on which AM process or processes to use? It will always be a question
     of commercial and technical requirements. Commercially, we are interested in things like the annual demand or
     throughput of parts, cost versus the legacy manufacturing method, lead time, supply chain maturity and risk.
     Technically, the overall size of the part, the detail resolution, the material, part performance, inspection needs, and
     surface finish factor into which AM process is suitable.
     The combination of technical and commercial requirements creates a picture of what has to be true to deploy AM as a
     method. In one instance it may be as simple as we need a specific material and there are only one or two methods that
     use that material. In others, the overall size of the part will dictate the process selection. It could be that manufacturing
     speed and delivery of parts is a key driver as AM processes today still seem quite slow compared to their legacy
     manufacturing counterparts.

     Figure 1.4 Choosing an AM process involves assessing the product and business requirements. Choices of materials and
     processes lead to the directed outcome, answering the question "why this process?"

   AM is Interdisciplinary

     Just as AM process selection requires input from multiple groups within an organization, it is imperative that an AM

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       1.4 · Reasons for Using AM 11

project is also staffed with an appropriate skills mix. AM encompasses multiple fields of materials ranging from polymers
to metals and ceramics. Manufacturing specialists will be interested in feedstock and process sensitivities. Design
engineers have a newfound sense of freedom to design for complexity, but they need to consider which AM process is
going to be used and the associated tradeoffs.
The technical community needs to be engaged early and working with manufacturing, supply chain, and program
management which ultimately calls on the leadership to create an environment where the organization can be
successful with AM. If all the parties mentioned are not present at some point, the risk of the AM project becomes higher.
In Chapter 8 The Business of Additive Manufacturing, we further reflect on the organizational knowledge required for
successful AM adoption.

AM in Use Today

AM found early adopters in the Aerospace, Medical and Defense industries. These sectors are distinct as they have a high
mix and low volume of parts, meaning they make a low number of a lot of different parts. Tooling is particularly un-
economical for this scenario because the tooling amortization becomes a significant component of the per part cost, but
often hard to avoid.
The luxury goods and jewelry sectors learned that personalization brought with it a price premium and so have taken
AM into the mainstream. Similarly, dental applications are small and bespoke creating a natural fit. Energy sectors have
been researching AM for years as they share some similar characteristics to aerospace and in some cases even similar
materials. High value, low part quantities drive the Energy sector to avoid tooling solutions when possible.

Figure 1.5 Industries using additive manufacturing can be considered markets for the technology as well as for
equipment makers and for fabricators, designers, and other professionals.
Most recently, automotive and heavy transportation have found successful uses. In automotive several factors are
converging and driving intense interest in AM:
 1. Material substitution has matured and further light weighting now relies on re-design versus simply changing to

      aluminum from steel, for example.
 2. Electrification of cars needs lighter structures due to the mass of the batteries and electric motors.
 3. Performance and customization have shown to be a profitable segment using AM to make specialized components

      for higher end cars, like Formula 1.
All these industries are exploring the ability to create digital warehouses wherever possible to avoid keeping and paying
for inventories of costly spare parts some of which may also be facing issues with obsolescence.
12 1 · Summary

Summary

AM is akin to a family of children where each child is a different age and they are not all maturing at the same rate but
eventually, they will become strong contributors to society. It is important to keep this kinetic mindset as you progress
through the different chapters of the book. Here are four Ds to remember to prepare you for all the new AM
technologies and improvements.

  · Disruptive - AM doesn't work like previous methods of manufacturing. It is additive by inception which requires
      different conceptual thinking and design rules.

  · Diverse - AM is a family of technologies but if you learn the Simplified View of AM: Layer, Energy and Material, you
      can likely describe any process.

  · Deployed - How an organization deploys AM is important. The TBGA AM Maturity Model provides a conceptual
      roadmap to build skills and grow the organizational knowledge to successfully adopt AM.

  · Developing - Along with the how you deploy AM, the 4 Building Blocks create a successful construct to reduce risk
      and friction within an organization as AM is inherently interdisciplinary.

Review Questions

 1. The Four Building Blocks of AM are:
       a. Layer formation, Energy, Materials and Printers
       b. Machines, Materials, Digital, People
       c. Machines, Materials, DfAM, Innovation
       d. 3D printers, materials, design, people

 2. When referring to Machines within the Four Building Blocks, we refer to the 3D printers
       a. True
       b. False

 3. AM thinking is a key element of which Building Block?
       a. Machines
       b. Materials
       c. Digital
       d. People

 4. True or False, polymers have been used in AM longer than metals and are more mature
       a. True
       b. False

 5. Which statement is most correct?
       a. All of the AM processes that can be invented, have been
       b. AM is limited to non critical applications and consumer goods
       c. Management and the organization of people is essential to be successful in AM
       d. DfAM is another term for lattice structures and designs that cannot be made conventionally

 6. The best time to start thinking about using AM is
       a. At the concept stage
       b. To make spare parts
       c. When all other good options have been exhausted
       d. With a big budget

 7. The 3 dimensional data to make a 3D printed part comes from
       a. Computer Aided Design (CAD) files
       b. 3D scanner
       c. MRI or CT scans
       d. All of the above

 8. Which of these statements is most true about the STL file format?
       a. It can only describe the surface geometry of a 3 dimensional object
       b. It is in metric units

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         1 · Review Questions 13

       c. It is used by the designer to designate features like color and material
       d. It is interchangeable with CAD

 9. Which of these statements is applicable to the build file?
       a. It can be a single part or multiple parts
       b. Controlling the build file is important to ensure consistent results
       c. It is similar to a manufacturing drawing
       d. All of these statements are applicable

10. Which is not a component of the Digital Workflow?
       a. 3D model
       b. Copy/Paste of CAD for management briefings
       c. DfAM
       d. The Build file

11. Which is the least commonality of all AM processes?
       a. A layer by layer approach
       b. Use of powders
       c. They can be described with describing the layer, energy and material
       d. Starting at the design concept phase

12. Which is not a question used to define any AM process?
       a. How is the layer created?
       b. How is the energy applied?
       c. How is the DfAM applied?
       d. How is the material applied?

13. The material in Binder Jetting is applied by which statement?
       a. As a glue via the print head
       b. As a powder in a bed
       c. As a wire or filament
       d. As a sheet

14. The material in Directed Energy Deposition is applied by which statement?
       a. As a sheet
       b. As a powder in a bed
       c. As a wire or filament
       d. As a powder or filament

15. This statement is true of which AM process? The layer is created by spreading a layer of powder in a bed.
       a. Powder Bed Fusion
       b. Binder Jetting
       c. Material Jetting
       d. A and B

16. Which AM process is least compatible with metals?
       a. Vat Photopolymerization
       b. Material Extrusion
       c. Binder Jetting
       d. Material Jetting

17. The AM Maturity Model describes an approach to match product requirements and the skills needed to meet them
      in what way?
       a. Go for the biggest return on investment
       b. Print any part, any time, anywhere
       c. A risk adjusted path to spend money
       d. A risk adjusted path for learning as product requirements get tougher
14 1 · Review Questions

18. In which of the following processes would you expect to find a high-energy laser?
       a. A Directed Energy Deposition system using 100% titanium wire
       b. A Binder Jet system with 98% steel powder and 2% plastic
       c. A Material Extrusion system with 60% steel powder and 40% plastic

19. Which of the following is an example of a Level 2 design?
       a. A clip made via Material Extrusion to test a new design of a prosthetic leg
       b. Spare parts for a railroad car that are out of production
       c. A fully designed for AM hydraulic manifold that has a reduced part count
       d. A rocket nozzle that has internal passages to cool and reduced part count which improve performance

20. Which statement is most true when considering the TBGA AM Maturity Model?
       a. Contemplating the use of both directly manufactured parts as well as tooling to make parts
       b. Mimicking a current part is a good example of a Level 4 design
       c. Level 4 is where the most value is and the where efforts should begin
       d. It is methodology for an organization to match its product requirements to its competitors

21. The Project Management Triple Constraint is
       a. Schedule, Scope and Labor
       b. Cost, Scope and Value
       c. Schedule, Scope and Cost
       d. Performance, Schedule and Budget

22. Which was not discussed as a use case for employing AM?
       a. Speed - AM improves time to market
       b. Complexity - Design freedoms allow for complex designs
       c. Durability - Consolidating parts eliminates joints
       d. Cost - Use AM to apply pressure on current vendors

23. True or False: When choosing an AM process, only technical requirements are used.
       a. True
       b. False

24. Which of the following is not a good example as an important consideration on how to choose an AM process?
       a. The surface finish attainable
       b. The part must be made from Ti 6Al4V
       c. The company owns a Powder Bed Fusion machine
       d. The annual demand is 865 parts a year

25. Of the AM process types discussed, which of the following is the best list of those that use powder in any way as a
      feedstock?
       a. Powder Bed Fusion, Binder Jet Processing, Directed Energy Deposition, Material Extrusion, Material Jetting
       b. Powder Bed Fusion, Binder Jet Processing, Directed Energy Deposition, Material Extrusion, Vat
             Photopolymerization
       c. Powder Bed Fusion, Binder Jet Processing, Directed Energy Deposition
       d. Powder Bed Fusion, Binder Jet Processing, Directed Energy Deposition, Material Extrusion, Vat
             Photopolymerization, Material Jetting, Sheet Lamination

26. Materials Engineers are important team players in AM because they can contribute to which of the following?
       a. Assessing the impact of property anisotropy, or if printed parts will exhibit different properties in the build or
             vertical direction
       b. Applying materials science as to whether a polymer material can be used in Material Extrusion
       c. Assessing the necessity of post build processing to meet requirements
       d. All of the above

27. Design Engineers are an important AM team player as they contribute to which of the following?
       a. Cost through minimizing print time with efficient designs
       b. Cost by taking into account post processing up front

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    1 · Discussion Questions 15

       c. Cost and performance by optimizing build file
       d. All of the above

28. What differentiates Material Extrusion from the other AM processes?
       a. Can be plastic or metallic
       b. The material is deposited through layers in the X and Y direction
       c. The material is extruded through a nozzle, die, or orifice
       d. All of the above

29. Which is a true statement?
       a. All AM processes are about the same level of maturity
       b. There is one AM process that will ultimately be chosen as the best
       c. AM is dynamic and growing rapidly
       d. AM will replace most of manufacturing in the next 20 years

Discussion Questions

30. What is the primary distinction between 3D printing and Additive Manufacturing?

Key Terms

1.1 The Components and Processes of of Additive Manufacturing

STL

1.2 Additive Manufacturing Processes

Binder Jetting, Material Extrusion, Directed Energy Deposition, Material Jetting, Powder Bed Fusion, Sheet Lamination,
Vat Photopolymerization
16 1 · Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
                             2 · Introduction 17

2  CORE AM TECHNOLOGIES AND
   SUPPORTING PROCESSES

Figure 2.1 The Patent that ignited an industry. Chuck Hull's patent titled, "Apparatus for production of three-dimensional
objects by stereolithography" became the first commercial patent associated with a new technology known as
stereolithography. Stereolithography, as a process, was the beginning of modern additive manufacturing and is still
largely used today for prototyping and other applications in thousands of factories, schools, and other environments.
(Credit: Charles A Hull, Patent US4575330, retrieved from https://patents.google.com/patent/US4575330A/en)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Processes and Process Organization
  2.2 Vat-based Processes
  2.3 Powder Bed Processes
  2.4 Liquid-Addition Processes
  2.5 Molten Material-Addition Processes
  2.6 Solid Material-Addition Processes
  2.7 Supporting Processes

      Introduction

Within this chapter, we will walk through the various technologies and supporting processes used in additive
manufacturing. These will include additive polymer, metallic and ceramic processes. In addition, we will present
supporting technologies that transform AM from initially fabricated object to the completed part.

2.1 Processes and Process Organization

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe the basic categorization of AM technologies originally developed by ASTM.
  · Describe the limitations of ASTM definitions.
  · Apply the AM subfunctions.

During the early 2000s, engineers were continually inventing new AM machines and technologies. With each new
development, they brought forth a new process with specific advantages and disadvantages in relation to others that
already existed. These new AM technologies required different types of energy sources, feedstocks, and material types,
and it soon became confusing for people - even those with deep expertise and experience - to understand exactly what
type of AM was being discussed.
18 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

To solve this confusion, in 2012, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) F42 committee defined seven
categories of AM processes, as follows:

  · VAT Photopolymerization - process in which liquid photopolymer in a vat is selectively cured by light-activated
      polymerization

  · Material Jetting - process in which droplets of build material are selectively deposited
  · Binder Jetting - process in which a liquid bonding agent is selectively deposited to join powder materials
  · Material Extrusion - process in which material is selectively dispensed through a nozzle or orifice
  · Powder Bed Fusion - process in which thermal energy selectively fuses regions of a powder bed
  · Sheet Lamination - process in which sheets of material are bonded to form a part
  · Direct Energy Deposition - process in which focused thermal energy is used to fuse materials by melting as they

      are being deposited

By grouping AM technologies into seven different types, it became easier for people to understand exactly what type of
AM technology was being described. However, the development of process variants and hybrid AM processes began to
accelerate at an unprecedented pace. By 2019, processes were being created that did not fit neatly into the seven
categories.

To maintain the classification method and develop a more logical way to differentiate between the technologies, experts
began looking at the AM process itself in combination with the subfunctions are used to create a part. Specifically, how
each Layer is created, where or how the Material feedstock is added to the layer and what Energy source is used during
the process.

Additional post-processing and, sometime, Densification steps, described below, may also be required for some
processes. Table 2.1 defines the options for each of these technologies and how often they are required.

                                   Remove             Subtractive  Process for  Process for  Heat Treat/Cure for
                                 Supports or          process for    Surface     Material            Material
                                  Substrate           Dimensions      Finish      Density
                                                                                                 Performance

            Vat                  Very often           Rare         Sometimes    Rare         Sometimes
Photopolymerization

Material Extrusion               Very often           Sometimes    Sometimes    Rare         Rare

Power Bed Fusion                 Very often           Sometimes    Sometimes    Rare         Very often

Directed Energy                  Sometimes            Sometimes    Sometimes    Rare         Very often
   Deposition

Material Jetting                 Very often           Rare         Sometimes Sometimes       Rare

Binder Jetting                   Rare                 Sometimes    Sometimes Sometimes       Very often

Sheet Lamination                 Very often           Sometimes    Rare         Rare         Rare

Table 2.1 Overview of downstream processing requirements for each AM process (Original data compiled by TBGT).

For example, the Material Extrusion process is characterized by: a) wire material feedstock commonly known as filament,
b) mechanical fusion from a nozzle, using c) liquification as the means to push the feedstock through the nozzle,
resulting in a d) fully dense part. By deconstructing AM processes into three distinct subfunctions of material, layers, and
energy sources, and an optional fourth, densification when required, an unlimited number of AM processes can be
mapped that stretch beyond the limits of the limited ASTM process definitions.

Energy Source

The energy source subfunction describes how the AM process initiates to create a chain of events that produces AM
hardware. Using thermal energy and/or pressure overcomes the material flow stress to change the physical
characteristics of the material feedstock. This can be accomplished using a number of different technologies, these
include:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   2.1 · Processes and Process Organization 19

  · Laser, which is a device that emits a special type of light that can be focused in a tight spot.
       Nd:YVO4 (aka UV): Used in commercial SLA machines to generate ultraviolet laser energy
       Nd:YAG: Used in some metal powder bed fusion machines. Typically, older machines CO2: Used in SLS polymer
           machines
       Yb-fiber: Used in most metal powder bed fusion machines and DED blown powder or wire fed machines

  · Plasma: Similar to conventionally manufacturing process known as plasma arc welding (PAW), AM machines have
      been outfitted with PAW deposition heads to build up freeform structure

  · Fluid Flow: Spouts a liquid that is made up of nanoparticles of ceramic or metallic material to freeform build a part.
      This category may include low pressure and temperature deposition process that deposits a variety of materials
      through an inkjet printing head system. Materials could be conductive for circuitry or polymer based.

  · High Pressure Gas: A gas is compressed at a high pressure to act as a catalyst to the remaining process.
  · Electrical Resistance: An energy source that opposes the flow of electrical current in a circuit, thereby converting

      electrical energy to thermal energy
  · Compression: The phase transformation of a solid material to a liquid typically through a compression and/or

      material sheering in a heated process.
  · Electron Beam: A discharging of a stream of electrons generated by magnetic and electric fields

Material Feedstock

Material feedstock is defined as the raw material form factor that is used at the beginning of the AM process, that is
ultimately, physically transformed by the energy source. These may be in the forms of the following:

  · Liquid
       Epoxy based photopolymer
       Nano particle slurry

  · Powder Either metallic or polymeric
       Stationary before the energy source is applied
       Dynamically moving when the energy source is applied

  · Wire Typically, in the form of conventional welding wire that is ordered in spools
  · Polymer filament A polymer monofilament feedstock that comes in spools
  · Pellets of polymer Similar to injection molding feedstock. Resin pellets created specifically for engineering plastic

      applications
  · Sheets Sheets or foil made from metal, plastic, paper or other fibrous material
20 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

     Figure 2.2 Additive manufacturing process materials come in many forms, including powder and liquid. (credit:
     Modification of "Additive manufacturing process material" by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Layer Creation

     Once the raw material is physically transformed into the AM processing material form factor, new layers are created
     during the AM process fabrication. As such, the layer is created with the energy and material coming together at a
     focused point. The following are ways that AM layers are formed:

        · Curing: A change in physical state of transformation within a material. The material is hardened by a cross linking of
            polymer chains typically from a liquid solution to a solid.

        · Welding: Joining of additive layers using high thermal energy to melt the feedstock together thereby creating a
            fusion of metallic or polymer layers into a homogenous structure

        · Mechanical fusion from nozzle: Joining liquified polymer material together by welding a heated bead of material
            to an already cooled region of polymer material

        · Kinetic energy: The successive buildup of layers by impacting new material on top of previously impacted material
            to form a thick coating or structure

        · Ultrasonic energy: The bonding of materials using an ultra-high frequency sound waves that is vibrates material
            thereby merging feedstock together to form a mechanical layered bond

        · Friction: The use of a tool or rotating body to locally increase temperature of a mater to allow solid state bonding.
     For some of the layer creation method, a material other than the feedstock can be applied. For example, a low-melting
     polymer powder used to fuse sheet materials together, an agent that increases the feedstock's ability to absorb energy
     and fuse, or that prevents fusion for control of features.

    Full Densification

     Though not a strict definition, full densification is an aggregate of each layer creating hardware that results in a structure
     which is greater than 99.5% dense directly from the machine without post-processing steps being necessary. These post-
     processing steps would include other non-AM related processes such as sintering, ultraviolet curing, etc. In the
     densification sub function, it is a binary decision. Will the part that is removed from the AM machine exhibit 99.5%
     microstructural density or not?

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          2.2 · Vat-based Processes 21

2.2 Vat-based Processes

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:
  · Provide a baseline description of vat-based AM processes.
  · Differentiate based on the nuances of SLA, DLP and LCD technologies.

Stereolithography (SLA) is the most common vat-based process. It has traditionally held the title of being one of the
oldest 3D printing technologies still on the market and continued to be used daily throughout medical, industry and
educational sectors. The SLA vat size ranges from 100mm3 to 2100 x 700 x 800 mm.

Figure 2.3 SLA parts with supports SLA parts constructed with support material. The thicker oval chain links are the
parts being created ,and the thinner lattice structures above the chain links are the support materials. (credit:
Modification of "A Functional Chain Printed on a Formlabs Form 2 SLA 3D Printer" by Formlabs/Flickr, CC-BY 2.0)
Derivative technologies to SLA include Digital Light Projection (DLP) and Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) masking systems.
DLP is an AM process where a projector screen is used to cure photopolymer resin by projecting pixels of light using a
digital micromirror device. LCD, also known as masked SLA, uses a liquid crystal display to mask projects one full layer at
a time using UV light emitting diodes as a light source. Resolution on the XY axis depends on the LCD screen pixel size.
We will highlight each of the major characteristics of each 3D printing subsystem to distinguish the difference among
the processes (SLA, DLP, LCD).

Material Feedstock

Generally, SLA, DLP, and LCD use similar materials: ultraviolet-sensitive photo curable liquid resins. The UV sensitive
liquid material is filled in a tank, or vat, which holds the material. The type of liquid resin depends on the size of the
machine and the machine's UV laser wavelength energy. For example, the small desktop SLA systems have a laser
wavelength of approximately 395 nm.
Material options include:

  · ABS-like
  · Polypropylene-like
  · Epoxy
  · Polyurethane
  · Silicone
22 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

        · Cyanate Ester
        · Urethane Methacrylate
     Once the laser discharges into the material feedstock, a solid structure is formed layer upon layer. The resultant part is
     considered a "green part," whereas it is not at full material strength. Green parts are removed from the vat and post-
     processed in a UV light chamber to reach full material strength.
     DLP energy systems use a wavelength ranging from 400 nm up to 680 nm. Due to the differences in wavelengths, the UV
     sensitive liquid that is held in the vat must be compatible with the DLP system.
     Similarly, LCD energy systems use a wavelength from 405 nm for UV-based versions and royal blue 450 nm for daylight
     versions.
     In summary, SLA, DLP and LCD all use a vat-based material feedstock system with similar material types, however, the
     feedstock itself must be compatible with the light wavelength for each respective technology to produce optimal parts.

    Energy Sources

     SLA: As discussed in the material section, for SLA systems, the energy source is a UV laser. The energy from the laser
     partially cures the liquid material, and the specific wattage varies from the large industrial SLA machines that can have
     up to 800mW to the small desktop machines of 400mW. The laser spot size governs how small of features one may be
     able to print and is steered in the X-Y plane by a set of galvanometer mirrors
     DLP: The DLP systems cure resin with a much different approach than the laser SLA systems. The digital light projector
     flashes images of layers onto the vat. A digital micromirror device (DMD) selectively directs the light. DLP printers
     produce layers made up of "voxels" the 3D equivalent of pixels"
     LCD: LCD technology is similar to DLP, with the light flashing images with LEDs. In this case, a screen reveals only the
     pixels necessary for the current layer. The screen eliminates the need for a special device to direct the light.

    Process Architecture

     SLA: The platform lowers by a layer thickness and a vacuum pumping smooths out any disturbances in the surface of the
     liquid material using a metal re-coater blade. There are two distinct approaches to the build plate. Some SLA
     technologies have a platform dropping, top-down laser approach, other SLA technologies have a platform lifting,
     bottom-up projection. For clarity regarding the distinction, reference the images below.

                                  Figure 2.4 (a) SLA platform dropping approach (b) SLA platform raising approach
     No matter if the build platform raises up during fabrication or lowers, the basic machine anatomy is made up of:

        · Laser/Light Source
        · Mirror/Scanning Galvanometers

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       2.3 · Powder Bed Processes 23

  · Build Platform and Motion System
  · Vat (Liquid Resin)
  · Computer / HMI

The laser beam is columnated through a series of optics and steered directionally into the vat of liquid resin using
scanning galvanometers as shown. The liquid resin is temporarily cured using a process known as photopolymerization.

DLP and LCD: DLP and LCD processes exhibit the same processing architecture as SLA machines and may also be
platform dropping or platform raising. However, the major difference between SLA and DLP/LCD is the energy source,
which is less expensive to manufacture for DLP and even less expensive for LCD. As highlighted in the DLP energy
sources subsection, DLP technology uses tiny mirrors to project an image, while the LCD machines project LED based
light energy.

Part removal

SLA, DLP and LCD: All SLA based processes may require sacrificial support material to be designed into the part to
support features of a part. This supporting material will be in either tension for platform lifting machines or in
compression for platform dropping machines. In either condition, extreme care must be taken to gently remove the
support material after curing.

The actual parts fabricated during the SLA, DLP or LCD process may go through a rinsing system after fabrication to
remove all loose resin from the part before being placed in a UV light booth for final curing.

2.3 Powder Bed Processes

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Understand the foundation of:
       Powder Bed Electron Beam.
       Powder Bed Fusion Laser Metal.
       Selective Laser Sintering Polymer.
       Binder jet.

Powder Bed Fusion Laser Metal System Architecture

For metallic powder bed systems, the basic machine architecture consists of the following:

  · Powder Distribution System
       Powder Feed Tank or Hopper
       Roller, Rake or Knife

  · Heat Source and Control System
       Laser with Optics
       Electron Beam with Magnetic Coil

  · Build Platform and Motion System
  · Build Plate
  · Gas System or Vacuum Chamber
  · Computer / HMI
24 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

                                           Figure 2.5 Basic architecture of a metal powder bed fusion machine

    Recoating systems

     The recoating system is a critical aspect of powder-based AM processes. It ensures that the layer is uniform and even,
     and it controls the thickness of the layer. Recoating, then, influences the structure, shape, and function of the part.
     Common recoating systems are described below.

        · Roller - The roller system, offered in a few powder bed fusion laser metal systems, affords the ability for consistent
            powder spreading without risk of catching on previously melted features that may have heaved out of the powder
            during fabrication. In some systems the roller additionally provides a downforce that compacts the powder bed,
            which is useful in materials systems that have some degree of compressibility.

        · Hard knife blade - While not as forgiving as the roller, this system is found in most powder bed fusion laser metal
            systems and electron beam melting systems and is made of a blade that spreads the powder evenly. This offers
            superior powder spreading consistency over the roller method. Blades can be made of several different materials
            from hardened steels, to erosion resistant cobalt alloys such as stellite to ceramics.

        · Soft gasket wiper blade - Offered as an option on many powder bed fusion laser metal systems. This type of
            system acts as a hybrid approach to powder spreading by allowing for superior powder spreading, while at the
            same time, remaining flexible enough to accommodate the occasional feature heaving from the powder bed during
            fabrication.

        · Dosing wheel systems - This system is designed to dose, or drop a measured amount of feedstock material over
            the bed as the recoating system traverses the print bed. Dosing is coordinated with the motion of the recoating
            mechanism so each area of the bed receives a uniform dose. Dosing wheel systems are often followed by a soft
            gasket-style wiper blade to ensure uniformity. As designed today, dosing wheel systems can require feedstocks with
            high flowability requirements than the other recoating system styles.

    Energy sources

        · Laser: The Yb-fiber laser is by far the most common laser found in commercial metal powder bed fusion machines.
            Depending on the relative scale of the machine, this laser can be specified from 100W to 1000W. Other lasers for

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       2.3 · Powder Bed Processes 25

      specific applications, like green for printing copper are available.
  · Electron Beam: The electron beam gun is used in powder bed electron beam machines. This gun is capable of over

      3000W of electron energy for metallic fusion, and consists of a filament used to generate electrons, and a strong
      magnet used to accelerate them towards the build layer.

Material Feedstock

Typically, the powdered material used to date for both laser and EBM systems are different in terms of the powder
particle size distribution range. Most Laser Powder Bed Fusion users specify finer PSDs, such as 15-45 microns, whereas
EBM powder lots are typically specified at larger PSD ranges, such as 45-105 microns. This is because the EBM process
runs at an elevated temperature, and fine powders have a higher driving force for sintering which results in powder cake
that is difficult to exhume parts from.

Common materials used in metal powder bed fusion laser machines include Aluminum, Tool Steel, Cobalt Chrome,
Copper, Nickel Alloys, Tungsten, Stainless Steel, and Titanium.

Common materials used in metal powder bed electron beam machines include Titanium, Cobalt Chrome, Niobium, Pure
Copper, and Nickel Alloys.

Selective Laser Sintering - Polymer System Architecture

For Selective Laser Sintering - Polymer Systems, the basic machine architecture consists of the following:

  · Powder Distribution System
       Powder Feed Tank or Hopper
       Roller or Hard Blade

  · Heat Source and Control System
       Laser with Optics

  · Build Platform and Motion System
  · Build Plate
  · Gas System
  · Computer / HMI

Recoating systems

  · Roller - The roller system, used in SLS systems, affords the ability for consistent powder spreading without risk of
      catching on previously melted features that may have heaved out of the powder during fabrication.

  · Hard knife blade - While not as forgiving as the roller, this system is found in EOS SLS systems and is made of a
      hardened steel blade that spreads the powder evenly. This approach offers superior powder spreading and layer
      thickness consistency over the roller method.

Energy sources

The energy source for the polymer SLS systems is a CO2 laser. In CO2 lasers, the gas CO2, fills a tube electrified using a
DC or AC current to induce the lasing. 10.6 m is the most widely used wavelength for SLS polymers.

The laser wattage specified for polymer SLS machines can vary depending on the specific polymer being fused, but a
range between 20-50W will typically cover most of the polymer powders commercially available.

Material Feedstock

Though not as stable in wattage as fiber lasers, the wavelength of the CO2 laser offers compatibility with the semi-
crystalline polymers used in SLS. Therefore, the commercially available materials used in the SLS process are the
following semi-crystalline polymers:

  · Semicrystalline
       Polyamide
       Polypropylene
       Polyaryletherketones

There are also limited cases of amorphous polymers being printed in SLS. These include:

  · Amorphous
       Elastomers
       Polystyrene (used for indirect tooling patterns)
26 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

    Binder Jet Technology System Architecture

     ASTM defines binder jet technology as an additive manufacturing process in which liquid bonding catalyst is selectively
     deposited to join powder materials. Once joined, the parts are fired in a sintering oven to melt out of the bonding
     catalyst and form a dense part. For binder jet machines, which range from machine size from 100mm3 to 10m3. The
     basic machine architecture consists of the following:

        · Powder Distribution System - Powder Feed and Leveling Roller
        · Binder Printhead
        · Build Platform and Motion System
        · Build Plate
        · Computer / HMI

    Recoating system

        · Roller - The roller system, typically used in direct manufacturing systems, affords the ability for consistent powder
            spreading from the feed bin.

        · Blade - Blade based systems are common in the sand and aggregate printing used in the foundry industry. These
            systems typically consist of a moving hopper containing the aggregate. The hopper deposits the aggregate on the
            powder bed, and connected hard recoater blade that ensures good layer uniformity. Vibration and/or rotary
            distribution systems are used to uniformly fill the moving hopper.

     One of the biggest advantages to using binder jet technology is that no sacrificial supports need to be produced with the
     parts. The powder itself self supports part made from the process.

    Energy source

     The energy source used for binder jet printing is the ink jetting process itself. The ink jet deposition from the print head
     flows droplets of a catalyst material that acts like a glue to `bind' the catalyst material to the raw material loaded in the
     powder bed.

    Material Feedstock

     As the binder jet process requires no heated physical transformation, a number of different materials are available for
     printing. The following list of materials are commercially available for binder jetting:

        · Ceramics
             Silicon Carbide
             Alumina
             Zirconia
             Boron Carbide
             Silica
             Sand

        · Metals
             Titanium
             Tool steel
             Stainless steel
             Inconel
             Tungsten
             Tungsten Carbide

    Curing

     In many binder jet processes, the printed part contains binder that is partially cured during the print process. This is
     known as the brown stage. In order to develop sufficient binder strength to be able to handle the parts, the entire build
     box is thermally cured in an oven at moderate temperature (between 100 and 300 C). After curing the parts are in the
     green stage, and can be removed from the build box.

    De-powdering

     De-powdering is the act of removing unfused powder from fused powder and is typically accomplished by vacuuming of
     the unbound material out of the print bed, followed by layerwise removal of the printed objects.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 2.4 · Liquid-Addition Processes 27

Debinding, Infiltration and Sintering

For direct manufacturing operations, after printing is complete, the parts are placed in a high temperature furnace for
either the process of infiltration or sintering. Because the binder content is typically less that 5% by weight, a separate
de-binding step is rarely used in BJP processes. Once parts are in the furnace, the binder is melted out burned or
vaporized from the part early in the thermal cycle, and separated from the raw material powder, leaving voided areas.
This is what is known as debinding. At this point in the process, the part exhibits between 50%-75% porosity, depending
on the density of the powder bed, and initial binder content.

  · Infiltration - In infiltration another material is introduced, such as bronze, that wicks into the part void areas,
      resulting in lower porosity. The infiltrated material has typical mechanical properties between the base material and
      the infiltrate so is used for prototyping, art pieces and consumer products like jewelry.

  · Sintering - Alternatively, the part is placed in an even higher temperature furnace directly after de-powdering to go
      through a sintering process. During early stages in this process, the raw material powder is fused together, and as
      temperature increases begins the process of densification. Densification can be thought of as a process whereby the
      individual powder particle centers move towards each other, resulting in a shrinkage of the part. As the part
      densifies, the porosity present after printing curing and de-binding is eliminated, resulting in a solid piece of the
      printed material.

During these secondary processes, it is important to note that significant shrinkage of the part will occur. Shrinkage may
be as much as 20%-30% by volume if sintering process is used, whereas if the infiltration process is used, shrinkage may
only be 1- 3% of the part volume.

Hewlett Packard has commercialized a binder jet technology known as Multi Jet Fusion (MJF). MJF is similar to traditional
binder jet processes, however, with two notable differences. 1) the materials used in MJF are nylon polymers instead of
metal and ceramic 2) the parts are heated at each layer of fusion, therefore eliminating any post-processing step.

Like all binder jet processes, MJF affords the ability to rapidly produce a large quantity of plastic parts, nested in all three
dimensions within the build chamber, without the need for sacrificial support structures. As such, this technology is
meant to compete more with the injection molding industry, but with the notable difference of being able to print
complex parts that may be difficult to injection mold.

2.4 Liquid-Addition Processes

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Understand material jetting.
  · Comprehend slurry-based AM systems.
  · Grasp the concept of direct ink write systems.

Material Jetting System Architecture

Material jetting is an AM process in which droplets of specialized materials sometimes referred to as ink are selectively
applied to a build surface. The layer is typically cured using UV light, and the process repeats itself to construct the 3D
object. The size limits of the machines can range from 500mm3 to 1200mm3. The basic machine architecture consists of
the following:

  · Jetting Head
  · UV Lamp
  · Build Platform and Motion System
  · Build Plate
  · Roller
  · Computer / HMI
28 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

                                                          Figure 2.6 Material jetting system architecture

    Material Feedstock

        · Polypropylene
        · ABS
        · Acrylic thermoset photopolymers
        · Nano ceramics
        · Electrically conductive nano metal particles

    Slurry based system architecture

     The sustainable and affordable housing industry has adopted slurry-based AM as a way to make quick housing on the
     worksite using cement deposited on a very large gantry system. Cement is fed as a slurry into a deposition head that is
     suspended from a gantry to additively construct housing.
     By fabricating homes at the worksite, may pre-fabricated labor and shipping steps are eliminated, thereby making the
     homes more affordable.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   2.5 · Molten Material-Addition Processes 29

Figure 2.7 AM structures can be created by a deposition head suspended from a gantry system. The system prints the
cement or other material layer by layer from the ground up, with the gantry lifting the system as the layers are
deposited. (credit: Modification of "The Tecla as of 2021," by Alfredo Milano/Wikimedia Commons, CC-BY 2.5)

Direct ink-writing system architecture

Direct ink writing, also known as aerosol jetting or robocasting, is a process that allows for the additive manufacturing
of functional electronics. In this process, a conducting ink made from silver or copper sprays 1 to 5 micron droplets onto
a surface using an atomizer to create an aerosol mist that moves to the deposition head. In many cases, the machines
capable of doing this work also operate on a 5 axis platform. This allows for direct writing of circuitry on conformal
surfaces. This aerosol spray can apply the conductive ink to a variety of substrates. Features can be from 10 microns to a
few millimeters in scale. Individual layer thicknesses can range from 10nm to greater than 10 microns. The basic
machine architecture consists of the following:

  · Deposition Head
  · Atomizer
  · Sheath Gas
  · Build Plate
  · Ink Material Feed
  · Computer / HMI

2.5 Molten Material-Addition Processes

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:
  · Understand EBM wire technology.
  · Comprehend DED blown powder technology.
  · Grasp the concept of DED wire fed technology.
  · Realize both large and small scale polymer material extrusion.

EBM wire process architecture

The Electron Beam Melting wire process is used to melt metal wire feedstock with an EBM gun that discharges directly
in the melt weld pool. This entire process takes place inside of a vacuum chamber. The resultant weld pool is
approximately 3/8" wide and must be machined after being fabricating. Gross deposition rates range from 7 to 25 lbs. of
metal per hour depending on the specific metal selected. The EBM wire process machines are quite large, existing
machines scaling to 19ft x 4ft x 4ft, and the process is not size constrained. After feature deposition on the build plate
substrate, the resulting structure is stress relieved and machined to the final shape.
Relative to traditional hog-out machined parts, the advantage of using EBM wire to construct parts includes:

  · Less material wasted during fabrication
  · Less processing time incurred during fabrication
The typical machine architecture consists of the following:
  · Wire Feed
  · Electron Beam Gun
30 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

        · 3 Axis Gantry
        · Vacuum Chamber
        · Build Plate Substrate
        · Melt Pool Closed Loop Control Optical Feedback System
        · Computer / HMI

    Material Delivery System

     The material delivery system consists of a mechanism that feeds common welding wire feedstock through a feeding
     system. Similar to traditional welding systems, the feed system is installed at an angle to provide the optimum material
     fusion upon electron beam welding

    Energy Source

     An electron beam gun is used to provide the energy to the workpiece. The electron beam gun used in this process uses a
     high powered laser, ranging up to 42kW. Coupled with the feedstock, this energy creates a weld pool on the surface of
     the workpiece.

    Metal Wire Feedstock

     Example wire materials that are used in this process include:

        · Titanium
        · Inconel
        · Tantalum
        · Tungsten
        · Stainless Steel
        · 4340 Steel
        · Aluminum
        · Zircalloy

    DED blown powder process architecture

     DED blown powder process architecture is defined as an additive manufacturing process in which a laser source,
     attached to a gantry, melts a weld pool from a feedstock of free-flowing powder typically being discharged from a coaxial
     deposition head. In addition to constructing freeform geometry, DED blown powder is often used as a weld repair
     cladding process to efficiently laser weld cracked surfaces on various metallic structures. This entire process takes place
     inside of an Argon filled low pressure chamber. The resultant weld pool can range from .065" - .100" wide and exhibits a
     rough surface similar to a casting. The DED blown powder process machines can range in scale and capability. Some of
     the larger machines commercially available displays a build volume of up to 5ft x 5ft x 7ft. Hybrid DED blown powder
     machines are also commercially available. These machines have the ability to build layer by layer similar to a traditional
     AM machine, but also include the ability to stop between deposition and machine away the previously deposited surface,
     thereby leaving a very smooth surface finish.

     The basic machine architecture consists of the following:

        · Powder Feed Mechanism
        · Deposition Head
        · Laser
        · 3 Axis or 5 Axis Gantry System with Articulating Table
        · Argon chamber
        · Baseplate Substrate
        · Optional Mill Cutting System for Hybrid Machines
        · Computer / HMI

    Material Delivery System

     Metallic powder is pressurized through a series of tubes to a coaxial deposition head, where a stream of powder is
     evenly distributed onto the surface of the workpiece. Only about 25% of the feedstock is melted during the deposition
     process, with the remaining 75% of material being recycled.

     A unique aspect of the DED blown powder process is the ability to include multiple powder feedstocks at different rates
     into the deposition head, thereby creating a functionally gradient weld system within a part.

    Energy Source

     DED blown powder processes use a solid state IPG laser system. Smaller systems contain 2-3kW lasers, where some of
     the larger machines can showcase up to 4kW laser systems. The DED blown powder process are easily capable to scaling

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   2.5 · Molten Material-Addition Processes 31

to much larger sizes and laser wattages will scale in relation to the machine sizing.

Metal Powder Feedstock

Like all powder based additive manufacturing technologies, the particle size distribution, morphology and flowability are
key variables in maintaining a quality powder. Compared to laser powder bed material and EBM, the optimum particle
size distribution range for DED blown powder is much coarser and is typically between 20-200m.

Typical materials used in DED blown powder machines include:

  · Nickel Alloys
  · Cobalt Chrome
  · Stainless Steel
  · Titanium

DED wire fed process architecture

DED wire fed process architecture is defined as an additive manufacturing process in which a plasma arc discharging
from a deposition head is attached to a gantry. This melts a weld pool from a feedstock of welding wire typically being
fed from the side of the deposition head. This entire process takes place inside of an argon filled low pressure chamber
or alternatively, shielded gas provides the appropriate environment to retard oxidization. The resultant weld pool can
range from .125"-.250" wide and exhibits a rough surface similar to the EBM wire fed process. The DED wire fed process
machines can range in scale and capability. Some of the larger machines commercially available exhibit a build volume of
up to 6ft x 1.25ft x 2ft.

The basic machine architecture consists of the following:

  · Wire Feed Mechanism
  · Deposition Head
  · Optional Pre-heat head
  · 3 Axis or Gantry System
  · Argon chamber or gas shielded deposition head
  · Baseplate Substrate
  · Optional Mill Cutting System for Hybrid Machines
  · Computer / HMI

Material Delivery System

Metallic welding wire is fed through a series of pinch rollers to a deposition head, where a plasma arc flows the molten
metal onto the surface of the workpiece. As with all AM systems, layers of newly deposited material are placed on top of
previously deposited layers, thereby building up structure.

Energy Source

Similar to traditional welding, DED wire fed processes use a plasma arc energy source to deposit the material.
Specifications for each plasma deposition head may vary between 50 to 350 amps and voltage from 27 to 31 volts. On
some systems two multiple plasma arc heads are used. One head for preheating the baseplate substrate, while the other
head is used for material deposition. This approach limits the amount of distortion of the baseplate during part
fabrication. Similar to DED blown powder, the DED wire fed process is easily capable to scaling to much larger sizes and
the amount of plasma arc heads will scale in relation to the machine sizing.

Metal Welding Wire Feedstock

Much more cost effective than powder based additive manufacturing technologies, the welding wire used in DED wire
fed processes reduces production costs substantially. Commercial grade off the shelf welding wire may be used which
can vary in diameter from .025"-.120" and price based on the material type.

Typical materials used in DED wire fed machines include:

  · Steel
  · Titanium

Small scale polymer material extrusion process architecture

One of the most common desktop AM technologies, small scale polymer material extrusion machines are available in
very small scale for hobbyists (4" x 4" x 6"), and larger scale (39" x 39" x 39") for industrial applications, and a range of
sizes in between. Also known as Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM), this technology uses amorphous polymer filament as
32 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

     a feedstock. The feedstock is liquified in a deposition head which moves in the x-y plane, depositing the polymer
     material. The part is built upon a table that moves in a z direction. Variant machines also exist that allow for the build
     plate to move in y axis and the deposition head to move in the x and z axis.

     The basic machine architecture consists of the following:

        · Material Feeder
        · Heated Head/Nozzle
        · Build Platform and Motion System
        · Build Plate
        · Computer / HMI

    Delivery Systems

     Polymer filament is pulled from a spool of material through a series of pinch rollers and pushed into a liquefier head,
     where it is melted. Material oozes out of the tip of the head and belted stepper motors drive a linear x-y motion, thereby
     depositing a small contour of material in a selective manner.

    Energy Sources

     Electrical resistance in heating elements provide the energy to melt the polymer filament. The heating elements are
     embedded in the deposition head around the liquification tip. Before the process begins, the deposition tip must warm
     to a temperature just above the melting temperature of the filament, but not too high that it burns the filament leaving
     behind carbon buildup deposits.

    Material

     A wide variety of polymers are available to be processed using small scale polymer extrusion. Typically, because of the
     relatively large melt range, amorphous polymers tend to be more compatible with small scale polymer extrusion than
     semi-crystalline. Though semi-crystalline Nylon and PEKK materials have started to become available recently. The
     following list provides an idea of the type of polymers compatible with small scale extrusion technology:

        · PLA
        · ABS
        · PC
        · PEI
        · PPSF
        · PEKK
        · PA

    Large scale polymer material extrusion process architecture

     Large scale polymer material extrusion machines are available exclusively for industrial applications. Also known as big
     area additive manufacturing, these machines represent a very scaled up version of the small-scale polymer extrusion
     machines. These are enormous systems had originally been designed for laser/plasma cutting applications and
     retrofitted with a deposition head to create large AM machines. This technology uses polymer injection molding pellets
     as a feedstock as it is less expensive to scale to larger sizes relative to filament. The feedstock is liquified by a heated
     screw in a deposition head which moves in the x-y plane, depositing the polymer material. The part is built upon a table
     that moves in a z direction. Deposition rates of 80 pounds of material per hour are attained on a build workpieces as
     large as 240" x 90" x 72".

    Delivery Systems

     Polymer pellets are stored in an air dryer system to ensure little humidity effect on the pelletized polymers. The pellets
     are sourced from injection molding polymer suppliers. Once dried to a desired relative humidity level, the pelletized resin
     is transferred through air handler lines to the injection screw. Material oozes out of the tip of the screw head and linear
     motors drive the large gantry up and down the part build area, thereby depositing a large contour of material in a
     selective manner. Various extrusion die nozzle diameters are available from .200", .300" and .400" to adjust to specific
     part application feature sizes.

    Energy Sources

     The screw head is heated and spins to create a compressive shearing effect on the pelletized polymer resin which
     liquifies the material for deposition. The spin rate, shape and pitch of the screw threads are adjusted depending on the
     material being extruded. For example, it is not uncommon to have an optimized screw for use with ABS and a different
     screw shape for PPS.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      2.6 · Solid Material-Addition Processes 33

Material

Most common injection molding materials are used for large scale polymer extrusion. These would include:

  · PEI
  · PPS
  · PC
  · PLA
  · ABS
  · Carbon filled ABS
  · TPU

2.6 Solid Material-Addition Processes

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Understand sheet lamination processes.
  · Comprehend cold spray technology.

Sheet Lamination Process Architecture

Sheet lamination process architecture is defined as an additive manufacturing process in which an ultrasonic
transducer attached to a 3-axis gantry fuses feedstock of thin metallic foil that is coiled approximately .5" wide with a
thickness similar to aluminum foil used in everyday household needs. After a few layers of ultrasonic bonding of the foil
feedstock, a mill cutter is introduced into the process and material is machined away to provide the feature definition
needed to fabricate the part. After the part is completed, the part exhibits a smooth machined surface. This process is
known as ultrasonic consolidation.

Due to the relatively low temperature solid state bonding process, ultrasonic consolidation has unique benefits
compared to other AM processes. These include:

  · The ability to embed temperature sensitive objects into the part during fabrication. Some examples include strain
      gage wires, sensors, fiber optics, printed circuits, etc.

  · Being able to bond very dissimilar metals together that would typically be difficult to bond using a high heat fusion
      process.

It is worth noting that there exists an alternative sheet lamination process that involves adhesive backed paper rolls that
are layered. At each layer, the paper is cut to the desired profile with a laser cutter on a gantry system. The resultant
wooden part is mainly used for basic prototyping. This type of AM technology is known as Laminated Object
Manufacturing (LOM) or Selective Laminated Deposition (SLD) and is very niche with limited application space. For the
sake of brevity, it will be excluded from the sheet lamination discussion with a sole focus on ultrasonic consolidation.

Commercially available ultrasonic consolidation machines are capable of a build volume of up to 6ft x 6ft x 3ft. The
fundamental systems that make up an ultrasonic consolidation system includes:

  · Foil Feed Mechanism
  · Transducer
  · Horn
  · Booster
  · 3 Axis Gantry System
  · Baseplate Substrate
  · Mill Cutting System
  · Computer / HMI

Delivery Systems

The transducer and horn fusion head are directly mounted to a X-Y gantry system. The gantry system moves the horn to
the desired location for fusion. The foil feedstock is fed into the work area. A specified amount of force is applied from
the horn onto the foil to hold it in place while the ultrasonic vibration motion takes place. After a few layers are
deposited, a CNC programmed mill cuts away undesired material from the consolidated metal part profile. Water soluble
material may be used as a support structure if needed for overhanging features.

Energy Sources

Ultrasonic consolidation occurs primarily through the energy transfer of the transducer which generates ultrasonic
vibrations at 20 kHz. The frequency is a static value whereas the amplitude value may be varied depending on the type of
34 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

     metal being fused. The sonotrode, which is a disc shaped horn, transmits the ultrasonic vibrations to the foil feedstock
     that are being fused together.

    Materials

     There are a wide variety of metals available for the ultrasonic consolidation process, some of which may be bonded
     together to create functionally gradient metal. Some examples have been demonstrated include, steel-nickel, tantalum-
     steel, aluminum-titanium, aluminum-copper. For single metal bonding, the typical materials used in the ultrasonic
     consolidation process include:

        · Aluminum alloys
        · Copper alloys
        · Low alloy steel
        · Titanium

    Cold Spray Process Architecture

     Cold spray technology is commonly used as a coating process; however, it has been demonstrated to be effective for
     freeform AM. Despite being named `cold' spray, the process is heated just below the melting temperature of the metal
     being deposited and is anything but `cold'.Cold spray is an impaction process where metal powder is discharged from a
     gas nozzle jet at extremely high velocities. These metal powder particles impact onto a surface and buildup material
     based on force. Care must be taken to tune process parameters to ensure part integrity and avoid delamination and
     porosity in the resulting built up structure. Once the bulk geometry is deposited, the structure is transported to a 5-axis
     mill for final machining.

                                                       Figure 2.8 Functional diagram of cold spray system

    Delivery Systems

     There are a number of variations to the delivery systems for cold spray. The first includes a gas nozzle jet moving in a
     linear motion spraying material on feedstock on a lathe producing a gradual buildup. Second, the nozzle jet may remain
     stationary below a tilt table shooting material vertically while a 5-axis tilt table receives the material from the nozzle
     creating a 3D freeform structure (shown in F02_19). A third approach includes a substrate plate mounted vertically in a
     stationary format while a nozzle delivers material horizontally against the build up baseplate.

    Energy Sources

     The originating source of energy for cold spray technology is highly compressed heated gas. The heated gas acts as a
     supersonic velocity carrier to transfer the metallic powder to a substrate to be impacted on the surface up to 4000 feet/
     sec. The kinetic energy of the particles is transferred to plastic deformation energy in the bonding process. The gas
     composition is typically either helium, nitrogen, or compressed air above 15 bar resulting in a flow rate of more than 71
     ft3/min. The power required for the heating the gas. can range from 3-5kW.

    Material

     Similar to other AM powder based systems, cold spray is sensitive to powder particle size variation. Ceramics and metal
     powders can all be used for cold spray. Some of these include:

        · Aluminum
        · Copper
        · Nickel

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        2.7 · Supporting Processes 35

  · Titanium
  · Zinc
  · Tantalum
  · Niobium
  · Tungsten
  · Zirconium
  · Steel
  · Copper-Tungsten
  · Al-SiC

2.7 Supporting Processes

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Understand all of the post-processing requirements relative to each AM technology.
  · Grasp the concepts of:

       Powder removal.
       Support removal.
       Curing.
       Sintering and densification.
       Thermal post-processing (stress relief, heat treatment, HIP).
       Machining surface and surface preparation.

Once an AM part has been processed using any of the aforementioned processes, the part will most likely endure
subsequent processing steps on its journey to become a quality part. These additional steps are what is known as post-
processing. The specific post-processing steps will vary significantly depending on which AM process is being
considered. Reference Table 2.1 on which specific AM technology requires which specific post-processing type.

Powder/Support Removal

Once a part is removed from the build chamber of SLS Polymer, Binder Jet machines, the resulting volume of powder,
also known as a build cake, is removed from the build chamber and de-powdered. Parts are dug out of a build cake of
powder to expose the parts fabricated.

Next, for powder bed electron beam and laser metal systems, part build cakes are removed from the machine and de-
powdered. In addition to de-powdering, since these processes require supporting structure, sacrificial support structures
are removed from the parts. This is accomplished by a technician using conventional hand tools to chisel, pry and
machine off the support structure from the parts.

Finally, large scale polymer material extrusion, stereolithography and liquid deposition requires a physical removal of
support structure after fabrication. Small scale polymer material extrusion may also require a physical removal of
support structures, however, water soluble support material has been developed that allows for support structure to be
dissolved easily from the part.

Some AM processes require curing, or the introduction of additional heat to strengthen the part after the part is built.
For example, stereolithography and liquid deposition processes require a subsequent UV curing process that occurs
after parts are temporarily cured in the AM machine because they are UV photopolymer based.

For binder jet technology, a binder catalyst temporarily `cures' a structure into a green part during the fabrication
process so that it can be moved to a sintering and densification step.

Curing of the binder is necessary to develop sufficient mechanical strength in the bound metal part for handling, in most
of the binder jet processes. Curing is typically done as a batch process where the entire build box is fit into an oven and
heated to 150-260°C (300-500°F) for a couple of hours.The temperature allows the polymer in the binder to crosslink,
increasing its strength and therefore the strength of the printed part.

Sintering and Densification

Once binder jet technology is partially cured, it is sintered to bake out the binder material and then subjected to a
densification process to reduce internal porosity.

There are several important subtopics to sintering: Setters and Trays, Furnace Environment and Control, De-Binding and
Sintering. Table 2.2 highlights just a few of the topics and impacts.
36 2 · Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes

               Setters and Trays       Furnace Environment                   De-Binding             Sintering
                                              and Control

Consideration  Temperature and                            Atmosphere,             Chemical          Final de-bind and
               sintering process                      temperature ramp       interactions and          densification
                                                                             thermal control
                   dependent                                  control

Impact            Slumping, part                      Excessive time in the  Trapped binder         Failure to achieve density
                    distortion or                      furnace to achieve       could be a          requirements or excessive
                                                       density or de-bind          defect
               material interaction                                                                         sintering time

Table 2.2 Sintering Steps and Impacts

Choice of atmosphere in the furnace and thermal control is closely related to the binder employed and the material
being processed. There is no one single solution to sintering. The atmosphere in the furnace could be a reducing gas,
flowing hydrogen, or a vacuum. Control of the furnace thermal profile is important to achieve good results given variable
ramp up and hold schemes to "burn out" the binder.

In addition to the temperature and environment, the part will be necessarily shrinking to densify. This shrinkage is
influenced by gravity, so some tooling may be required to control slumping. It is also necessary to consider that great
care was taken to put the binder in the right place and cured. The binder is removed as the particles transition from
being held together by the binder, to being held together by powder particle to powder particle bonding.

Sintering is fairly simple in concept. Where two particles contact, atoms can begin to move from one to the other, and,
with time, multiple particles coalesce in 3 stages: 1) Neck growth, 2) Intermediate sintering and 3) Final sintering. Table
2.3 shows the main considerations, and Figure 2.9 Stages of Sintering shows the stages conceptually.

               Stage 1: Neck Growth                                          Stage 2: Intermediate  Stage 3: Final

Consideration  Packing density / disruption by        Packing density and part densification        Gas egress
                        the binder impact                                                           from part

Impact         Particle contact initiates             Higher density speeds sintering, part         Decrease in
                         sintering                       densification leads to shrinkage           part density

Table 2.3 Three Stages of Sintering

           Figure 2.9 Stages of Sintering: 2-dimensional view of debinding and sintering from a particle perspective.
All sintering stages are important, but the packing density of powders in the printed part is important in Stage 3 as a
higher density produces more rapid sintering. The powder bed density can be impacted by the binder impacting the
surface. The bulk of densification occurs during this stage which drives the entire body to shrink up to 15-20% by
volume. This shrinkage results in distortion of the part, because thick features shrink more than thin features. Abrupt

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        2.7 · Supporting Processes 37

changes in section thickness can result in surface cracks due to the differences in shrinkage.

Large openings and overhangs can distort due to gravity during this stage of sintering, and the drag of the shrinking
part on the tray can cause the bottom of the part to shrink less than the top.

A typical debind and sintering cycle for an Iron-based alloy is shown in Figure 2.8_Typical Debind and Sinter Cycle.
Debinding occurs at the first hold at 300C, and finishes at the 2nd hold at 600c. This temperature is chosen such that
stage 1 sintering begins at about the same temperature. Sintering completes stage 3 in this example cycle during the
hold at 1400C.

With the exception of sheet lamination, all metallic AM processes typically require one or more processes of stress relief,
heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing to achieve full mechanical density.

Machining/Surface Preparation

All metallic AM processes require some form of post-process machining. Some powder based metallic processes may
simply require wire EDM or bandsaw removal of parts from the build plate. Complex parts with threaded holes and
features that fit up into assemblies will at least need mating surfaces machined, and many tight tolerance features will
also need machining or finishing.

However, all metallic wire fed, sheet lamination and cold spray processes will require subsequent machining to reach
final feature definition. Also, large scale polymer material extrusion will need full machining. This is due to the fact that
these processes produce parts that are near net shape preforms.

SLS polymer and small-scale polymer material extrusion may also require surface treatment of sanding, painting and
seal coating to provide a smooth surface. The need for these additional steps will depend on the customer requirements.

Which post processing steps are required for binder jet technology?
38 2 · Summary

Summary

Choices for AM technology are extensive and distinct, with each option offering unique benefits and extensive processes.
The most common processes are vat-based processes, powder processes, liquid addition processes, molten material
processes, and solid material processes. Each requires expertise and equipment to bring to bear the proper materials
and energy source. Within each AM technology there may be dedicated steps that are highly specific to that application,
such as recoating in a powder-process. Supporting processes include curing, polishing, and sintering.

Review Questions

 1. What are the original ASTM categories of AM, and how were they grouped?
 2. Describe the different ways that layers are formed in AM processes. Can one way be more effective than another?
 3. What are the different types of feedstocks available for AM processes?
 4. Describe the differences and similarities between SLA, DLP and LCD stereolithography.
 5. How are parts cured after being fabricated used vat-based processes?
 6. Which UV wavelength is compatible with DLP?
 7. Which process is more similar to injection molding?
 8. Which recoating process is the most forgiving for part failure during the build process?
 9. Which is a more powerful energy source for metallic powder bed, laser or electron beam?
10. Which liquid addition process can be used to fabricate homes?
11. Which liquid addition process can be used to fabricate circuit boards?
12. What is the resolution size limitation of direct ink write technology?
13. Which polymer addition process can be used to fabricate full size car chassis?
14. What is the most significant advantage of using welding wire as a feedstock over metallic powder?
15. What is the most significant advantage of using a screw over filament for polymer processes?
16. Which process has a unique ability of making functionally gradient parts, and why?
17. What are some advantages of using the sheet lamination process called ultrasonic consolidation?
18. What types of items can be embedded within ultrasonically consolidated parts?
19. Which post processing steps are required for DED blown powder?
20. Which post processing steps are required for powder bed fusion laser metal?

Discussion Questions

21. Of the different types of energy sources, which do you believe is the most powerful for AM processing?
22. As more AM processes become available, how would you categorize AM technologies?
23. Of the different types of Vat based processes, which process would be best for a hobbyist or student?
24. Describe in your own words the definition of a green part.
25. From a process standpoint, in what significant way is a binder jet part similar to SLA?
26. Why does binder jet technology require infiltration or sintering where EBM does not?
27. Describe how a slurry-based process can be used to fabricate homes.
28. Provide your thoughts on what the future may hold for slurry-based AM.
29. Why is there a limit to geometric design freedom for wire fed EBM systems compared to powder bed processes?
30. Why is blown powder DED used for crack repair in parts?
31. In your own words describe the process of cold spray.
32. Why is cold spray typically a coating process?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             2 · Case Questions 39

33. Why is sintering and densification needed for binder jet technology, but not for SLA?

34. Why is an UV curing process needed for SLA, but not for SLS polymer powder?

Case Questions

35. Print out the process mapping image. Search online for 3 different additive manufacturing technologies of your
      choice and learn all aspects of the technology. Follow the flow lines on the process map of each of your identified
      technologies to ensure the process map's accuracy. Is it correct? Did you find errors? Will the technology change in
      the future thereby making the process map obsolete?

36. Read the following case study (https://openstax.org/l/AMMammoth) and answer the following questions.
      a. Why did it take so long to print the mammoth skeleton?
      b. With the file size of 21 GB of data representing the mammoth, what problems could this cause with processing
      AM files?

37. Read the case studies (https://openstax.org/AMEOS) and answer the following questions.
      a. Why was AM used for these systems?
      b. Which case study is your favorite example of AM powder bed processes, and why?

38. Read the case study (https://openstax/org/l/AMGuestHouses) and answer the following questions.
      a. What are the advantages and disadvantages of these homes?
      b. Could this technology be used beyond earth?

39. Read the case study (https://openstax.org/l/AMOptoMec) and answer the following questions.
      a. What are the advantages and disadvantages of direct ink write technology?
      b. What applications exist for this technology?

40. Watch the case study videos regarding large scale polymer material extrusion technology known as BAAM
      (https://openstax.org/l/AMBAAM) and answer the following questions.
      a. What are some other applications you could think of that could be made with this system?
      b. Which demonstrated application could have broader industrial implications?

41. Read the case study (https://openstax.org/l/AMRockets) and answer the following questions.
      a. Given the scale of DED blown powder technology, what other uses do you see for this technology?
      b. What is a main advantage of using DED blown powder for this application?

42. Watch the video regarding ultrasonic consolidation (https://openstax.org/l/AMUC) and answer the following
      question.
      What are some other applications you could think of that could be made with this system?

43. Watch the video on cold spray of a copper rocket nozzle (https://openstax.org/l/AMspee3d) and answer the
      following questions.
      a. Given the scale of cold spray, what other uses do you see for this technology?
      b. What would be the limitation of this technology relative to feature detail of metal powder bed fusion or binder
      jet?

44. Read the article on post processing costs (https://openstax.org/l/AMPostCosts) and answer the following
      questions.
      a. How much extra cost would you incur beyond printing your part with post processing in mind?
      b. Though the article doesn't mention a time frame for each post processing step, take a guess on how much extra
      time may be involved to post process sheet lamination ultrasonic consolidated parts versus powder bed fusion
      laser metal.

Key Terms

2.1 Processes and Process Organization

ASTM F42, Binder jetting, Densification, Directed energy deposition, Energy Source, Material extrusion, Material jetting,
Powder bed fusion, Sheet lamination, Vat photopolymerization, Laser, Plasma, High Pressure Gas, Electrical Resistance,
Compression, Electron Beam, Feedstock, Curing, Welding, Mechanical Fusion , Kinetic Energy, Ultrasonic Energy

2.2 Vat-based Processes

LCD, DLP, SLA
40 2 · Key Terms

2.3 Powder Bed Processes

Roller System, Hard Knife Blade, Soft Gasket Wiper Blade, Yb-Fiber Laser, Electron Beam Gun, Infiltration, Sintering, De-
powdering, Debinding

2.4 Liquid-Addition Processes

Direct Ink Writing, Slurry-based AM, Material Jetting

2.5 Molten Material-Addition Processes

Powder Bed EBM, DED blown powder process, Small Scale Polymer Material Extrusion, Large Scale Polymer Material
Extrusion, Polymer Filament, Polymer Pellets, Screw Head, Metallic Welding Wire

2.6 Solid Material-Addition Processes

Sheet Lamination, Ultrasonic Consolidation, LOM, SLD, Foil Feedstock, Sonotrode, Cold Spray

2.7 Supporting Processes

Post-processing, Build cake

Access for free at openstax.org
                 3 · Introduction 41

3  AM MATERIALS

Figure 3.1 This 3D printed glass structure, one of several by innovative designer and architect Neri Oxman on display at
the Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum, required precise control and materials to maintain structure and
produce the texture, strength, and light effects. (credit: modification of "3d printed glass" by walknboston/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Polymer Materials
  3.2 Metallic Materials
  3.3 Metallic Materials Characteristics
  3.4 Ceramics and Other Materials

      Introduction

As AM technology has matured over the last 30 years, a wide range of materials including those with engineering
properties are now available. While there are fewer choices than for conventional manufacturing processes, almost all
classes of polymers, metals, and ceramics are available such that a product team does not have to rule out the use of AM
due to a lack of suitable materials. However, achieving suitable properties is still not guaranteed. In this chapter, we will
discuss the primary engineering materials classes: polymers, metals, composites, and ceramics, as well as other
materials.

3.1 Polymer Materials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Understand the range of engineered polymer materials and their characteristics that are available for AM.
  · Differentiate the feedstocks of those materials, and how they relate to the different AM processes.
  · Describe the relationships between polymer properties, feedstocks, AM processing, AM post-processing, and the

      resultant AM part.

Polymers have been widely available in AM since the beginning of rapid prototyping resins. However, many of the early
polymeric materials for AM were only suitable for models and fit testing as the physical properties of early AM polymers,
42 3 · AM Materials

including toughness and strength, were poor. Polymers are still the first choice for rapid prototyping of AM models and
demonstration test parts due to the proliferation of desktop and prosumer printers, but there are now a number of
polymer feedstock products on the market with sufficient engineering properties to achieve the desired performance in
a range of applications from biomedical to aerospace industries. Additionally, as AM process technology and use cases
have flourished, companies with deeper experience in designing customized raw materials have entered the market to
supply the AM industry with new feedstocks. Generally, for AM applications, polymers are classified into two types:

 1. Thermoplastics, or heat-processible, heat-formable materials can be shaped using a variety heating schemes from
      thermal radiation to conduction. These materials can be heated and formed multiple times during reprocessing,
      often without major degradation in properties under the right conditions. Common means of AM processing
      thermoplastics include thermal material extrusion AM and powder bed fusion.

 2. Thermosets, or materials that crosslink and change from a liquid to a solid state and cannot easily be reprocessed
      once solidified. The crosslinking process can be induced by photo or thermal means, generally, but
      photocrosslinking is most often used for AM due to the rapid solidification reaction required. The mainstream AM
      processes that incorporate thermosetting-type polymers are vat photopolymerization and material jetting, although
      post-processing crosslinking is sometimes used to stabilize initially thermoplastic, heat formed materials.

These two general processing characteristics of polymers drive the choice of AM processes where polymeric materials
are deployed across a huge number of applications. In fact, in ASTM classification of polymer feedstock AM processes, all
techniques fall under thermal bonding (mainly used for thermoplastics) or chemical reaction bonding (mainly used with
thermosets). Within thermoplastics and thermosets, polymers have a range of processing conditions. There are low-
temperature polymers that are easy to melt process and have low viscosities under flow at 80 °C, and there are high-
temperature polymers and composites that push the limits of thermal processing conditions and degradation in excess
of 400 °C. Similarly, thermosets can cure at room temperature or at elevated temperatures, up to 250 °C or higher. Table
3.1 lists a range of polymers across thermoplastic and thermoset materials that are widely used in AM. At first glance,
there seem to be many more thermoplastics available than thermosets for AM. Thermoplastic properties are dictated by
the backbone type. If a different set of properties is desired, then a different polymer must be chosen. However, the
properties of thermosets can be varied by changing the ratios of resin components such as crosslinker, monomer
diluent, or other additive - giving a huge range of possible formulations. The thermosetting photopolymer function is
preserved in the precursor materials but the resin "recipe" can be optimized without too much of a change in the overall
chemical formulation. Thus, there are different materials "knobs" to turn depending on the characteristics of the
feedstock. This unique formulation flexibility of thermosetting resins for vat polymerization or material jetting AM
provides many possibilities for customizing unique materials in these AM processes, even though the underlying
crosslinking chemistry does not have to change much.

Processing                       Polymer Name          Common Uses in AM
    Class

Thermoplastics       PLA - poly(lactide), poly(lactic  Prototyping, hobbyist printing, degradable packaging
                                      acid)

                                 PET - poly(ethylene   Clamshell packaging, composites in automotive applications
                                    terephthalate)

                     ABS - acrylonitrile-butadiene-    Tough plastics, cases, consumer goods
                                    styrene

                     PE/PP - poly(ethylene) and        Low-strength parts, disposable components
                            poly(propylene)

                                 PC - poly(carbonate)  Transparent panels, tough components, composites

                     PA - poly(amide), Nylon           Automotive and engineering parts

                     PSU/PSf - poly(sulfone)           Medical, consumer, industrial, and automotive components

Table 3.1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.1 · Polymer Materials 43

Processing  Polymer Name                     Common Uses in AM
    Class

            PPS - poly(phenylene sulfide)    Automotive and aerospace applications

            PEI - poly(ether imide)          Aerospace applications

            PEEK - poly(ether etherketone)   Medical and aerospace applications

            TPU - thermoplastic              Elastomeric components, bumpers, energy adsorption, soft
               poly(urethane)                                            touch components

            TPE - thermoplastic elastomer    Elastomeric components, consumer goods, energy
                                                        adsorption, soft touch components

Thermosets  Crosslinked acrylate             Vat photopolymerization, material jetting
               photopolymers

            PDMS - poly(dimethyl siloxane),  Elastomer applications, medical components
                       silicone rubber

            PU - crosslinked poly(urethane)  Elastomer applications

            Epoxies                          Adhesives, composite matrix phase

Table 3.1

Polymers and their precursor feedstocks for AM are all derived from product streams of the petrochemical industry,
although there are a few AM polymers derived from bioplastics, such as PLA. Polymers and chemical feedstocks used for
AM are generally widely available since polymers are such heavily used materials with robust distribution networks and a
large number of suppliers. In the last 10 years with the increase in AM technology, a number of important polymer
feedstocks have been adapted to AM processes. As AM has matured, the plastics and chemical industry has produced
different grades of materials that are customized for AM including samples with tuned melt flow index, which is an
indication of mass of polymer extruded in a given time, for ME, new grades of powder for BPF processes, and
customized photo curable materials and composite resins. However, from the 1,000s of products available from the
petrochemical industry for polymeric materials, AM consumes a small fraction of the possible accessible formulations.
Consequently, there is a long way to go and a tremendous toolbox to access for customizing polymeric materials and
composites for the AM industry.

Also noted here is that many of the polymers discussed above can be compounded with fillers to make composite
feedstocks. Very few polymers are used in their pure form for commercial applications. Often the base polymer is mixed
with colorant, filler, antioxidants, and other functional components (or inexpensive fillers to decrease the cost of the
material) and hen shaped into the desired form. While the discussion of polymers in this chapter will emphasize the
polymer portion of a composite, there are many types of polymer-based composite AM feedstocks available from
carbon-filled elastomers to ceramic photopolymer resins.

Key characteristic of AM polymers and base monomers/chemistries

The key characteristic that must be considered for the polymers used in AM is the method by which they are shaped and
under what conditions can the AM process yield the required resolution and properties required for a given material and
application. For example, the only way to process a polyamide (Nylon) is by thermal shaping, as this material cannot be
photopolymerized. Therefore, if polyamides are the desired end-use material, thermal AM processes, such as ME and
PBF are the main pathways for production of these parts. Similarly, if a thermosetting acrylate is required, the only way
to access this polymer composition is through vat photopolymerization. Using these conventional pathways for
deploying polymers in AM, processes can be paired with the requisite materials, or vice-versa. From there, dimensional
tolerances, surface finish, and post-processing schemes can be considered. However, new research breakthroughs are
occurring in hybrid polymer processing where the shaping technology is complemented by a post-processing scheme to
facilitate post-shaping chemistry or conversion of the material. Materials including crosslinked polyurethanes, cyanate
44 3 · AM Materials

     ester thermosets, and liquid silicone rubber are all being deployed in multistage processes to access both the
     advantages of AM shaping technology and robust engineering properties of these materials.

    Polymer Feedstock Types and Processes

     Based on the two general classes of polymers, thermoplastics and thermosets, there are two basic types of polymer
     feedstocks and printing processes that form the basis for understanding the constellation of polymer materials for AM.
     For thermoplastics printing, Material Extrusion AM, is ubiquitous. This type of printing employs a filament or pellet
     feedstock that is thermally extruded through a simple orifice to build a component from roads. Readers versed in the art
     will know the ever-present MakerBot and similar printers as a Material Extrusion AM thermal process. While ME is still
     the predominant technology for hobbyists and desktop printing, it has been adapted successfully to a number of
     commercial systems including units by Stratasys and Cincinnati Incorporated. ME is inexpensive in concept and can be
     successfully used to process a wide variety of thermoplastics at many different size scales.
     Powder bed fusion of thermoplastics, while laser driven, is a thermal process. Long wavelength (1-10 m) fiber or diode
     lasers are used to heat thermoplastic powder that is often darkened with carbon black or other additives to increase the
     heating of the powder for rapid fusion. This technology is deployed industrially for a few different types of polymers,
     namely PA11/12 and PEEK. The polymer PBF equipment setup is similar to that used for metals, however, the physics of
     fusion is much different between the liquid melt pool needed for metals and the fusion of viscous polymer powders
     above their melting temperature. Polymers have two thermal transitions, the Tg, or glass transition temperature, and
     the Tm, or crystalline melting temperature (Figure 3.2). The Tg, where a polymer turns from a glassy solid into a
     rubbery solid, can be observed for nearly all polymers and is defined as the temperature at which chains can diffuse past
     one another and the material can undergo flow when exposed to shear. At the Tg, the viscosity of the material drops in
     the transition from a glass to a rubber. To achieve reasonable flow, amorphous polymers must generally be processed 50
     °C or more above their Tg. The Tm only exists for semi-crystalline polymers that have a mixture of amorphous and
     crystalline regions in their solid-state structure. Polymers with a Tm must be processed 20-50 °C above Tm to induce
     rapid flow and fusion. Still, even above Tm, polymers are viscoelastic and do not easily undergo rapid fusion. Thus, only a
     small number of polymers have been employed widely in PBF processes.

                               Figure 3.2 Viscosity/Modulus of thermoplastic polymers as a function of temperature
     PBF generally requires a polymer to have a Tm and a rapid viscosity drop above Tm to achieve the temperature spike,
     flow, fusion, and solidification of the material. While some success has been achieved in the PBF of amorphous
     thermoplastics, the transient temperature spikes and rapid processing times of PBF are not compatible with a highly
     viscous polymer above Tg. Thus, material introductions to PBF are generally slow and the limited availability of
     development machines and suitable polymers has held back the widespread adoption of this technology outside of
     specialized applications. Additionally, polymer powders are highly explosive and pose a serious environmental safety and

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            3.1 · Polymer Materials 45

health risk due to their low density and ability to circulate in the air for extended periods.

For thermosets, light-driven vat photopolymerization including the variations of SLA, DLP, CLIP, (as described in Ch 2) etc.
are employed. The feedstocks for these processes are all UV-cured photopolymers where the rapid liquid to solid curing
kinetics are leveraged for component fabrication using high-intensity photopolymer curing methods such as UV DMD
chips and diode lasers. While some heat is liberated from photocuring reactions, the primary mechanism of the liquid to
solid transition is photochemical, although heat must be managed during rapid curing. Material jetting of UV curable
polymers is widely employed to obtain highly detailed models with resolution rivalling the best VP systems.

Material preparation for polymers in AM is relatively straightforward in the industry, although production of well-
dimensioned filaments, polymer powder, and shelf-stable liquid polymer resins is challenging for non-specialists. These
materials can be prepared for processing under mild conditions which lends itself to widespread adoption and
experimentation across the community.

Photopolymers

Photopolymers or light-cured materials are the feedstocks used in vat photopolymerization and MJ processes, among
other light-driven AM processes. Photopolymers are a wide class of materials, but industrially, photopolymerization or
photocrosslinking (a technique that uses light to create bonds) of liquid precursors to crosslinked solids is usually
achieved through UV curing of acrylates. This photopolymer crosslinking chemistry is fast, inexpensive, and easy to
deploy for a wide range of polymers to yield a tremendous variety of materials. In fact, nearly all commercially sold vat
photopolymerization and ME resins are the same crosslinking chemistry.

The different properties derived from light-cured acrylate resins are due to the chemical composition of the groups
between acrylate crosslinking sites, the crosslinking density, and other additives, such as monomer diluents. Using
photopolymerization, elastomers, tough engineering plastics, and even highly filled ceramic resins can be accessed.
Many feedstocks for vat photopolymerization are sold with descriptors such as "polyethylene like" or "polycarbonate like"
properties. In fact, these materials may not contain any of the noted polymers in their descriptions, but the resin
formulations are tuned to display thermal and mechanical properties that mimic more familiar thermoplastic polymeric
materials. This approach is typified in Table 3.2. Many of these resins contain 20-30 components including UV absorbers
and stabilizers and are not usually formulated by the manufacturer listed on the label, these materials are generally
formulated by specialty chemical suppliers for private label reselling. Generally, the formulation of these materials is
confidential. This type of feedstock formulation is still in the art phase although advanced experimental design and data
analytics can be used to optimize these materials.

Manufacturer             Product Name      Properties Similar To

Formlabs                 Tough 2000 Resin  ABS

                         Flexible 80A      TPU

Stratasys (for Polyjet)  Digital ABS       ABS

                         Tango             Rubber

                         Rigur             Poly(ethylene)

Envisiontec              E-Rigidform       Acrylic, Nylon-6, polycarbonate

                         ABS Hi-Impact     ABS

                         E-EA90            Rubber

Table 3.2 Photopolymer resins marketed with thermoplastic-like
properties.

The advent of advanced vat polymerization processes and chemistries that complement this rapid production of
engineering-grade parts has ushered in a new approach of rapid light shaping and dual cure mechanisms. Companies
like Carbon have leveraged new chemical approaches to VP feedstocks and post-processing schemes to achieve
46 3 · AM Materials

properties in photopolymerization materials that have not been possible previously. The resolution and surface finish of
VP makes it alluring for direct production of consumer and industrial grade parts and new materials, coupled with
improvements in printing technology, have brought a number of successful products forward.

Thermosets

Thermosets tend to refer to any crosslinked polymer system, including photopolymers (or perhaps photosets). Familiar
thermosetting materials include epoxies, crosslinked polyurethanes, and thermally cured or room temperature
vulcanizate (RTV) silicones, as examples. Thermoset usually implies thermal curing at temperatures greater than room
temperature, but this does not have to be the case. Superglue is a thermoset, along with bathroom caulk. Once
hardened, thermosets cannot be reprocessed due to the crosslinking of polymer chains and their inability to flow. By far,
the largest use of thermosets in AM is in vat photopolymerization that leverages the liquid to solid transition that occurs
due to the rapid increase in molecular weight and crosslinking of polymer chains during acrylate photopolymerization.
As described above, these acrylate crosslinking systems can achieve a wide range of properties that are dependent on
the polymer characteristics between acrylate groups. In addition to vat photpolymerization, MJ printing leverages
thermosetting liquid acrylate resins for building voxel-based designs.

Thermosetting polymers such as two-part epoxies or thermally cured silicones can be deposited using direct ink writing,
which is a form of material extrusion AM. In many cases, these thermally cured thermosets are post-processed to
achieve the desired properties. For instance, many long pot life silicones and epoxies tend to cure at temperatures above
100 °C. These materials also have Bingham plastic behavior where they can support a finite stress at zero shear. This
unique property of these highly viscous thermosetting precursors can be used to stabilize liquid direct ink writing
printing before thermal post-curing.

Thermoplastics

Thermoplastics are ubiquitous in ME and PBF and there are at least 20 different types of thermoplastics used routinely in
AM processes that can be sourced from any of the major manufacturers and polymer distribution houses. Thermoplastic
polymers are characterized by their ability to be shaped under high temperatures (between 150-400 °C) and moderate
pressures. All of the common AM polymers are thermoplastics, aside from those that are used in vat
photopolymerization and liquid resin-based printing. These include Nylons (polyamides), PE, PP, PLA, ABS, PET, PC, and
PEEK, among others, see Table 3.3. All of the thermoplastics available for AM are sourced from the plastics processing
industry where extrusion and molding are the mass-production technologies of choice. Thermoplastics are generally
used for inexpensive, moderately demanding applications. Composites of thermoplastics are widely used in consumer
and automotive components and are the result of mass-production from injection molding. However, injection molding
is prohibitively expensive for small part counts and machining of many plastics can be challenging. Therefore, AM of
thermoplastics has filled an important gap in prototyping of plastic parts. These materials can also be ground and
reprocessed, although degradation in performance usually results from repeated recycling.

Thermoplastic                           Young's Modulus  Elongation to break       Upper use temperature
                                                (GPa)                (%)                          (°C)

PE - poly(ethylene)                     0.5-1            100-700                   130

PP - poly(propylene)                    1-1.5            100-600                   80

PLA - poly(lactide), poly(lactic acid)  1-3              5-10                      50

PET - poly(ethylene terephthalate)      3-4              30-300                    150

ABS - acrylonitrile-butadiene-          1-3              40-130                    100

                     styrene

PC - poly(carbonate)                    2-3              100-150                   150

PA6 - poly(amide), Nylon-6              2-4              10-200

Table 3.3 Thermoplastic polymers with chemical structures and general properties.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   3.1 · Polymer Materials 47

Thermoplastic                   Young's Modulus  Elongation to break               Upper use temperature
                                        (GPa)                (%)                                  (°C)

PSU/PSf - poly(sulfone)         3-5              10-30                             165

PPS - poly(phenylene sulfide)   1-4              10-60                             200-260

PEI - poly(ether imide)         4-6              10-30                             300

PEEK - poly(ether etherketone)  5-7              30-50                             250

Table 3.3 Thermoplastic polymers with chemical structures and general properties.

One of the key drawbacks of current hobby and prosumer printers is the need for thermoplastic filament. The main
feedstock used in the polymer industry is pellets. So, pellets must be converted through extrusion into a well-gauged
filament. The consistency of the filament dimensions is of utmost importance as most machines feed a certain length of
filament in the build and do not monitor variations in thickness or flowrate. Pellet printers that directly use widely
available materials from the plastics extrusion industry are highly desirable, but are not common for small-scale printing.
While there are drawbacks of deploying thermoplastics in relatively low-resolution printing processes, their engineering
properties and low-cost still make thermoplastics desirable materials.

Thermoplastics can have a wide variety of properties, including water solubility. Many ME builds employ water soluble
supports in dual printing schemes to enable complexity that is difficult to achieve with single-material builds. Water
soluble thermoplastics such as poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) can be deployed in many dual extrusion thermal ME printers
and have the melt-flow characteristics needed for support structures. By the same method of dual or multiple extrusion,
multicomponent builds using thermoplastics are possible, although material fusion can be a challenge. Additionally, a
number of dual head printers exist on the market, but more than two materials integrated into a fused filament
fabrication scheme is not common. ME of thermoplastics yields the characteristic striations of the extruded, layered
build of fused filament fabrication, along with the associated z-direction anisotropy (as described explicitly in ch 2).

PBF of PA11/12 and PEEK has begun to disrupt the production of high-performance polymer parts as a consequence of
the high-fidelity manufacturing available from PBF and 100 or even 1000s of parts accessible in short run times.
However, while PBF does incur anisotropy, its part count per build, reasonable surface finish, and acceptable tolerances
make PBF one of the scalable routes to large-scale manufacture of polymer parts. PA11/12 (Nylon variations) and PEEK
are also highly desirable thermoplastics that can be used in demanding applications from consumer goods to
biomedical devices. Production of thermoplastic powders is usually accomplished by cryogrinding polymer pellets,
although different methods of polymer powder production and the powder characteristics needed for effective polymer
PBF are an area of active research.

Composites

Composites can be composed of a thermosetting or thermoplastic polymer and a "filler" or reinforcing inorganic phase,
typically glass, carbon fiber, carbon black or ceramic particles like silica. There are many types of composite materials,
but for the purposes of this discussion, we will confine the description of composites to those that contain polymer and
fiber or particles and are processed in the realm of filled thermoplastic polymers. Because polymers are generally softer
than other engineering materials, filling them with inorganic phases greatly increases their moduli and rigidity. Key to
formulating composites is a coupling agent between the filler phase and the polymer matrix. Silane coupling agents or
sizing agents have been specifically designed for currently available composite systems and are being leveraged to
produce robust composite materials for AM. Chopped fiber or particle filled polymers are widely available, but can be
abrasive during thermal ME, which is the most common method of processing composite polymeric materials. Some SLA
resins are composites, but these are generally classified as ceramic photopolymer resins where the composite properties
are less important than using the photopolymer function to shape the material.

While composite materials are critically important and widely used, their advance in the AM industry has been slow,
primarily due to their difficult processing and the different formulations needed between molding and extrusion as
compared to AM. Adding a polymer filler increases a polymer's melt viscosity and can drastically reduce interlayer
adhesion. Additionally, many composites are processed under vacuum conditions to compact the material and avoid air
pocket defects, which is difficult to deploy in AM. Composites have played a major role in the development of Big Area
Additive Manufacturing (BAAM). Because most polymeric materials used in structure applications are composites, a
process that produced filled composite materials was critical to large-scale printing. Currently, most BAAM materials are
48 3 · AM Materials

10-30 wt % chopped glass or carbon fiber in ABS or other medium performance thermoplastics. As the adoption of
BAAM and similar platforms has progressed, major plastics manufacturers like SABIC have introduced AM-specific lines
in addition to boutique polymer compounding house's products, such as those available from TechmerPM, see Table 3.4.
As an advantage of these composite feedstock materials, stiffer materials can combat warping during printing. Oak
Ridge National Laboratory showed that carbon fiber filled materials resist thermal warping during printing compared to
more flexible thermoplastics. So, even though composite materials are more difficult to process, there can be unique
properties that can be leveraged for innovative processing schemes. Another example of unique facets of composite
feedstocks is the use of external IR heating to promote interlayer adhesion. This type of pre-heating is helpful to
promote interlayer adhesion, especially in large builds. Due to the presence of carbon fiber in many of these materials,
the heating at the surface can be accomplished rapidly without long hold times at temperature that may oxidize the
material.

Supplier                         Material name                     Description

SABIC LNPTM THERMOCOMPTM AM, grade name 6C004XXAR1 PC/PBT resin containing 20% carbon fiber

                     LNPTM THERMOCOMPTM AM, grade name AF004XXAR1  ABS resin containing 20% glass fiber

                     LNPTM THERMOCOMPTM AM, grade name DC004XXAR1  PC resin containing 20% carbon fiber

DSM                              Arnite® AM8527 (G)                glass-reinforced PET

                                 Novamid® ID1030 CF10              carbon fiber filled PA6/66 copolymer

Table 3.4 Commercially available composite feedstocks.

Finally, continuous fiber composites such as fiberglass and carbon fiber composites are some of the highest-
performance widespread materials available for industrial and consumer applications. Aerospace components,
automobile panels, wind turbine blades, sporting goods, and other lightweight, strong components are all composed of
these continuous fiber composites. However, due to the layup procedures and vacuum consolidation used in production
of these types of parts, processing continuous fiber composites remains a challenge. Markforged has pioneered
continuous fiber AM using ME with layers of thermoplastic and thermoplastic coated Kevlar, glass, or carbon fibers.
These parts have shown promise in light-duty structural aluminum replacement applications where loads are
reasonable, but the intrinsically layered structure of this method and the presets in Markforged software presents
challenges to custom part design. Conventional high-performance composites also have some interwoven character to
the reinforcement, which is difficult to envision being deployed in standard AM. Z-extrusion and interlayer stitching
methodologies have been reported in the literature, but have not made it out of the research laboratory, yet.

There have been attempts to adapt automated fiber layup machines, such as the Ingersoll Machine Tools MongooseTM
machine. These types of concepts have been successful in printing on curved mandrels in sizes up to those of 100 m
wind turbine blades, although free-forming large-scale components continues to be an unmet challenge.

Elastomers

Elastomers are a high-value class of polymers that can have hardnesses and strengths ranging from nearly glassy
polymers with high impact strengths and high loading resistance to the softest silicones for vibration dampening and all
familiar rubbery materials in between. Interestingly, elastomers can be composed of either thermoplastics, as in
thermoplastic elastomers, or thermosets, as in thermally cured liquid silicone rubbers. There are a few key thermoplastic
elastomers (TPE) on the market for AM, including the NinjaTek (Fenner, Inc.) family of products which are generally
thermoplastic polyurethanes (TPU) with durometers of Shore 85A to 95A. These ME filament feedstocks are derived
from injection molding grades of TPUs. Other TPEs on the market include Kraton® (Kraton Corp.) or Pebax® (Arkema
Group)-based filaments sold under a variety of trade names. Since all of these materials were initially invented for
traditional extrusion-based processing of polymeric materials, like injection molding, much is known about their
performance across a wide range of applications and they are in common use. Soft elastomers with Shore 60A or lower
durometers are difficult to adapt to traditional filament ME processes due to the mechanical deformation of the filament
as it is fed into the extrusion die. Therefore, pellet-based ME of elastomers enables the use of a wide range of materials,
although elastomer parts tend to be small with fine detail and the larger pellet-based ME technology is not necessarily
suitable for these components.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             3.1 · Polymer Materials 49

Flexible SLA resins and MJ flexible photopolymer materials are widespread on the market. What is interesting about MJ
elastomers is that due to the voxelization of the MJ process, the durometer of these materials can be dialed in during the
design of the part - just by mixing hard and soft voxels, an element of volume in 3-dimensional space. Combined with
the architectural complexity of additive manufacturing, material variations on the fly are an important advantage of this
technology, albeit the photopolymerization of elastomers generally does not yield the properties of melt-processed
materials.
Photopolymer elastomers can be widely customized during blending in the manufacture of the material or at the point
of use. Because of the multicomponent photopolymer formulations, a wide range of properties can be achieved,
however the elongational properties of these thermoset elastomers are not as good, in general, as the elongation of
TPEs or thermally cured elastomers from direct in writing. Regardless, SLA and its vat polymerization variants give the
surface finish and fine detail required for consumer products such as silicone watch bands and soft-touch headphone
components. Direct ink writing (DIW) ME has been demonstrated for a variety of silicones from Wacker Chemie AG and
Dow although due to the drawbacks of DIW, there are not commercial applications of these processes, yet.
TPUs are also being investigated in PBF and HP Multi-Jet Fusion processes as the powder feedstock. TPU powder is still
under development by a number of companies, including Covestro. While PBF and HP MJF processes are routine for PA11
and other thermoplastics, the unique powder rheology and fusion characteristics of elastomers need to be revisited in
terms of these known processes. Additionally, highly fused elastomer powders will likely suffer from low elongation to
break and high defect concentrations which will limit their high-strain properties and fatigue resistance.

Polymer summary

                                                      Figure 3.3 Polymer performance pyramid.
Additionally, there are some polymers that are widely used that have not been deployed in additive processes. Materials
such at polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polybenzimidazole (PBI), and other common polymeric materials, such as Kevlar,
are not necessarily melt processible or cannot be formulated as a polymerizable liquid resin and will be difficult to
integrate into AM feedstocks except in the case of composites.
The availability of high-performance, finished materials directly from the AM process (and associated post-processing)
enables low-run production of end-use parts, full-functionality advanced prototypes, and one-of-one customization
without sacrificing the materials performance that is expected from high-fidelity manufacturing techniques.
50 3 · AM Materials

   3.2 Metallic Materials

    Learning Objectives

     By the end of this section, students will be able to:

        · Describe the range of engineered metallic materials available for AM.
        · Describe the means of preparing and processing those materials for use in AM applications.

     Over 100 different alloys are either commercially available or have been proven in the laboratory as suitable for AM.
     These alloys cover all the primary classes, with many being available for multiple processes, as summarized in Table 3.5.
     The majority of alloys currently used in AM were originally developed for casting, welding, or wrought (sheet, plate,
     forging, extrusion) processes for two reasons:

       1. Using an alloy with a known chemistry and characteristics reduces the risk of unforeseen metallurgical issues, such
            as brittleness or corrosion issues.

       2. It can be difficult to build a material supply chain for a new alloy. Hence, most of the alloys are similar or identical to
            existing ones, and are already produced as a wire, powder, or foil for another market.

     This situation will change in the future as the AM industry grows and more alloys are developed. Note that the
     mechanical properties, cost, and other characteristics for a given alloy class can range widely; consulting a current
     comparison guide will be necessary. Relative cost is often expressed in terms of per kg, so in some cases the use of a
     lower density but higher cost alloy can be less expensive, keeping in mind that metal feedstock cost may only represent
     10%-50% of the final part cost.

     While most alloys are characterized by their composition, density, and mechanical properties, two other characteristics of
     importance to AM are weldability and heat treatment. Weldability is important because many AM processes are fusion
     processes, that involve melting the alloy and fusing it to the previous layers through solidification. Fusion based AM
     processes are often described as either `making the part by welding' or `making the part by micro-welding'. Heat
     treatment is important because certain alloys require a specific heat treatment to obtain optimum properties.

    Heat treatment

     These primary types of heat treatment are below, with the percent of melting point referring to the absolute melting
     point in K:

       1. Stress-Relief - This is used for most alloys which undergo a fusion process to eliminate residual stresses that can
            lead to distortion, decreased fatigue lives, or reduced corrosion resistance. It generally takes place between 30%
            and 40% of the melting point. This is often performed on parts made using fusion AM prior to removing it from the
            build plate.

       2. Annealing - This is used in austenitic (3xx series) stainless steels, copper alloys, and a variety of Al, Co, Ni, Co, Fe,
            and refractory alloys. The primary goal is to provide a more stable microstructure for a better balance of mechanical
            properties and corrosion resistance. Annealing temperatures are generally between 50% and 60% of the melting
            point

       3. Austenize, Quench, and Temper - This is primarily used in alloy steels, tool steels, martensitic (4xx series) stainless
            steels, and some titanium alloys. It involves heating the material to around 60% of its melting point (austenize),
            rapidly cooling it (usually a water or liquid quench), and then reheating to around 300C (tempering) to remove
            brittleness.

       4. Solution Anneal, Quench, and Age - This is most commonly used for aluminum alloys, PH (Precipitation Hardening)
            stainless steels, Ni alloys, some Cu alloys, Mg alloys, and some Ti alloys. It involves heating an alloy to around 90% of
            its melting point (Solution Anneal), rapidly cooling (Quench), and aging at around 25% of melting point to
            precipitate out phases that strengthen alloys, hence why it is referred to as precipitation hardening.

     The actual temperatures, times, heating and cooling rates for any alloy often need to be quite closely controlled. Since
     the overwhelming number of alloys used in AM were previously developed for casting, wrought, and welding
     applications, the optimum heat treatment for the same alloy used for AM may be different. It should also be noted that
     the rapid (generally liquid) cooling in some of the heat treatments can induce residual stresses, distortion, and even
     cracking.

     Another thermal treatment often used in conjunction with AM is hot isostatic pressing (HIP). This consists of heating
     the material to around 50% of its melting point while under extremely high pressure (100MPa - 200MPa) in Ar gas for 2
     to 8 hours, then cooling back to room temperature. The purpose is to close any discontinuities (pores, lack of fusion, or
     cracks) in the interior of the part. HIP is not effective for discontinuities that are open to the surface. Also, the presence
     of an inert gas in a pore (such as that which may become trapped during AM processing in and Ar atmosphere) may also

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               3.2 · Metallic Materials 51

keep it from fully healing. This is either because as the pore shrinks, the internal gas pressure will increase until it
matches the HIP pressure, arresting further shrinkage and healing. In some instances, especially if the part is treated to
a high-temperature solution annealing after HIP, the gas and the pore may then expand, as the temperature heats the
gas and raises the pressure, while simultaneously lowering the flow stress of the metal. The overall relationship between
pore size, gas content, alloy, pressure, time, and temperature is very complex with examples where HIP is successful and
where it is not successful in the literature, with the current consensus being that it does provide a benefit.

Because of the high temperature and long time, HIP often doubles as a stress relief or an annealing operation. If the HIP
temperature is sufficiently high and the cooling rate is relatively fast and controlled, it is possible to also use this as the
solution annealing and quench step for precipitation hardened alloys that do not require a rapid quench. This is known
as a combined cycle, and it is also possible after the quench to hold the part at an elevated temperature to age as well.
Since HIP vessels are significantly more expensive to purchase and operate than heat treat furnaces, however, economics
may still recommend performing these operations in different cycles.

Metallic Feedstock Types and Processes

Because AM by definition makes parts in layers, the metallic feedstocks used are small or thin, meaning powders, wires,
or foils. While powder bed fusion (PBF) by definition uses powders, and sheet lamination (SL) by definition uses sheets or
thin foils; directed energy deposition (DED) processes can use powder or wire, while binder jetting (BJP), material
extrusion (ME), Material Jetting (MJ) and cold spray (CS) use powders. Typical feedstock types and sizes, along with their
associated processes, are provided in Table 3.5. The different ways in which these feedstocks are manufactured has an
impact on their subsequent behaviors in AM.

Feedstock                                                    Process

                   Electron                                  Binder Jet

                Laser Beam Small Large and                                        Sheet
      Size Powder Powder Puddle Puddle Polymer Material Material Cold
Type            Bed Bed DED DED material Extrusion Jetting Spray Lamination

                Fusion Fusion                                Extrusion/

                                                             Jetting

Powder <15m                                                  X

      15m -     X                                            X

      45m

      45m -     X  X           X  X                          X

      105m

      105m -                      X                          X                 X
      150m

      >150m                       X                                            X

Wire <1.5 mm                   X                                            X

      diameter

      >1.5 mm                     X                                      X  X
      diameter

Foil  ~250m                                                                                                                      X

Table 3.5 Metallic Feedstock Types and Associated Processes

Wire Manufacturing

Regardless of the alloy system, wire is made in generally the same way. A cylindrical ingot, or cast simple shape suitable
for further processing, of the alloy is cast in a melt shop, and then progressively reduced in diameter in a series of
52 3 · AM Materials

     forging, followed by bar mills, until the bar is relatively small in diameter, with 25mm being near the top end. This bar is
     then pulled through a series of dies to progressively smaller diameters, known as drawing, until the final wire diameter
     is achieved. Because drawing is a cold-working process that progressively strengthens a metal and reduces its ductility,
     intermediate anneals are performed to reduce the strength and restore the ductility. Other steps involve the chemical
     removal of lubricants and oxide coatings. An operation done for some arc welding (generally Gas Metal Arc or MIG) wire
     is to add a thin Cu coating to conduct electricity from the weld electrode to the wire. Because of this, care must be taken
     when ordering wire if a Cu coating is not wanted.
     Highly workable, non-reactive alloys such as mild and austenitic stainless steels will have an annealing station as part of
     a large, continuous wire drawing line that may produce thousands of kilometers of wire in a single day. Alloys that are
     more difficult to work, especially reactive materials, such as titanium alloys, will be drawn to the extent of their ductility,
     annealed in a vacuum furnace, and then further reduced as an iterative operation until the final diameter is achieved.
     Additionally, surface oxidation may need to be removed, which further reduces the amount of sellable wire. This means
     that in some alloys, small variations in diameter can result in significant increases in the unit cost of the wire.
     Some variants on this process, especially for low melting point alloys like Al and Cu, will make the bar using continuous
     casting methods which can range from 10mm diameter to up to 75mm diameter. Another variant, generally for metals
     with very high melting points, known as refractory metals, such as tungsten, molybdenum, niobium, tantalum, etc, will
     press and sinter powders into a billet, which will then be fully densified using HIP, forging, or extrusion. This approach
     would also be used for metal matrix composites and alloys that cannot be cast, such as some nickel-based superalloys.

    Foil Manufacturing

     Foil manufacturing is much like wire manufacturing except that instead of round bar being drawn through a die, flat
     sheets are reduced in thickness using a rolling mill. Even without cold-working, the pressure needed to roll an alloy
     increases as it gets thinner. As a result, foils are produced in specialized mills with relatively small rollers that are backed
     with other rolls, known as Sendzimer Mills. Like wire, intermediate anneals are often necessary.

    Powder Manufacturing

     Whereas wire and foil are made using variants of the same process, a wide array of processes are used to make powder.
     Plasma
     These processes use a plasma to melt solid metal or alloy of the desired composition to form spherical particles. Barring
     the pick-up of undesired gases, the composition of the powder is the same as the feedstock. Generally, whatever you can
     get in bar, wire, or particle stock you can make into spherical powder. There are three processes in this category:
      1. Plasma Rotating Electrode (PREP) uses a plasma torch to melt a cylindrical bar of the desired alloy. The rapid

            (>10,000 RPM) spinning of the bar causes the molten metal to fly away from the bar and form spherical particles. A
            combination of the alloy surface tension and the radial velocity of the molten alloy as it departs the arc determine
            the powder particle size. Attributes of powder from this process are a relatively coarse size distribution, nearly
            perfect spheres, almost no satellites (small powder particles adhered to larger ones), and almost no porosity.
      2. Plasma Atomization (PA) uses a wire feedstock that is melted by plasma torches in place of forcing a molten metal
            and gas through an orifice. The wire feedstock is significantly more expensive than the billet or ingot feedstock used
            in gas atomization. The primary benefit of plasma atomization is that it has lower satellite and porosity content than
            gas atomization produces.
      3. Spheriodization is a way to convert existing irregularly shaped or porous particles into spherical powder particles.
            In this process, the particles to be converted into spheres fall through a plasma. While they are falling due to gravity,
            the particles re-solidify into spheres. A combination of alloy surface tension and the initial particle size determine
            the powder particle size, thus making the initial particle size key to the powder size distribution. This powder can be
            finer than PREP but is generally coarser than atomized. It will have more satellites and pores than PREP but will
            generally be better in both categories than typical atomized powder.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             3.2 · Metallic Materials 53

Figure 3.4 Plasma rotating electrode is a primary method of powder manufacturing. A bar is spun rapidly and heated by
a plasma torch. The high speed of rotation ensures that the molten alloy flies away from the bar. Particle size depends on
the alloy composition, the electrode diameter, and the rotation speed. (credit: modification of "PREP principle diagram"
by Li et al in "High-Quality Spherical Silver Alloy Powder for Laser Powder Bed Fusion Using Plasma Rotating Electrode
Process." Micromachines 2024, 15, 396. CC BY 4.0)
Atomization
Atomization generally involves mixing a liquid metal stream with flowing fluid and forcing the mixture through an
orifice to scatter the liquid, which then solidifies into generally spherical powders. Key variables that influence the size
distribution of the powder are the size of the molten stream, the metal:gas ratio, their velocities, and additional gas
flows, and the size of the orifice. Additional characteristics of the powder are sphericity, satellites and porosity.
Depending on the variables and degree of control, a wide range of characteristics is possible.
Inert Gas Atomization (IGA) and Electrode Inert Gas Atomization (EIGA) are the most common processes for reactive and
high-value alloys, such as titanium (reactive), aluminum (reactive), magnesium (reactive) nickel-base (high-value), and
higher value tool and stainless steels. This is because the inert gas (almost always Ar) does not react with the base metal
or any oxidation-sensitive alloying elements. It should be noted that using an inert gas provides protection from
oxidation but is no guarantee of a powder with good flow and packing characteristics or homogeneity. Standard IGA
melts the alloy in a crucible and pours it into a gas stream, while EIGA melts a bar with an electrode, with the molten
metal impacted by the stream.
Gas Atomization (GA) is primarily used for non-reactive, non-ferrous alloys as well as lower-grade tool, stainless, and
carbon steels. The typical gas used is nitrogen, but sometimes air is used. This process is not used for reactive metals, as
the result would be catastrophic.
Water Atomization uses water as the fluid in place of the gas. This actually allows for more rapid cooling of the particles.
Like GA, it is not used for reactive or higher-grade powders. This is the lowest cost process and produces a relatively
coarse particle size distribution and irregular powders.
Ground/Machined
Ground and Machined processes take existing large stock (bar, plate, granules, etc) and use mechanical energy by
grinding or machining to make powders. By adjusting the machining and grinding parameters, a wide range of shapes
and sizes can be achieved. One of the benefits of using solid-state methods to make the powder is the absence of melt-
related defects, such as gas pores, although care must be taken to avoid contamination by the cutting media.
Milling/Turning: In some cases, this is as simple as purchasing chips or turning scrap from a machine shop and
subjecting them to additional grinding or cutting operations to make powder. In other cases, an engineered process to
deliberately make powders may be used. A benefit of this is that almost any wrought alloy can be converted into powder
54 3 · AM Materials

     without the complexities of melting and oxidation.

     Hydride - Dehydride (HdH): This process is limited to titanium and its alloys, due to the unique combination of
     hydrogen absorption and embrittling characteristics. In this process titanium or titanium alloy particles are put in a
     hydrogen atmosphere at around 700C. After a period of time, a significant (>1%) amount of hydrogen is absorbed into
     the titanium, and embrittles it. The particles are cooled, removed from the furnace and ground to the desired particle
     size. After this, they are put into a vacuum furnace at around 700C, and the hydrogen evaporates out of the titanium or
     titanium alloy, leaving behind smaller, but irregularly shaped titanium or titanium alloy particles of the same composition
     as the initial feedstock. A variety of feedstocks can be used, such as machining chips (alloy), sponge (pure Ti), or even an
     alloy made using a direct reduced process. This powder can be used as-is, or spheriodized to make a spherical powder. In
     this case, the size of the powder is determined by the initial particle size and the time used to grind it. Porosity levels
     would reflect the initial feedstock. Impurity levels would also reflect the initial feedstock, so if machining chips are used,
     they must be well cleaned in advance to remove carbides and steel from any cutting tools; along with any cutting fluids.

     Direct Reduced
     Direct reduced powders range start with an oxide or other metal-containing compound and use reacting gases, liquids,
     or thermal decomposition to produce a metal powder. While they are generally used to make pure metals, some variants
     can produce alloys. The original processes were the use of hydrogen to reduce refractory metal oxides into metal
     powders, and thermal decomposition of carbonyl iron into iron powder. Some processes also use electrochemical
     methods. Multiple processes for making titanium alloys are in development, with some in the initial stages of
     commercialization. Most of these powders are irregular, and some can be spongy with a very low (<20%) tap density
     (density of a compacted container of powder, expressed as a percentage of fully dense alloy), and would require
     secondary processing, such as spheriodizing, to achieve a higher tap density and better flow characteristics.

    Powder Attributes and Characterization

     In addition to the chemistry and way of making powder, a variety of powder attributes impacts their use in AM. The
     attributes include overall size, the distribution of size, surface oxide, individual particle chemistry.

     Not only do different processes use different types of feedstock, but the size of the feedstock varies as well. The size of
     the powders is generally specified as a range, where the lower number indicates the size that 10% of the particles are
     smaller than (called D10), and the larger indicates the size that 90% of the particles are smaller than (called D90). Some
     specifications place requirements on the powder size distribution (PSD), such as D2, D50, and D98. The size ranges
     provided in Table 2 are commonly used, but many processes and users specify powders in other size ranges. While
     spherical powder is currently preferred and is usually specified for PBF and DED applications, the ability to flow and
     spread evenly are the most important requirements. Sphericity is less important for the other processes, and in the case
     of BJP and polymer ME/MJ powders that don't flow as well are preferred, as they have better green (condition after
     printing) strength and brown (condition after binder removal) strength to better retain their shape during sintering.

     When powder is manufactured, the overall PSD covers a range that resembles a Gaussian distribution that may range
     from under 5µm to over 250µm. The powder manufacturer will then sieve the powder into the specified size ranges. The
     challenge for the powder manufacturer is to align the powder they produce, the price they can charge, and the
     customers they have to maximize the revenue they obtain from each lot of powder they produce. Much like the lumber
     industry where heartwood costs more than bark (excepting cork), some PSDs have a significantly higher market price
     than others, even though the unit cost to produce each size range (grow the tree) is the same.

     Another consideration in powders, especially reactive alloys (Al, Mg, and Ti), is that the surface of the powder particles is
     covered with a thin oxide layer that is generally of a constant thickness. Thus, the smaller the powder diameter, the
     higher the ratio of surface area (and oxide) to volume. This means that the smaller PSDs are generally higher in oxygen
     than the larger ones. This is important when purchasing powders to make sure that one is not trying to get very small
     powders with a very low oxygen content, which can result in either excessive cost or poor availability. This comes into
     play in processes that require recovery and re-use of powders, as each run through the AM and recovery processes can
     result in oxygen pick-up. If the starting oxygen level is high relative to the maximum allowed amount, re-use can result in
     the powder quickly going above the maximum amount of oxygen, requiring scrappage and excessive costs. A final
     consideration in handling and mixing powders is that many specifications prohibit blending powder that is above the
     maximum allowed oxygen (or any other element, for that matter) with powder below the maximum allowed oxygen to
     create a blend that is within specification.

     In powder bed fusion, the diameter of the powder is limited by the layer thickness, as having individual powder particles
     larger than the layer thickness can interfere with the recoater and impact the homogeneity of the layer. At the same
     time, powder particles that are too small can experience displacement by the melt pool. Electron Beam has traditionally
     used a larger powder size, but both processes are capable of using sizes in the 15µm - 105µm range, or even larger for

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      3.3 · Metallic Materials Characteristics 55

very thick layers. Likewise, in DED, powder particles and wire diameters that are too close to the powder diameter can
negatively impact the stability of the puddle, hence the reason small (generally <3mm) puddle processes use smaller
diameter wire than large (>6mm) puddle processes.

Binder jet and polymer material extrusion/jetting (ME/MJ) can use a wide range of powder sizes, with small sizes being
preferred for resolution, surface finish, and sintering time, and larger sizes preferred for cost, shrinkage control, and
handling safety. A blend of sizes is sometimes preferred to optimize for sintering time and shrinkage. Material Extrusion
(commercially known as the MELD® process) uses bar, large diameter wire or very coarse powder, often referred to as
granules. One variant of Material Jetting (Xerox/Vader®) uses wire. The foil size used in sheet lamination is a trade-off of
having a flexible foil (thinner is better), layer thickness (thicker is faster), and alloy type (higher-temperature and harder
alloys are more difficult to ultrasonically weld, hence thinner is better).

A final way of characterizing powders is whether each particle is of the target chemistry (pre-alloyed) or if the powder
particles are each a pure metal, and the ratio of different powders is the target chemistry (blended elemental). While
these represent the extreme ends, blends of pure metals and alloys are also used, with an example being a mixture of
90% pure Ti and 10% Al/V master alloy (with a ratio of 60% Al and 40% V) being used to make Ti-6Al-4V. Each has its own
advantages and disadvantages. Like the example above on oxygen content, the benefit of pre-alloyed powder is that the
risk of chemical inhomogeneity in the final part is minimized, since one does not have to worry about the powder
segregating during handling or passage through the AM machine and recovery/re-use processes. As a result, almost all
of the fusion AM processes use pre-alloyed powder. Blended elemental powders and their offshoots, on the other hand,
have been successfully used in the powder metallurgy industry for decades. Some of the benefits of blended elemental
powders are lower cost, reduced inventory for a facility processing multiple closely related alloys, higher green/brown
strength and faster sintering. Because of this, blended elemental alloys will more likely be used in BJP or polymer ME
processes. A final potential use of blended elemental powders and AM is the ability to change the composition of from
one region to another of a single part. These are often referred to functionally gradient materials and have been
demonstrated in both DED and BJP processes.

Feedstock Safety and Cleanliness

Other feedstock factors relate to safety and handling. Smaller powders are more of a fire and inhalation safety issue,
with reactive alloys of most concern. Because contamination is a concern with powders as well, powder handling is
moving towards always keeping them in a sealed container throughout the entire process chain (`protect the operator
from the powder and the powder from the operator'), especially as powder bed fusion and binder jetting require
recovery and re-use of powders. Safety and cleanliness are less of a concern in polymer material extrusion because the
powder is encased in a filament with >40% polymer and a low surface area. In the case of polymer material jetting, the
powder particles are also encased in a polymer. Additionally, polymer material jetting tends towards small, precise parts
so that there is little powder in a given area. The coarse powder used for Material Extrusion is of little safety concern. Foil
and wire have little or no safety issues, and while cleanliness is the primary handling issue, even this is reduced since
wire-based AM processes are once through, with no recovery and re-use. Larger diameter wires are more difficult to
handle but have less surface area for contamination.

3.3 Metallic Materials Characteristics

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Differentiate several feedstocks of metallic materials, and how they relate to AM processes.
  · Describe the relationships between metallic feedstocks, AM processing, AM post-processing, and the resultant AM

      part.

Aluminum Alloys

Currently, the overwhelming use of aluminum alloys in AM is for L-PBF, with DED, ME, MJ, CS, and SL all seeing their initial
introductions. The difficulty in sintering low-density materials with adherent oxides presents challenges for BJP and
Polymer ME/MJ. Aluminum alloys have a wide range of properties, falling into several different categories. All of the
precipitation hardened alloys require quenching in either water or an engineered quenchant, so the potential for
distortion and residual stresses must be addressed.
56 3 · AM Materials

     Figure 3.5 Fittings and other aluminum parts fabricated by ADDiTEC's ElemXTM 3D liquid metal printer sit upon a
     workbench onboard USS San Diego.(credit: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Brandon Woods
     on DVIDS, Public Domain)
     The most commonly used alloys at this time are Al-10Si-Mg and Al-7Si-Mg. These are essentially the AM counterparts of
     A360 (a die casting alloy) and D356 (a sand, permanent mold, and investment casting alloy). The Si content provides
     good weldability, and hence is favorable for AM. The presence of Mg with Si enables them to be precipitation hardened
     to a reasonable strength:weight ratio. Related to these alloys are the 4xxx welding and 6xxx (usually 6061) wrought
     alloys. The 4xxx welding alloys are available in wire form, hence are readily available for wire-based processes. They
     contain Si for weldability with some variants having Mg. Variants with Mg can be precipitation hardened, while those
     without are only annealed. Since 6061 is a wrought alloy, it is readily available as bar for ME, but is also available in wire
     (for DED), powder (for L-PBF and Cold Spray), and foil form (SL). It can be precipitation hardened to slightly higher
     properties than the casting-based alloys.
     Because of their weldability and excellent corrosion resistance, 5xxx alloys are primarily used for architectural and
     marine use, but the inability to heat treat them limits their mechanical properties. Common product forms would be bar,
     wire, and sheet/foil. Because 5xxx alloys respond well to cold-working, cold-worked foils and SL or bar and ME would
     provide higher properties.
     The 2xxx series alloys were history's original precipitation hardened system and were the primary ones used to build in
     aircraft from the 1920s through the 1970s, with advanced variants still used. They can be heat treated to higher
     properties than the 3xx, 4xxx, and 6xxx alloys. The high copper content, however, generally gives them poor weldability
     due to hot cracking. Welding grades such as 2219 are the exception, and are available in wire, although bar is also
     available. A20X® is an AM variant of a casting alloy that offers 2xxx mechanical properties and is available in powder.
     The high Zn and Cu content in 7xxx series alloys also leads to hot cracking problems, so they have generally only been
     considered usable for solid-state processes such as ME and SL. The attraction of the 7xxx system is the very high
     strength that can be achieved with precipitation hardening. The development of a 7xxx alloy that is suitable for AM has
     been the subject of considerable research, with the first variant, 7A77.50 being registered and in the process of
     commercialization.
     Scalmalloy® is one of very first alloys specifically designed for AM, whose unique Al-Mg-Sc chemistry, takes advantage of
     the rapid solidification in L-PBF to develop precipitates that impart very high properties without the need for
     precipitation hardening. The ability to achieve very high properties without needing to solution anneal and quench can
     provide additional design freedom as it eliminates the concerns over residual stresses and distortion from quenching,
     although the Sc content makes it a relatively expensive alloy. It also provides for very good thermal stability at elevated
     temperatures.
     The typical process flow for both a precipitation-hardened alloy and Scalmalloy® using L-PBF, starting with initiation of
     the build program will illustrate the unique processing aspects of precipitation hardened and non-precipitation-
     hardened alloys.
     Precipitation-Hardened Alloy
      1. Build part.
      2. Remove part, build plate, and excess powder from machine.
      3. Analyze log file from machine. Unless this is automatically performed at the end of the cycle, it will take place after

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       3.3 · Metallic Materials Characteristics 57

       part removal so that machine is available for the next build.
 4. Perform rough finishing. Depending on the supply chain, the actual order of these operations can be quite flexible,

       with the exception that some form of stress relief should be performed prior to build plate removal to prevent
       movement and distortion of the part during build plate removal. As mentioned above, HIP can serve as the stress
       relief operation. Depending on the type of supports, HIP vessel operators may require removal of the supports to
       ensure that there is no entrapped powder that could escape and cause damage to the internals of the HIP vessel,
       especially the heating elements.
        1. Stress relief
        2. HIP
        3. Build plate removal
        4. Support removal

 5. Solution anneal, quench, and age. This is almost always performed after build plate removal to prevent the build
       plate and part from cooling at different rates during quenching and distorting the part.

 6. Lot acceptance testing. Excise and test metallographic and mechanical test (usually tensile) coupons. This may also
       include removal of features built on the part to prevent distortion during HIP, solution annealing, or quenching.

 7. Surface smoothing. This includes processes such as tumble de-burr, bead blasting, etc. Integrated finishing
       machines for AM parts are being introduced to the market, with some of the machines incorporating support
       removal in the same operation. This can also include manual operations, such as manual removal of support rash
       (protuberances on the part where supports were attached).

 8. Interface machining. This is generally machining of higher-tolerance features for mating with other parts, although
       non-mating regions with high tolerances would also be machined here.

 9. Part acceptance testing. Depending on the industry, a part acceptance testing can range from simple checks with a
       gage, to highly detailed measurements on a coordinate measuring machine (CMM), to extensive nondestructive
       testing methods. This will be more fully discussed in 6.2 Production Acceptance Testing.
        1. Radiographic nondestructive testing. This can range from simple film radiography to digital radiography to
             elaborate computed tomography (CT) testing. One benefit with aluminum is that its low density allows for
             lower, more sensitive X-ray energies, thicker parts, or a combination of the two. As AM parts become more
             complex, CT testing may sometimes be required to validate the locations and dimensions of internal cavities.
        2. Dimensional inspection
        3. Penetrant inspection. Penetrant inspection is highly dependent on surface roughness. That found in typical L-
             PBF parts that have not been smoothed will not allow for high-sensitivity fluorescent penetrant testing used in
             aerospace, and even makes lower-sensitivity dye penetrant testing challenging due to the high number of false
             positive indications. Aerospace grade penetrant inspection of aluminum requires a pre-penetrant etch of
             machined surfaces, which can require a unique chemical solution, depending on the alloy.

10. Chemical treatments (paint, anodize, etc.) - Chemical treatments for higher Si alloys (Al-10Si-Mg, Al-7Si-Mg) can be
       significantly different than ones with lower Si contents, and different non-Si alloys have different chemical
       treatments.

Scalmalloy® or 5xxx Alloy
 1. Build part.
 2. Remove part, build plate, and excess powder from machine.
 3. Analyze log file from machine.
 4. Perform rough finishing. Scalmalloy® requires an aging cycle that has different parameters than the HIP cycle, while

       a 5xxx alloy would not require anything except a stress relief.
        1. Stress relief
        2. HIP
        3. Build plate removal
        4. Support removal

 5. Lot acceptance testing.
 6. Surface smoothing.
 7. Interface machining.
 8. Part acceptance testing.
 9. Chemical treatments.
58 3 · AM Materials

     Figure 3.6 An Air Force technical specialist compares 3D printed pump bracket to the older bracket that needs
     replacement. The new part used a stronger alloy to decrease the amount of repairs that are needed over time. (credit:
     U.S. Air Force photo by Airman 1st Class Jayden Ford on DVIDS, Public Domain.)

    Carbon and Maraging Steels

     As the most widely used material system on the planet, there are thousands of steel grades, with hundreds of them
     available in powder and wire form. Carbon, in a range of content from 0.08% up to 1% provides the strengthening agent,
     with austenize, quench, and temper as the primary heat treatment to provide strength. The use of a liquid quench brings
     in complications for distortion and residual stresses. The other alloying elements are generally used to provide
     hardenability (the ability to fully harden thick sections) or other property enhancements such as elevated temperature
     properties, corrosion resistance, toughness, etc. Carbon steels can be divided into 4 main categories:
     Mild steels generally have under 0.08% carbon and relatively low properties. In wrought form, these are by far the most
     widely used class of metal on the planet because of their low cost, formability, weldability, predictable mechanical
     properties, and wide range of product forms. Because even `high-cost' carbon steels are very low cost, and can have
     superior properties, mild steels are rarely used for AM. This could change in the future as AM moves into industries such
     as construction and shipbuilding.
     Low alloy steels will tend to have around 1% alloying elements by weight and under 0.4% carbon. They can provide very
     high properties with heat treatment in thin sections, with alloy 4130 being a prime example. Their low cost and the broad
     experience in the powder metallurgy industry makes them attractive for BJP and polymer ME. Their lower hardenability
     is not a tremendous liability in AM, as section thicknesses tend to be relatively low. Higher carbon contents can result in
     cracking in fusion AM processes.
     High alloy steels (around 3% alloying elements and up to 0.4% carbon, as in 4340) and tool steels (around 10% alloying
     elements and up to 1% carbon) are very much like low alloy steels in terms of the impact of carbon on fusion AM
     processes. Higher alloy and tool steels would be selected based on the need for enhanced properties, or occasionally for
     hardenability. One of the benefits of AM for making tooling is the ability to put in conforming cooling channels, shown in
     Figure F03_02_Conformal, so it can be imagined that the high hardenability of tool steels may become less necessary for
     AM tools. Both types of steel are available in wire and powder form, although the choice is not as wide as for wrought
     and cast products.
     Maraging steels, which are carbon-free Iron nickel alloys, were developed to provide very high strength steels without

      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       3.3 · Metallic Materials Characteristics 59

the need for rapid quenching and the inherent cracking and distortion risks. They can also provide higher toughness
than some tool steels. They use a variant of precipitation hardening known as Maraging. Maraging steels are of interest
in AM because of the ability to provide high strength parts without the high carbon content that can cause cracking in
fusion AM processes. Their higher alloying element content (up to 25%), however, means that the feedstock will be
significantly more expensive in relative terms than low and high alloy steels. The rapid cooling present in most fusion AM
processes also opens possibilities to avoid a high-temperature heat treatment after build and proceed to a stress-relief/
aging cycle.

Processing considerations for medium and higher carbon steels made using a wire DED process can be quite different
from L-PBF of aluminum alloys, as described below.

 1. Build part. This may have to be stopped from time to time and the part sent off for stress relief to prevent cracking
       of any martensitic regions.

 2. Remove part and build plate from machine.
 3. Analyze log file from machine.
 4. Perform rough finishing. Similar flexibility to L-PBF, with the exceptions that while supports are less common in DED

       processing, they would be larger, and would probably be retained until interface machining.
 5. Austenize, quench, and temper.
 6. Lot acceptance testing.
 7. Surface smoothing. While tooling surfaces often need to be smoother than parts, this will often be done during

       interface machining, with the remainder of the surfaces left as built.
 8. Interface machining.
 9. Part acceptance testing. The higher density of steels makes radiographic inspection more difficult, while very high

       strength steels do not require pre-penetrant etch. Additionally, steels can be inspected using magnetic particle
       inspection.
10. Chemical treatments. While there are significant efforts to develop alternatives to Cr plating, the process still exists,
       and may be required for some applications. Additionally, some chemical treatments of high-strength steels present
       the risk of hydrogen embrittlement, so a low-temperature bake out may be required.

Stainless Steels

Their combination of weldability, corrosion resistance, and low relative cost make stainless steels one of the principal
alloy systems used in AM. The widespread use of stainless steels in powder metallurgy, MIM, and welded chemical,
medical, and food industry applications means widespread availability of powder, wire, and foils. The stainless steels
used in AM fall into four primary classes based on chemical composition and method of hardening.

Austenitic (3xx) and Ferritic (4xx) stainless steels are relatively low-strength steels. Cold working in wrought versions
can double the yield strength, but they are not strengthened by heat treatment. The difference between austenitic and
ferritic is that former contains a significant (>8%) amount of Ni which gives the alloy a more formable cubic structure
while making it nonmagnetic. These alloys are ideal for a wide variety of applications where resistance from oxidation or
corrosion is desired, but high strength is not.

Martensitic stainless steels have a low (<0.2%) carbon content and are commonly used for molds and dies where
resistance against corrosion is desired, especially where the part produced in the mold has a high surface finish
requirement. Designs with conformal cooling channels would be an ideal AM application. Precipitation hardened
stainless steels also obtain their properties by heat treatment and would be used where one would use an austenitic or
ferritic stainless, but where higher mechanical properties are desired. Because the required cooling rate for PH stainless
steels is lower than for martensitic stainless steels, there are fewer concerns with residual stresses and distortion.

 1. Build green part.
 2. Remove green part from machine and excess powder.
 3. Analyze log file from machine.
 4. Remove binder using thermal or chemical methods, resulting in a brown part
 5. Sinter brown part to target density, checking furnace log file and taking simple dimensions as a quick cycle check.
 6. Optional HIP if full density is desired. No final heat treatment is required.
 7. Lot acceptance testing.
 8. Surface smoothing.
 9. Interface machining. This would include supports and excess material needed for support during sintering.
10. Part acceptance testing. If required, non-magnetic austenitic steels would require penetrant testing.
11. Chemical treatments. Passivation of the surfaces to properly form a protective oxide is often performed.
60 3 · AM Materials

    Titanium Alloys

     Titanium alloys are highly valued by multiple industries due to their combination of high strength, low density,
     toughness, and corrosion resistance. This combination of properties comes at a steep price, as shown in Table 3.5, which
     is why titanium alloys were one of the first systems where AM was implemented. Not only are titanium alloys costly, but
     their toughness also makes machining expensive.
     Like wrought and cast product forms, Ti-6Al-4V is the primary alloy used for AM. Its weldability and ability to absorb its
     oxide in vacuum means that it can be used in nearly every AM process. This includes both aerospace and medical
     applications. Some of the first implementations of Ti-6Al-4V in aerospace use large-puddle DED processing to add
     features to a piece of plate, which is then stress relieved, ultrasonically inspected, and machined to the final
     configuration. The benefit of using AM is in reducing the ratio of raw material used needed to make a finished part
     (referred to as the buy:fly ratio in aerospace). The reduction in the high costs of procuring and machining Ti-6Al-4V more
     than make up for the additional costs for the DED processing. It should be noted that one challenge in fusion AM of
     Ti-6Al-4V and similar alloys is their high strength to stiffness ratio, which can result in excessive distortion, residual
     stresses, and even a higher propensity to crack during build. Thoughtful design and processing, however, can minimize
     this. While it is possible to heat treat Ti-6Al-4V to obtain maximum properties, the need for a rapid quench and the
     residual stress issues make this relatively uncommon. It is generally stress relieved or HIPped.
     Commercially pure (CP) titanium is primarily used in the chemical industry due to its excellent corrosion resistance,
     formability, and significantly lower cost than Ti-6Al-4V, especially in sheet products. Its use in AM would also be primarily
     in the chemical industry for valve and connector components. A variety of Near-Alpha, Near-Beta, and Alpha titanium
     alloys are beginning to see use in applications where higher strength or higher temperature capability then Ti-6Al-4V is
     needed, without moving to higher-density Ni-based alloys. Most of these alloys use a post-build heat treatment to obtain
     optimum properties, which may differ significantly from the standard wrought products. The combination of high
     temperature capability and design complexity from AM makes some of these alloys ideal for heat shields and ducts.

     Figure 3.7 A new metallic 3D printed bracket alongside the aluminum part it will replace on an F-22 Raptor. The new
     titanium part will not corrode and can be procured faster and at less cost than the conventionally manufactured part.
     (credit: U.S. Air Force photo by R. Nial Bradshaw on DVIDS, Public Domain)
     Processing considerations for Ti-6Al-4V made using a large puddle wire DED process differ slightly from that for carbon
     steels, as described below.
       1. Build part. This may have to be stopped from time to time and the part sent off for stress relief to minimize

            distortion or prevent cracking.
       2. Remove part/build plate from machine.
       3. Analyze log file from machine.
       4. Perform final anneal and/or HIP (if required)
       5. Lot acceptance testing.
       6. Pre-machining for ultrasonic inspection. This generally consists of simple, 3-axis milling to remove the crowns from

            the top of the part, unless inspection can be performed through the base plate. Locating features for finish
            machining may also be machined in at this point to reduce set-up time.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       3.3 · Metallic Materials Characteristics 61

 7. Ultrasonic inspection
 8. Final machining. As can be seen in M4, all surfaces of the part are machined.
 9. Part acceptance testing. Since ultrasonic inspection was already performed, this is limited to penetrant (with a

       different etching solution than used for aluminum alloys) and dimensional inspection.
10. Chemical treatments.

Nickel-Based Alloys

Nickel-based alloys are often used where titanium alloys don't quite have enough strength, stiffness, or temperature
capability to meet requirements. They can also perform better than titanium alloys or pure titanium in some corrosive
environments. While they are significantly lower in cost than titanium alloys, they are often more costly to machine, and
their higher density often means more material mass is needed for the same application. Like titanium, use of AM for
buy:fly and cost reductions will apply for some geometries.

Where lower mechanical properties are acceptable, 6xx (Ni-Fe-Cr) alloys are generally used where high temperature
oxidation resistance is desired, and Ni-Cu (and Cu-Ni variants) alloys are used where corrosion resistance is more
desired. Both of these alloy systems have excellent ductility and weldability, so lend themselves well to a variety of AM
processes. Variants of these alloys will have either better temperature capability, oxidation resistance, or improved
corrosion resistance.

Where either higher strength or higher strength at elevated temperature is desired, 7xx alloys are used. These use
precipitation hardening with a relatively low cooling rate like PH stainless steels for significantly higher mechanical
properties, as well as elevated temperature properties. Because they also have excellent corrosion resistance, variants of
them are used in the chemical and petroleum industry in hot, corrosive environments. When even higher temperature
properties are needed, superalloys containing Ni, Co, and other high-temperature elements are used. While these alloys
sacrifice room temperature strength, they will have excellent resistance to deformation over long times at the elevated
temperatures (creep) found in rocket and turbine engines. Some of the higher temperature grades, however, have lower
weldability that can impact the ability to use for fusion AM processes.

Processing considerations for Ni-base alloys using a small puddle powder DED process differ slightly from that described
above for Ti-6Al-4V.

 1. Build part. While it is likely that fewer stress relief operations compared to other alloys due to the lower strength/
       stiffness ratio and lack of brittle phases will be needed, this is quite design dependent.

 2. Remove part/build plate from machine.
 3. Analyze log file from machine.
 4. Perform heat treatment, which may include HIP and a solution anneal, quench and age for PH alloys. Large, thin,

       complex parts may require a fixture to support them during high-temperature heat treatments.
 5. Lot acceptance testing.
 6. Surface smoothing, generally a grit blast.
 7. Final machining.
 8. Part acceptance testing.
 9. Chemical treatments.

Cobalt-Based Alloys

Outside of superalloys, cobalt-based alloys have seen most of their AM use in the medical industry, with some
applications now appearing in aerospace due to their combination of weldability, ease of heat treatment, and corrosion
resistance. These fit in between 6xx and 7xx nickel-based alloys in terms of properties, with generally lower material cost
and a simpler heat treatment than required for 7xx alloys. In general, the process path for L-PBF CoCr parts is similar to
other alloys, with the exception that current specifications for F75 medical alloy require a high-temperature
homogenization cycle. This is an example of a heat treatment for a cast alloy that may not need to be as long for a part
produced using AM with the very rapid cooling cycle.

Other Alloys

The wide range of processes and the geometric freedom provided by AM has found applications using a wide variety of
other alloys as well. These include copper alloys, refractory metals, magnesium, metal matrix composites, and
intermetallic compounds.
62 3 · AM Materials

     Figure 3.8 In this image, NASA successfully hot-fire tests a 3-D printed copper combustion chamber liner with an E-Beam
     Free Form Fabrication manufactured nickel-alloy jacket. The hardware must withstand extreme hot and cold
     temperatures inside the engine as extremely cold propellants are heated up and burned for propulsion. (credit:
     Modification of "NASA Advances Additive Manufacturing For Rocket Propulsion," by NASA/MSFC/David Olive on Flickr,
     Public Domain)
     In addition to the Cu-Ni alloy system, copper alloys are often used for their high electrical or thermal conductivity.
     Precipitation hardened Cu alloys generally require liquid quenching.
     Since the SL process for the heat exchanger takes place near room temperature and is a hybrid manufacturing process
     without melting, the process path is the shortest of all.
       1. Build part.
       2. Remove part/build plate from machine.
       3. Analyze log file from machine.
       4. Lot acceptance testing.
       5. Final machining.
       6. Part acceptance testing. This could include ultrasonic inspection.
       7. Chemical treatments.
     The process path for the cold spray propeller would be quite short, especially since Al bronze is a non-heat treatable
     alloy.
       1. Build part.
       2. Remove part/build plate from machine.
       3. Analyze log file from machine.
       4. Lot acceptance testing.
       5. Surface smoothing and polishing.
       6. Final machining.
       7. Part acceptance testing.
       8. Chemical treatments.
     Refractory metals (W, Mo, Ta, Nb, etc) are being investigated for very high temperature applications. Because refractory
     metals are often brittle at room temperature and have high oxygen sensitivity, careful consideration must be taken,
     especially for fusion AM applications.
     The low density, adherent oxide, and flammability of Mg have limited its potential in AM, although newer alloys with
     reduced flammability are being investigated.
     Metal matrix composites (metals with either oxide, carbide, or boride reinforcements) are beginning to emerge from the
     laboratory into applications research. The high cooling rates of fusion AM could potentially allow for the fabrication of
     net-shape parts with a lower risk of the reinforcements agglomerating to the detriment of mechanical properties. Finally,
     AM has enabled the first widespread use of titanium aluminides, which have excellent creep resistance combined with
     low density. The rapid solidification and high, stable build environment of EB-PBF are enabling the fabrication of turbine
     blades. The process path would be similar to L-PBF of Scalmalloy®.

    Future Alloys

     Multiple organizations have initiated efforts over the last 5 years to develop alloys whose composition and processing
     are more compatible with AM, especially fusion processes. Much like Scalmalloy® does, these will take advantage of the
     rapid solidification in fusion AM processes to use chemistries with properties that one could not achieve using
     conventional ingot metallurgy. One concept would be to develop a precipitation hardened alloy where the rapid

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            3.4 · Ceramics and Other Materials 63

solidification and cooling in AM would leave alloying elements in solution, but where the stress relief would cause them
to precipitate out, providing high strength without the need for a high-temperature heat treatment or rapid quench.
While it typically takes 20 years for a new alloy to enter service, advances in computational modeling and the reduced
scale-up needed for AM processes could result in these alloys being available sooner.

An ideal processing path for an alloy designed for L-PBF would be:

 1. Build part.
 2. Remove part, build plate, and excess powder from machine.
 3. Analyze log file from machine.
 4. Perform rough finishing and heat treatment.

       1. HIP
       2. Build plate removal
       3. Support removal

 5. Lot acceptance testing.
 6. Surface smoothing.
 7. Interface machining.
 8. Part acceptance testing.
 9. Chemical treatments.

3.4 Ceramics and Other Materials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Understand the range of engineered ceramic materials available for AM.
  · Understand the range of other materials available for AM.
  · Understand the different feedstocks of those materials, and how they relate to the different AM processes and the

      challenges associated with AM of ceramic materials.
  · Understand the relationships between feedstocks, AM processing, AM post-processing, and the resultant AM part.

Ceramics represent one of the most challenging and least widely-developed category of engineered AM materials.
Because conventional ceramic processing uses powders, feedstocks are widely available. The most common ceramic
processes are BJP and MJ, with the polymer binder driven off during sintering, with VP processes becoming available.
Because the ceramics are generally stable oxides, carbides, and nitrides, flammability concerns are minimal, although
inhalation safety must be considered.

The processing path for a ceramic part made using BJP would also be shorter than a typical structural metallic part, as
provided below:

 1. Build green part.
 2. Remove green part from machine and excess powder.
 3. Analyze log file from machine.
 4. Remove binder using thermal or chemical methods, resulting in a brown part.
 5. Sinter brown part to target density, checking furnace log file and taking simple dimensions as a quick cycle check,

      with generally no final heat treatment required.
 6. Lot acceptance testing.
 7. Interface machining. For the mirror, this would include polishing of the reflective surface.
 8. Part acceptance testing. Possibly radiographic to look for large discontinuities.
 9. Chemical treatments, especially application of the reflective coating.

While fully densified technical ceramics remain a challenge, ceramic SLA resins and other type of photoceramic
approaches are currently being deployed. Ceramic-filled resins are being sold by a number of vendors. These resins can
be printed in an SLA-style printer at high resolution and fired using traditional ceramic processing approaches. Currently,
there are a number of groups pursuing the best methods for producing densified ceramics from pastes and other
photoceramic feedstocks.

In addition to conventional engineering materials such polymers, metals, and ceramics, other material systems are
being used in AM. One of the first of these was heavy gage paper used in the original sheet lamination process, called
Laminate Object Modeling (LOM). This process used adhesively backed or epoxy impregnated paper that was bonded to
the previous layer. The outline of the part for that layer was then cut with a laser, and the excess material cut into 1cm x
1cm x 1cm cubes. After completion of the build, the cubes were broken off, and the part remained. This process was
64 3 · AM Materials

     used for prototypes, visualization, and simple sheet metal forming tools. This type of sheet lamination has been
     extended to carbon fiber paper and a number of other type of sheet stock with various binders.
     Concrete is another common material that is starting to be used in AM. Large-scale extrusion-type machines are being
     built that deposit concrete to build structures, eliminating the need for formwork. An example of housing made this way
     is shown in Figure 3.9. Finally, sand with a polymer binder is used in BJP to make casting molds in a form of indirect AM.
     Indirect versus direct AM gives designers and engineers choices on how to approach processing for different types of
     materials. Innovations in indirect AM and hybrid processes and assemblies have been useful in diffusing new design and
     processing flexibility across a number of important applications.

     Figure 3.9 3D-printed housing using concrete in the lower floor. (credit: Modification of "3D printed house. Austin, Tx" by
     Lars Ploughman/Flickr CC BY 2.0).
     Clearly, new materials are being brought into the AM sphere at a quick pace and materials innovations are one of the
     cornerstones of a growing AM industry as more product lines are being disrupted by AM strategies. While rapid
     prototyping started with brittle, unusable polymers, the industry has progressed to engineering metals and polymers
     that have long-lifetime applications. Work continues to additively manufacture high-value ceramic and composite
     components. While there have been some important breakthroughs in these areas, there is much left to do to
     industrialize many ceramic and composite parts.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    3 · Summary 65

Summary

It is clear that there are many materials available for AM, but in the larger world of engineered materials used in final
applications, only a few dozen materials are regularly deployed for long-use AM components. This gap provides a
tremendous opportunity for innovation in customizing material feedstocks for AM as well as exploring AM processes to
bring new materials into the AM space. Polymers, metals, ceramics, and many different types of composite materials are
being pursued for commercial deployment in AM and research is continuing at the intersection of AM processes and
materials. The characteristics of thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers and the thermal and photo energy sources
needed to process and shape these materials drive the AM technology choice for obtaining the desired polymeric part.
Thermoplastics are most often encountered in ME using filaments or pellets. While the availability of high-quality
filaments poses a barrier to bringing new thermoplastic materials into AM, the use of pellet extrusion AM is highly
desirable as this feedstock is widely used in the plastics industry for molding. Photopolymer thermosets are the
feedstock that enables both vat photopolymerization and photo material jetting, as in PolyJet systems. While other
thermosets are beginning to be explored for industrialized AM, like liquid silicone rubbers and epoxies, these types of
direct ink writing processes are usually confined to the research and exploratory domains.

While the total number of alloys available to AM are significantly less than those for conventional technologies, the full
range of alloy systems are now available, and often for multiple different processes. As a result, having a suitable
metallic material no longer limits a product team. As AM processes become more widespread in industry, niche' alloys
that either deliver improved performance or lower cost for a given application will become available. The most likely
candidates being more temperature and corrosion resistant alloys for heat exchangers, jet engines, and fluid systems,
many of which will be designed to take advantage of either rapid solidification or solid-state processing to achieve
properties previously unattainable via ingot metallurgy. Other candidate materials are metal-matrix composites for
applications requiring higher temperatures or wear resistance. Finally, the wide range of solid-state metal AM processes
means that fusion weldability is no longer a prerequisite for an alloy to be used for AM.

Ceramics is the least developed of the engineered materials. This is due in part to a number of factors, such as:

  · Relatively simple shapes of many ceramic applications and limitations on complexity due to the brittle nature of
      ceramics

  · Existing low-cost methods to fabricate shapes
  · Typical challenges of sintering of ceramics are the same for AM, so the lead time savings is minimal

That said, the existence of a large range of available powder feedstocks combined with final processing likely being the
same as for conventional products (sintering), mean that as AM equipment and expertise become more available to the
ceramics industry that the range of material systems will become as widespread as there are for metallics.

Finally, there are a wide range of composite feedstocks available for AM, even though the composite nature of materials
presents processing challenges. Many vat photopolymerization resins are in fact composites to introduce reinforcement
into the generally brittle acrylate crosslinked material. Additionally, the available ceramic resins for vat
photopolymerization are composites of photopolymers and ceramic particles that provide adequate, if not high-
performance consolidation upon sintering. Composite material AM is challenging because there are many variables in
formulating the composite material and usually composite fillers increase the melt viscosity of thermoplastics or flow
viscosity of photopolymer resins. Regardless of difficulties in processing, many materials, especially plastics, are
deployed as composites and there are some commercial thermal ME resins on the market from major manufacturers,
such as SABIC, in order to meet the demands of applications in structural, automotive, and aerospace applications.

Review Questions

 1. A powder particle size distribution denoted by D90=100 means what?
       a. All the powder particles are less than 90 microns
       b. 90% of powder particles are less than 100 microns
       c. 90% of powder particles are equal to 100 microns
       d. 100% of powder particles are less than 90 microns

 2. Atomization is a process where
       a. plasma torch is used to melt a cylindrical bar of the desired alloy
       b. Existing irregularly shaped or porous particles are melted into spherical powder particles
       c. A liquid metal stream is pushed through an orifice and mixed with flowing fluid that forces the liquid to
            scatter, which then solidifies into generally spherical powders
       d. A wire feedstock is melted by plasma torches
66 3 · Key Terms

 3. Which AM processes use metal powders?
       a. PBF, BJP, DED, and cold spray
       b. SL Only
       c. PBF only
       d. DED only

Key Terms

3.1 Polymer Materials

ABS - acrylonitrile butadiene styrene copolymer, Crosslinking - chemical linking of polymer chains together to create an
insoluble material, Cryogrinding - grinding material at low (liquid nitrogen) temperatures, Cyante Ester - chemistry for
high-temperature polymers used in thermal post-processing of vat photopolymerization resins, Diluent - low viscosity
component in polymer resin, Durometer - a measure of the hardness of a rubber, Glass transition temperature -
temperature at which the glass to rubber transition occurs in amorphous materials, Melt Flow Index - mass or volume of
polymer extruded in a given time at a constant temperature under a specific flow condition, PC - poly(carbonate), PE -
poly(ethylene), PEEK - poly(ether etherketone), PET - poly(ethylene terephthalate), PLA - poly(lactide), PU -
poly(urethane), PP - poly(propylene), PVA - poly(vinyl alcohol), Silane - silicon oxygen organochemistry for surface
modification of glass, Thermoplastic - melt processible material, Thermoset - a polymer that crosslinks, Viscosity - flow
characteristic of a fluid , Voxel - three dimensional constitutive unit

3.2 Metallic Materials

Annealing, Atomization, Austenize, Cold Work, Heat Treating, Hot Isostatic Pressing, Hydride-Dehydride, Ingot, Plasma
atomization, PREP, Precipitation Hardening, Satellite, Solution Anneal, Spheriodization, Stress-Relief, Tap Density,
Temper, Weldability

3.3 Metallic Materials Characteristics

Austenitic, Ferritic, Maraging

Access for free at openstax.org
                        4 · Introduction 67

4  DESIGN FOR ADDITIVE
   MANUFACTURING

Figure 4.1 A student analyzes a component physically and using CAD software in the The UC Davis Translating
Engineering Advances to Medicine facility. (credit: UC Davis College of Engineering/Flickr CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Design Approach
  4.2 Design Optimization: Implementation while Considering Build Constraints
  4.3 AM Industry Design Challenges & Strategic Solutions

      Introduction

Design for Additive Manufacturing (DfAM) fundamentally challenges the design engineer's way of thinking. It takes all
the design rules and best practices learned over a century of the industrial age and turns the majority of them upside
down. No longer is design freedom constrained by the traditionally held rules of fabrication processes like machining
and casting. In fact, there are almost no fabrication penalties for complicated designs in AM given the flexible toolpath
and layer-by-layer nature of the build process.

AM machines often use a laser, extruder, or other tool to selectively fuse or deposit material. The "toolpath" - as in the
laser or extruder nozzle path - in an AM machine is not inhibited by the complexity of the part being designed. The AM
toolpath is only constrained to that of the robotics of the machine rather than the shapes of conventional tools as in the
case of traditional subtractive processes like machining, which remove material away versus add it layer-by-layer. A
complex geometry, or in the machine's language, a tool path, has little to no bearing on how "hard" the machine works.
Combined with the layering technique, the part in fabrication is never in the way of itself or the toolpath, yielding near-
infinite geometrical possibilities.

However, despite the seemingly endless design possibilities with DfAM, there are considerations on how to approach the
process the correct way in order to avoid expensive post-processing and support removal, for instance. This chapter
details an approach for designing parts to be viably fabricated with additive manufacturing, acknowledging both the
exciting potential and technical nuances to AM processes. Within this chapter, design content will cover metal powder
68 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

bed fusion, directed energy deposition, polymer selective laser sintering, and polymer material extrusion.

4.1 Design Approach

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Differentiate key AM design terminology.
  · Identify the AM Design Workflow process steps.
  · Modify parts for AM design (MfAM).
  · Understand how to approach conceptualizing AM designs from scratch (DfAM).

AM Design Workflow Process Steps

There are a number of steps required to move from having an idea to printing an AM part and readying it for use. The
detailing of these processing steps is what is known as the AM Design Workflow, and the eight steps that are most
frequently encountered are shown in Table 4.1

Process Step                              Details and Components

1. 3D Model Design                        3D solid model designed to meet requirements

2. Define Build Plan                      Sliced model, Build orientation, Support structures, Toolpath

3. Prepare Material Chemistry, Particle Size Distribution, Gauge, Certifications, Mixing

4. Prepare AM System                      Calibration, Pre-use checks

5. Execute Build                          Parameters, Data collection

6. Inspect                                Dimensional, Metallurgical

7. Post-process                           Heat treat, Machine, Surface treatments

8. Final Inspect                          Dimensional, Surface, NDE

Table 4.1

Regardless of the specific printing process, most AM parts follow these 8 basic steps, although each step may vary. For
example, a plastic part does not need to be heat treated in Step 7, but surface treatments could exist to smooth out
rough edges or make a part watertight.

The content of this chapter focuses primarily on Step 1, but it is important to realize that if parts are designed to take
advantage of AM's ability to create complex designs, the added complexity can negatively affect subsequent steps if not
properly accounted for during design in Step 1. For instance, Steps 2, 5, and 7 can be adversely affected from a cost
standpoint.

In Step 1 of the AM Design Workflow, a 3D model must be created. This step, much like conventional manufacturing, is
the foundation of creating an AM part. Within this step, 3D solid models can be generated in any CAD software package.
Generation of the 3D model can come from: (1) creating the original design in CAD as shown in Figure 4.2 (2) scanning an
existing part to create a 3D model, (3) converting a 2D drawing like that in Figure 4.3 to a 3D model, or (4) downloading a
model from an online design repository.

Depending on which of these four methods is selected, different levels of design requirements may be necessary. For
example, if one were to create an original 3D design in CAD, the design requirements may come from the designer's own
thoughts, or perhaps the design requirements are being received from a customer. When 3D scanning an existing part,
converting an existing 2D drawing or downloading an existing design, the design requirements could have been
established many years ago. As such, those antiquated designs may not be the optimal for AM.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Design Approach 69

                    Figure 4.2 3D solid model in CAD (credit: Spencer Wright on pencerw.com, CC-BY 4.0 license)

Figure 4.3 2D drawings must be converted into 3D solid models for AM (credit: Spencer Wright on pencerw.com, CC-BY
4.0 license)
There are many commercial software choices capable of creating 3D models. Many industrial companies and universities
own specific software licenses, each having unique characteristics of functional performance. A list of major 3D CAD
companies at the time of writing is found in Table 4.2. Note that product names and companies change often, and new
or application-specific versions may be more appropriate for your needs.
70 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

                                          3D CAD Software Name Parent Software Company

                                          Fusion 360  Autodesk

                                          Inventor    Autodesk

                                          Creo        PTC

                                          CATIA       Dassault

                                          SolidWorks  Dassault

                                          NX          Siemens

                                          Solid Edge  Siemens

                                            Table 4.2

The Sculpteo Blog (https://openstax.org/l/AMSculpteo) maintains a relatively up to date list of open source CAD software
that you can use, as well.

Since each software outputs its own coding structure, AM's primary working solution has been to use a common file
language that AM machines can understand. To achieve this, 3D solid models are typically converted into a neutral .STL
file that any AM build software can read and interpret. A .STL file is a faceted representation of the part that is created by
tessellation, a process that approximates the boundary of an object with many triangles. Tessellation is an arrangement
of polygons closely fitted together in a repeated pattern without gaps or overlapping, in this case triangles.

The STL File

The number of triangles of a .STL file depends on the user-defined output resolution from the CAD system. The more
triangles created, the more accurate the tessellation, but the larger the .STL file size. Conversely, fewer triangles
results in a smaller file size but a coarser approximation.

It is helpful for a designer to recognize what types of individual features the AM part will have and how .STL file
resolution may impact the design. Without modification, the AM machine will print whatever the .STL surface is
defined as. As such, coarse surfaces will look highly faceted after being printed. If the design involves many rounded
features, then it may be worthwhile to define a higher resolution .STL output within your 3D CAD system prior to
exporting to a .STL file. The higher resolution output settings can be accomplished differently depending on the CAD
system. Some CAD systems require a triangulation factor value input prior to .STL file export. Other CAD systems
simply output a .STL file based on the visualization settings. Explore each CAD system .STL file export settings
carefully prior to .STL file creation.

While .STL is often still the primary solution for converting CAD into machine language for a specific AM system, other
solutions are in development. Their main objective is to eliminate the .STL step and allow users to go straight from
CAD to the AM machine.

Historically, the .STL file was the first type of digital format developed for the rapid prototyping technology,
Stereolithography. This was first developed in the 1980's and the file protocol hasn't changed since.

Figure 4.4 shows different levels of detail in triangulations in an .STL file.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Design Approach 71

Figure 4.4 Triangulation of a .STL file. (credit: Modification of "STL triangulations of the pipe wall," in Morente, A. et al, " A
Highly Scalable Direction-Splitting Solver on Regular Cartesian Grid to Compute Flows in Complex Geometries Described
by STL Files." Fluids, Volume 8. 2023. CC BY 4.0)
Balancing .STL file size and accuracy is a challenge for complex 3D CAD models, especially, if the models have cellular
features incorporated in them.
When exporting .STL files there can be a number of errors.

  · Export Issues
       Resolution tolerance too low, leads to low quality surface curvature
       Multiple bodies/faces present during export - multiple shells, overlapping faces

  · Conversion issues
       Inverted normals
       Bad contours, mesh holes
       Overlapping/intersecting triangles

Though not all AM machines use them, the good news is that there are alternative formats to the .STL file that have been
developed recently. One alternative format is the Additive Manufacturing File (AMF). This file format is an XML-based
format that includes information beyond the .STL file. Specifically, the AMF includes 1) units and object metadata 2) color
and texture 3) multiple materials/gradients 4) optional curved triangles.
Another alternative is the 3D Manufacturing Format (3MF) file format. It is also an XML-based format that includes 1)
units and object metadata 2) color and texture 3) multiple materials/gradients 4) beam lattice elements 5) support
structure information. Persuading AM machine equipment manufacturers to adopt these alternative types of formats
can be difficult. Some machine manufacturers do and others do not.
Many of the large 3D CAD software companies are directly working with the AM machine manufacturers to export the
native 3D CAD solid model directly to the machine code, thereby skipping the intermediate step of the .STL, AMF or 3MF
formatting altogether. Though an incredibly promising advancement, only specific software companies have partnership
agreements with specific machine manufacturers. This results in an unclear definition of which file format from which
specific 3D CAD software is compatible with which AM machine type. Though incredibly inefficient and antiquated, the
.STL file is the common language ubiquitous to software and machine manufacturers until further development.

Topology Optimization/Generative Design

Powder bed fusion allows for incredibly complex metallic structures to be created. This creativity unlocks design
potential that is virtually impossible to fabricate using traditional manufacturing methods. There are two basic
approaches to create organic structures for AM:
Topology optimization is a mathematical output from FEA (Finite Element Analysis). The FEA drives where material is
placed such that the material layout is optimized within a design space, for a given set of loads, boundary conditions and
constraints with the goal of maximizing the performance of the system for the given application. While accurate,
topology optimization output can pose issues in terms of file format and detail resolution which limits viability, especially
for very complex designs.
Generative design also encompasses the FEA behind topology optimization acknowledging the same criteria to
72 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

optimize material, which it then utilizes to generate a viable design via an algorithm. It is often used as a design
exploration strategy in which designers input multiple design goals in the form of parameters such as performance or
spatial requirements, materials, manufacturing methods, and cost constraints. Historically, exploring a series of viable
designs would require many hours from engineers to build them manually in CAD, but generative software uses
machine learning to explore all of the possible permutations of a solution and quickly generates a number of design
alternatives. The software tests and learns from each iteration based on what works and what does not.

Most of the software found in Table 4.3 offers either topology optimization or generative design as an approach to
reduce weight, increasing functionality during 3D CAD model development in Step 1. Either approach is effective in
creating structure that solves the objective function of design with the least amount of material necessary. Details of
topology optimization and generative design can be found below.

Analysis

After a part concept has been generated using topology optimization or generative design, it is then critically important
to validate that the design is structurally robust using finite element analysis (FEA) software. This software is a
computerized method for predicting how a product reacts to real-world forces, vibration, heat, fluid flow, and other
physical effects. Finite element analysis shows whether a product will break, wear out, or work the way it was designed.
It is called analysis, but in the product development process, it is used to predict what is going to happen when the
product is used.

Note that generative design software often uses artificial intelligence to perform multiple iterations of a design so that it
is inherently performing FEA while the part is being generated. However, it is worthwhile to check structural robustness
relative to the design intent using a different FEA software that would offer a non-biased perspective.

FEA/Topology Optimization/Generative Software Name Parent Software Company

                                          ANSYS Mechanical     ANSYS

                                          SimScale             SimScale

                                          COMSOL Multiphysics  COMSOL, Inc.

                                          HyperWorks           Altair Engineering

                                          Autodesk Simulation  Autodesk

                                          Nastran              Hexagon MSC, Siemens PLM

                                          Abaqus               Dassault

                                          Hexagon              MSC

                                          APEX                 Hexagon MSC

                                          Generate             PTC Creo

                                          nTop Platform        nTopology

                                          CogniCAD             ParaMatters

Table 4.3

When the design is validated using FEA software, the software identifies areas in the structure that need to be changed
to ensure safe structural integrity to the overall part. This input is then fed back to the 3D CAD systems, and another
topological optimization simulation is started. This iterative approach allows for a part to maintain a minimal amount of
weight while concurrently being structurally validated, although iterating is sometimes easier said than done, and the
workflow is ever-evolving. Certain topology optimization and generative software programs have issues resolving
models and smoothing the 3D bodies for export to analyze, especially when the export output is .STL, since most

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Design Approach 73

analysis tools prefer CAD or .STEP type files. STEP, which stands for STandard for the Exchange of Product Data file, is a
text file that contains three-dimensional model data in a standard format.
Fortunately, optimization programs such as ParaMatters and MSC Apex run the FEA simulation as a part of the
generative design process and then automatically apply smoothing for better model resolution. MSC Apex, for example,
has aimed to rebuild the optimization platform in such a way that it intelligently smooths surfaces within a CAD
environment to yield high-fidelity export options. Once the designer and structural engineer have agreed on the design
concept, and the optimized model quality is acceptable, the part must be prepared for fabrication. A .STL file (or
compatible build set up file such as .STEP or .3MF) is created and imported into build

Build Preparation

Step 2 of the AM Design Workflow is a digital build plan that prepares the part for fabrication in the AM machine. A build
plan specifies the orientation and layout of the part(s) on the build platform, including layer thickness, support
structures (if needed), and the toolpath for each layer. See Figure 4.5 for examples of build plans.
Often the build plan is fulfilled by a manufacturing engineer, but it is important for design engineers to be aware of the
implications of the build plan on the AM part being produced. Build orientation and layout decisions will impact:

  · Build time and material utilization
  · Build height and number of layers
  · Surface roughness, including staircasing, which is a regular interruption in the part surface that looks like a

      staircase.
  · Thermal cycling and residual stresses
  · Microstructure and mechanical properties
  · Post-processing (e.g., support removal)
AM build plan software is in development with most of the large commercial 3D CAD companies.

Figure 4.5 In the preparation step, the designer can choose to display and adjust the entire build, including the
supports. In this example from Flashforge, a simple interface allows the user to control which supports to display. The
two Benchy (boat) examples that lie flat require no extensive supports, but the one that is tilted upward at an angle
requires supports to print in that orientation. (credit: Modification of
"Flashforge_Dreamer_FlashPrint_#3DBenchy_Screenshot_GCode_preview" by Creative Tools/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Build Orientation and Nesting

In the build plan, it is critically important to understand how AM part orientation and nesting can influence part cost. In
general, the more parts one can nest in the build volume, the less costly the parts become. In a similar fashion, the
shorter the build height and the less sacrificial support material required, the less costly parts become. The less time the
laser/extruder is active during the build process and more minimal support structures thus post-processing steps are,
the less costly parts become.
With the above general cost considerations in mind, there are also a number of process specific build preparation rules
of thumb.
The table below highlights the differences in how build preparation can be different relative to the type of AM process.
Note that these are general guidelines and that each type of AM machine and material combination can have special
requirements that limit or enhance design freedom.
74 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

Approach                                  Metal                                             Polymer

             PBF                                 DED                  FDM                            SLS

    Build    Minimize support                 Minimize material       Minimize support      Minimize stair stepping
Orientation  material required.           required. Features must       material. Keep      features by identifying
             Keep features < 45                                          features < 45      surfaces with low build
                                                  self-support.         degrees from
                degrees from                                           vertical z-plane                angles
               vertical z-plane

                  Keep critical           Incorporate build plate in  Minimize build        Keep long aspect ratio
             features away from                   part features            height             surfaces vertical to
             downward angled                                                                   prevent distortion

                facing surfaces

             Avoid parallelism of         Orient holes in X-Y build   Orient holes about    Orient holes in X-Y build
               parts relative to                       plane            X-Y build plane                  plane

              machine re-coater

             Orient holes in X-Y                Consider using          Minimize stair          Build feature mass
                  build plane             deposition baseplate for    stepping features       gradually. Angle your
                                                                                            part relative to the build
                                             symmetric parts to                              plane to avoid starting
                                             minimize distortion                            your part with bulk laser
                                                                                               exposure of a large
                                                                                               amount of material

                                                                                                        initially

             Minimize build                   Build feature mass           Anisotropic      Minimize build height
                  height                    gradually. Angle your        material, avoid
                                          part relative to the build
                                           plane to avoid starting         structurally
                                          your part with bulk laser   significant features
                                             exposure of a large
                                             amount of material        in Z-axis of build

                                                      initially

                Avoid trapping            Design large Radii at the   Large flat surfaces   Avoid trapping powder in
                    powder in             transition point between     will tend to curl.    encapsulated volumes.
                                           the baseplate and start    Avoid orientation         Make sure that any
                 encapsulated                                           of parts so that    enclosed volume has the
             volumes. Make sure            of the part to increase      large flat areas    ability for powder egress
                                               bonding strength       interface the base
              that any enclosed
                volume has the                                        sheet and the part
                                                                               start
              ability for powder
                      egress

Nesting      Maintain spacing >           Maintain spacing > .5       Maintain spacing >    Maintain spacing > .175
                    .125 inch                         inch                   .100 inch                   inch

Table 4.4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4.1 · Design Approach 75

Approach                         Metal                                           Polymer

          PBF                           DED                  FDM                          SLS

           Consider exposure      Avoid placing parts too    Pack as many parts   Pack as many parts in
          sequencing of parts    far apart while nesting to    on a build sheet  the machine as possible
                                                              possible to lower
               to limit metal     minimize gantry travel           unit costs        per build to avoid
               spatter from                    time                                  powder recycling

                 becoming                                                               inefficiencies
            contamination of

               adjacent part
          downwind of the gas

                     flow

           Nest mainly in X-Y    Nest in X-Y plane only      Nest in X-Y plane   Nest in 3D space, no
             plane only, EBM                                         only          support material
          allows for limited 3D                                                          required

                   nesting

Table 4.4

Process Simulation

Once a build plan is established and the part build orientation and support generation strategy are defined, designers
need to understand if the actual fabrication process could produce issues due to common failures or issues specific to
the machine, material, or process. Even if everything is planned correctly, an issue in fabrication will not only waste time
and material, but could actually damage the machinery.

For example, with AM metallic processes, internal residual stress accumulates with quick heating of feedstock to melting
and cooling back to solid metal during AM fabrication. As a result, parts will tend to distort during and after printing and
after thermal post-processing. In addition, improperly designed support structures can delaminate from the build
platform during fabrication if too much residual stress accumulates. This is especially true with large titanium structures,
which have been known to distort and even crack during the build. If this happens during the powder bed laser process,
there is a significant risk of the powder recoater feature in the AM machine to collide with parts that have distorted and
separated from their respective support structure while printing, causing build failure. Therefore, AM Process Simulation
is used to help understand the effects of the AM process on the part geometry and its fabrication.

AM Process Simulation is the analysis of the complex AM machine and material interaction using 3D CAD software
specially designed to predict part distortion to parts during AM fabrication. Figure 4.6 highlights a process simulation
that allows precise control over which aspect of the build is being considered, including its relationship to other parts.
The simulator used here - by Siemens - accounts for collision avoidance with the laser deposition head.

Figure 4.6 AM Process Simulation Example. (credit: "NX CAM Hybrid Additive Manufacturing - Simulation and Machine
Support" by Siemens PLM Software/Flickr CC-BY-ND 2.0)

The distortion of features during an AM build depends on many factors such as the feature orientation, thick to thin
76 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

transition zones, thin walled structures, material type, layer thickness, process parameter settings, heat treatment
selected, etc. As such, software is used to simulate the amount of residual stress inherent to the AM build and digitally
pre-compensate the geometry so that after printing and heat treatment, the parts will be closer to original design intent
in the 3D CAD model. Table 4.5 lists several process simulation software packages that are now readily available.

AM Process Simulation Software Name Parent Software Company

                                          Simufact Additive  Hexagon MSC

                                          Amphyon            Additive Works

                                          AM Simulation      ANSYS

                                          NX                 Siemens

                                          NetFabb            Autodesk

                                          Geonx VirFac       GE Additive

                                Table 4.5 Examples of AM Process Simulation commercial software.

Inspection

After AM parts are fabricated, they must be inspected for dimensional compliance and mechanical integrity (step 6 of the
AM Design Workflow). In addition, mechanical and metallurgical samples that were constructed concurrently with the
part are collected and tested as a witness to the AM process. AM parts can be difficult to inspect with conventional
coordinate measuring machines (CMM) due to part complexity and presence of internal features. AM parts are often
inspected using light inspection techniques, or Computed tomography (CT) using x-rays, for instance (See Radiographic
Inspection section in 5.2 Nondestructive Testing (NDT)).

There are many aspects to part inspection, and a sample list of common inspection techniques used for AM follows.

  · Surface Roughness
       Profilometry, which is the measurement of surface roughness at a fine scale - affordable and fast, but limited
           effectiveness at higher surface roughness values
       3D laser scanning microscope - expensive and slow, but highly accurate

  · Dimensional Inspection and Metrology
       Contact methods (e.g., CMM with touch probe)
       Non-contact methods (e.g., 3D scanner with laser, structured light)

  · Fluorescent Penetrant Inspection (FPI)
       Uses fluorescent die to highlight surface irregularities - AM surface finish makes inspection difficult

  · Radiographic Inspection
       Used to find internal cracks, voids, or trapped powder - Limited use with dense parts

  · Computed Tomography (CT) Scanning
       Able to see in high-density materials
       High-resolution digital data set for interpretation or measurement

From a design engineering perspective, it is important to understand that using extreme design complexity that AM
affords may require more expensive inspection techniques.

AM Design Terminology Differentiation

As AM becomes more prevalent in industry, a common vernacular should be established within the company regarding
the process and expectations for Design for Additive Manufacturing (DfAM). The views on DfAM vary widely on social
media posts, company promotional materials, academic publications, and industry-led groups and professional
organizations. It is important to resolve these differences within your own organization to describe the specific design
actions taken when developing concepts and preparing AM parts for fabrication. This way, everyone in the organization
speaks the same technical language, even when simply reproducing a part of an existing design with AM.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.1 · Design Approach 77

In this chapter, we define three distinct categorizations of design as it relates to AM:

  · Direct Part Conversion
  · Modified for Additive Manufacturing (MfAM)
  · Design for Additive Manufacturing (DfAM)

Direct Part Conversion is defined as the exact AM reproduction of an existing design. No modifications are made to the
part design as the goal is to reproduce a part that is traditionally made with existing fabrication methods. This technique
is common with parts that have quick fabrication needs, parts that are 3D scanned to be reverse engineered, or legacy
parts that cannot be sourced or redesigned without significant re-certification challenges.

Modified for Additive Manufacturing (MfAM) entails slightly modifying features of an existing design so that the part
may be fabricated more easily and/or cost effectively with an AM process, without significantly altering the design intent.
This approach often targets features that require support structures to reduce post-processing of the AM part or
features that may lead to build failure (e.g., thin walls).

Design for Additive Manufacturing (DfAM) involves the complete re-architecting of design intent to create a new
product from scratch that can only be manufactured using AM. This type of approach often leads to subsystem redesign
as opposed to component (re)design occurring in MfAM or Direct Part Conversion. It is important to note that when
DfAM is correctly applied, a designer would also include aspects of MfAM in the design.

It is incredibly important to distinguish between these types of definitions as each requires significantly different levels
of a) certification requirements b) non-reoccurring labor expense for design c) design cycle times d) mechanical testing
costs e) software investments.

Modifying Parts for AM Design (MfAM)

As direct part conversion does not permit any design changes, let us first examine MfAM. It is a common and natural
inclination of many companies that are transitioning a part's manufacture from conventional to AM, to dip a toe in the
water by the way of MfAM. As opposed to completely overhauling a part design, Parts are transitioned from a
traditionally manufactured component to AM. Modifications are made to a part so that it can be fabricated with an AM
process successfully and most cost effectively while concurrently matching original design intent.

AM processes can individually be quite different and the MfAM approach may also be different. As such, let us consider
four different AM processes when applying MfAM. These AM processes are:

  · Metallic Laser Powder Bed Fusion (PBF)
  · Metallic Direct Energy Deposition (DED)
  · Polymer Material Extrusion Additive Manufacturing (MEAM)
  · Polymer Selective Laser Sintering (SLS)

AM Features

AM feature modifications are unique depending on the specific AM process used. Table 4.6, highlights rules of thumb for
AM feature modifications needed to fabricate AM parts successfully.

                Metal                                             Polymer

           PBF                   DED                         FDM                        SLS

Change holes and cavities in Z    All structure needs to be  Avoid sharp corners in         Avoid sharp
  axis to a teardrop profile to  accessible for subsequent     favor of large radii     corners in favor of
     avoid support material
                                   machining operations                                      large radii

 To reduce support material,     Minimize the amount of          Change holes and       Avoid thick to thin
change 90 degree features to     material to be machined       cavities in Z axis to a    wall transition
                                                             teardrop profile to avoid          areas
  self -supporting chamfers
                                                                  support material

Table 4.6
78 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

                                 Metal                                          Polymer

PBF                                       DED                              FDM                       SLS

Avoid sharp corners in favor of           Avoid sharp corners in favor of  Avoid thick to thin wall       Maintain
              large radii                               large radii            transition areas       minimum gap
                                                                                                     width spacing of
                                                                                                      features > .031

                                                                                                            inches

Avoid thick to thin wall                  Avoid thick to thin wall         General tolerances +/-     Minimum wall
    transition areas                          transition areas             0.004 inches in the XY-   thickness > .028

                                                                                    direction              inches

General tolerances are ±0.005             Can be used to weld repair and   General Tolerances +/-     Minimum hole
  inch. If CNC tolerances are                  add features to existing    0.010 in the Z-direction  size > .068 inches
  required, parts will require                           products
         post-machining.

Maintain minimum gap width                 General tolerances are ±0.008       Minimum walls         General tolerances
  spacing of features > .020              inch for blown powder systems.   thickness > 0.047 inch      are ±0.012 inch.
                inches
                                            CNC tolerances during post-
                                                        machining.

Minimum wall thickness >                  For wire fed systems, generous   Minimum hole size >        Holes for powder
           0.016 inch                     net shape tolerances expected.         .040 inches         egress should be >

                                            CNC tolerances during post-                                   .140 inches
                                                        machining.

Minimum hole size > .020                  Blown powder minimum hole        Maintain minimum gap      Minimum feature
             inches                       size > .2 inches, wire fed, > 1      width spacing of      size shall be > .031

                                                            inch            features > .020 inches           inches

Table 4.6

Design for AM (DfAM)

As defined earlier, DfAM is the complete re-architecting of design intent to create a new product from scratch that can
only be manufactured using AM. That product can be a part, assembly, sub-system, or whole system. DfAM pushes the
design envelope with the freedom that is made possible by AM build processes. It encourages designs to encompass
multiple parts and assemblies that make up a system to reduce part count and touch time, while possibly also improving
performance. That level of freedom reaches beyond what most conventional fabrication technologies can process. The
highest levels of design freedom are most enabled by powder bed AM build processes such as metal and polymer PBF
and Binder Jet. Design freedom is more limited in blown powder DED systems and largely absent from wire fed DED
systems.

Often, people are aware that AM can produce very novel and organic looking structures, but they are not quite sure
where to start in the process when designing from scratch. This is especially true for more seasoned design engineers
that have had Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DfMA) principles engrained in their design approach for many
years. These techniques involve a lot of part substitution and reuse to lower costs. As such, it can be challenging and
uncomfortable to break away to a level of design freedom not experienced before.

Concept Ideation

The first step to beginning re-architecture of a design for AM is to understand clearly the product requirements. A good
way to begin understanding these requirements is to develop a morphological analysis, a method for exploring all
possible solutions to a multi-dimensional, non-quantified problem. "A Morphological Analysis defines a process for
generating solutions to problems by first breaking down a problem into its parts (or subcomponents or subfunctions),
generating ideas for each part, and then exploring combinations of the resulting ideas to develop a solution or concept"

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Design Approach 79

(Daley et. al, 2016) This approach works well for system-level design for DfAM. To create a morphological chart, you
begin by listing the identified subfunctions that satisfy customer requirements. Next, you develop solutions for each
subfunction.
To efficiently generate ideas for new concepts, it is helpful to conduct the exercise in a team brainstorming session to
create a list of subfunctions to build the morphological chart. Ideally, the skillset required within the team should include
AM design, conventional product design, AM process manufacturing, and customer representation. As DfAM structures
can often become organic in nature, the AM designer shall also be well versed in the skills of biomimicry.

  Biomimicry
  According to the Biomimicry Institute, biomimicry can be defined as "an approach to innovation that seeks
  sustainable solutions to human challenges by emulating nature's time-tested patterns and strategies. The goal is to
  create products, processes, and policies--new ways of living--that are well-adapted to life on earth over the long
  haul." By integrating biomimicry principles that emulate nature's structures into concept ideation, products will
  inherently become more structurally efficient.
  DfAM of the same part shown in the MfAM section, except now the design has been completely overhauled and
  optimized via light-weighting that utilized biomimicry in the upper web-like structures. The ratio at which the
  branches grow uses the same strength ratios seen in the natural log of a tree.

  Figure 4.7 Biomimicry is exemplified in the creation of artificial feathers, initially at a much larger scale than actual
  feathers. This design includes most aspects of the feathers, including the hooks at the ends of the barbules, which in
  natural feathers are invisible without magnification. (credit: Modification of "20180322-MeyersLab-
  Feathers-3492-export-8MP" by UC San Diego School of Engineering/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Functional requirements communicated directly from the customer are known as the Voice of the Customer (VOC).
Based on this input from the brainstorming meetings where customer feedback is directly communicated, concept ideas
are refined and modified to reflect true requirements. These requirements can be weighted within the Pugh Concept
Selection Matrix, or Pugh Matrix for short, based on VOC rankings. The Pugh Matrix is a rating analysis tool that results
in ranking of ideas to generate an optimal concept or selection.
Once ideas are generated, the concepts should be evaluated relative to the customer-defined requirements. Using a
80 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

Pugh matrix, each idea is compared to a baseline design for each requirement as shown in Table 4.7. Ideas are then
scored as better (+1), similar (0), or worse (-1) than the baseline design for each requirement. The scores are then
weighted and summed, and the best concept has the highest consolidated score. With this approach, the team not only
selects the best concept but also keeps track of their decision-making process should questions arise later.

                                 Existing Baseline  VOC Weighting  Morphological Analysis Chart
                                        Design            Factor                  Concept

VOC Requirements                                                   A   B   C   D

Mass Reduction                            0         5              -1  1   0   0

           Cost                           0         2              0   1   -1  -1

Thermal                                   0         4              0   -1  1   0

Performance

Ease of Installation                      0         3              -1  0   -1  1

Table 4.7

In the example provided in Table 4.7, concept ideas generated in the morphological analysis brainstorming sessions are
listed at concept A, B, C and D. The VOC requirements are shown on the left. Also, note the VOC relative weighting of
each of the requirements on a scale of 1-5 with 5 being the most important. An existing baseline product (either a
competitor's or an older design) is listed with a baseline of 0 for all requirements. Under each concept idea the team
provides an assessment score for each concept as being worse than the baseline (-1) or better than the baseline (1) or
the same (0).

Next, each assessment score is simply multiplied by the VOC weights to create a sum of weighted scores as shown
below.

                                 Existing Baseline  VOC Weighting  Morphological Analysis Chart
                                        Design            Factor                  Concept

VOC Requirements                                                   A   B   C   D

Mass Reduction                            0         5              -1  1   0   0

           Cost                           0         2              0   1   -1  -1

Thermal                                   0         4              0   -1  1   0

Performance

Ease of Installation                      0         3              -1  0   -1  1

                                                    Sum            -8  3   -1  1

Table 4.8

In this case, concept idea A is far worse than the baseline design, with concept design B being better. Concepts C and D
are slightly worse and better than the baseline, respectively.

Topology Optimization and Generative Design

Now that VOC requirements are understood, ideas are generated, and concepts are sorted using the Pugh Matrix,
generative design or topology optimization tools can be used to embody the concept. Alternatively, biomimicry or other
approaches could be used to generate different embodiments for each concept. Keep in mind that just because one can
produce complex structures with AM, does not mean one should do so unless it helps satisfy the VOCs.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               4.1 · Design Approach 81

Concept B appears to have an edge over the baseline design on paper, how long will it take to optimize for topology or
use generative design? On occasion the objective requirements provided by the VOC might be satisfied solely with
traditional fabrication methods. However, if they cannot be satisfied with traditional fabrication, then one must turn to
additive manufacturing.
Below is the process flow that takes digital definition from VOC 3D CAD definition all the way to inspection. Many types of
software exist at each of the steps of the digital chain.
The existing CAD will be assessed, FEA analysis run (within the optimization software), optimization applied, and then
additional analysis run on the optimization. The optimized design will be prepared for build. The build plan will be
simulated for build feasibility. The part will be built, and later inspection will provide empirical data to help the designer
understand how accurate their digital tools are, and design improvements that can be made in the future. What is most
important from a DfAM standpoint though, is the transition from CAD Definition to Topology Optimization (or Generative
Design).
Another DfAM nuance is applying systems-level thinking when using generative design tools. Designer's concepts can be
used for part consolidation as well as making a structure lighter.

Figure 4.8 Using a generative AI process, a part can be optimized for weight while maintaining strength and shape.
(credit: "NX8 Simulation - Opt" Siemens PLS Software/Flickr CC BY ND 2.0)
Generative design offers a glimpse into the future direction of hardware design. Using AI inspired software to derive a
large number of design permutations will lead to faster product design cycles that are more optimized for the hardware
requirements.
The basic generative design or topology optimization workflow is:
 1. Define retained bodies - in other words, volumes on the part that should not be optimized
 2. Assign material type - this loads the property inputs for the optimization algorithms
 3. Set load cases and boundary conditions - these are the forces or loads the part will see, and surrounding

      boundaries that contain the part to a certain location in space
 4. Set the objective - usually mass reduction
 5. Set constraints such as volume fraction, model resolution, design speed, and manufacturing overhang angle
 6. Optimize! Sometimes this can take hours or days depending on complexity and computing power
The digital chain is completed when the chosen design is input into build preparation software to create a build plan,
which is then run through a process simulation tool to assess buildability. Once deemed feasible to build, the part can be
sent to the machine to be built. After building, empirical results from inspection are then compared to simulated process
82 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

     results to advise and correct future designs and process simulations.

   4.2 Design Optimization: Implementation while Considering Build
   Constraints

    Learning Objectives

     By the end of this section, students will be able to:

        · Understand design nuances of powder bed fusion AM processes.
        · Learn a number of different types of AM features used to lighten designs and add more functional efficiency.
        · Describe the nuances of directed energy deposition AM processes.

     AM provides a vast amount of design and manufacturing opportunities, and there is an abundance of tools and
     programs to help. But there is much development yet to take place in the industry, which creates unique challenges for
     optimizing the performance of AM parts. This section provides additional guidelines and strategies for overcoming
     specific build process constraints and achieving the most optimal designs. It demonstrates how to leverage both MfAM
     and DfAM skills at the same time for greater success.

    Internal Passageways

     When designing for AM processes such as PBF, binder jet, or polymer SLS, one of the major benefits of AM is the ability
     to create internal passageways, or open cavities that pass through the inside of the part. However, there are some
     nuances when designing these types of features. For example, AM PBF creates walls that are inherently rough. If the
     internal passageway needs to be smooth, expect to add cost with a post-processing step to smooth out the
     passageways. And even with the extra post-processing costs, don't expect mirror finish smooth surfaces like those of
     machined parts.

     Also for processes that require support material, the profile of an internal circular channel will most likely need to be
     MfAM'd so that it is self-supporting during the fabrication process. If support structures are left in the passageways, they
     may be difficult (or impossible) to remove and will impede the flow through the internal passageway. Note that
     redesigning internal passageways is not as much of an issue with polymer SLS and binder jet, where the powder alone is
     supportive enough without excessive solid support structures.

    Complex Sweeps and Surfaces

     With AM, geometries don't need to be made using simple extrude, sweep, and revolve commands found in traditional 3D
     CAD software methods. Complex curves and surfaces can be used to generate unique geometries and organic shapes;
     provided designers know how to use the tools to create these structures.

     It is important to maintain the orientation of the internal passageway, which is a diamond shape, so that it remains self-
     supporting as discussed in the previous section. Otherwise, the interior may need support structures which will be
     impossible to remove.

     A Cellular feature, or type of mechanical structure that repeats a specific structural pattern, in order to offer a
     lightweight design solution. These repeating patterns encompass 3D or 2D space and are adjusted to accommodate
     different loading conditions. Of cellular features, two of the most common found in DfAM are honeycomb structures and
     lattice structures.

     Honeycomb structures follow a form of biomimicry which draws inspiration from bee honeycombs. These types of
     structures are typically used in the aerospace industry made from metal or composite to form a core.

     "Lattice structures are topologically ordered, three-dimensional open-celled structures composed of one or more
     repeating unit cells. These cells are defined by the dimensions and connectivity of their constituent strut elements, which
     are connected at specific nodes". (L. Hao, et al., 2011). These types of structures fulfill specific stiffness requirements, and
     simultaneously achieve weight reduction relative to bulk structure. An AM example is shown in Figure 4.9.

     Creating honeycomb or lattice is becoming a very popular AM design engineer's tool in the toolbox as these types of
     features can be created in polymer SLS or Material Extrusion (FDM), as well as metal PBF and BJP technologies. However,
     there remains some challenges in using these structures in a part that exhibits high loading requirements or stringent
     inspection criteria.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.2 · Design Optimization: Implementation while Considering Build Constraints 83

Figure 4.9 An example of a lattice structure. (credit: Modification of "Form 2 closed lattice" by Creative Tools/Flickr CC BY
2.0)
First, these features are difficult to produce with traditional 3D CAD software. On the other hand, they can be produced,
but should they be? Honeycombs, lattices, and other lightweight features are great for additive, but they can be difficult
to create and analyze in current tools. Software such as nTopology makes the process of creating cellular features easier
as they have approaches that generate the geometry in more efficient ways. The program easily computes and displays
complex lattices and organic structures.
The second challenge is structural evaluation. Just as creating these structures is difficult in 3D CAD, they are even harder
to mesh in FEA software. Simply exporting these types of structures into FEA software is a challenge. At a higher level,
structural analysts see every surface profile as `defect' potential for a stress fracture. The rougher the surface, the higher
risk of failure, especially with high and low cycle fatigue conditions. With honeycomb, lattice or cellular features, the
designer exponentially increases the potential of premature failure if any significant load is passed through these types
of rough surface structures. On the other hand, as a way to increase heat transfer efficiency, that same increase in
surface roughness might be a desirable feature for complex heat exchangers composed of lattice.
The third challenge is inspection. If a part consists of many cellular or lattice features, how will it be inspected for
conformance to design intent in a cost-effective way? With the current state of inspection technology available, it would
be difficult to find an inspection method that could be used on these types of structures in a serialized production
environment.
From a design standpoint, if a designer were to use honeycomb, lattice or cellular features, the best approach would be
to place them in non-load bearing areas of structures to avoid the critical evaluation and software challenges described
above.

Isogrids

Isogrid features are stiffening ribs, typically triangular in shape, protruding from a surface at a defined distance from
the surface. These features have been used for several years in industry as a light weighting practice for CNC machining
and composite fabrication industries.
84 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

                    Figure 4.10 Isogrids on the pressure vessel for the CST-100 spacecraft. (credit: NASA, Public Domain)
     Whereas lattice and cellular features are linked to PBF processes, isogriding offers flexibility across AM process types.
     This type of feature offers structural stiffness with reduced weight. It is also noteworthy that since applying isogrid
     features has been used in industry for a number of years, structural analysts will have greater ease analyzing this type of
     structure relative to cellular or lattice features. As a result, this type of design sees less certification scrutiny and analysis.
     The discussed design features optimize AM shapes and performance, not without certain challenges. With those
     challenges and tips for overcoming them in mind, there is still more to master in design optimization as it pertains to the
     different AM fabrication processes. The remaining sections of this subject will outline basic design allowables according
     to each AM process as they exist today. Note that process development could always expand these guidelines in the
     future.

    PBF Machine Process Constraints

     When designing AM parts for PBF processes, there should be a focus on how the process may be constraining. This first
     obvious constraint is the overall build platform volume. This limits the size of AM part one can build in the process. Each
     year, equipment manufacturers develop machines with larger build volume sizes than the previous year. There can be
     large scaling differences for some AM processes. For example, an FDM type machine can exist in the range of 8.6 inches
     x 8.6 inches x 9.5 inches on the small end consumer printer to 240 inches x 90 inches x 72 inches for the large Cincinnati
     BAAM system. For PBF metals, one is the larger GE Concept Laser Xline with a build volume of 31.5 inches x 15.75 inches
     x 19.68 inches. As mentioned, these machine sizes will likely be surpassed by new models or newer processes each year.
     Most all AM equipment manufacturers will post the build volume sizes on their websites, so be sure to check the AM
     companies' website on how large of an AM component can fit inside the machine to establish scale constraints.

    DED Machine Process Constraints

     Depending on the type of DED process, the scale of the machines may vary. Blown powder deposition machine sizes can
     beas large as 5 feet x 5 feet x 7 feet with wire fed machines as large as 19 feet in length, 4 feet wide, 4 feet high, and 8
     feet in diameter for some machines. However, similar to the PBF, manufacturers are constantly increasing the physical
     size of the build volumes. AM equipment manufacturers will post the build volume sizes on their websites, so be sure to
     check the AM machine companies' website on how large of an AM component can fit inside the DED machine to
     establish scale constraints for parts fabricated from AM DED.

    Hybrid vs Conventional

     Hybrid DED machines integrate a milling step during the layered process of fabricating parts and as a result, offer

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4.2 · Design Optimization: Implementation while Considering Build Constraints 85

superior surface finished parts than conventional DED machines. This process approach allows for the AM part to exhibit
machined finish across all surfaces of the part if desired. Traditional DED machines require a part to be milled after a part
is produced and removed from the chamber.

The upside to using a hybrid DED process is the absence of a post-process milling operation and the avoidance of tooling
setups for secondary milling operations. This allows for faster throughput of the overall AM fabrication cycle. However,
the downside to this approach is the added complexity of programming requirements for a hybrid DED process and
hybrid DED machines are typically smaller in build envelope compared to conventional DED machines due to the added
complexities of the hybrid machine. The catch-all nature of the process also precludes the part from going through a
stress relief cycle or heat treatment before machining, which can be problematic for final dimensions staying in
tolerance.

Also, both hybrid and conventional blown powder DED machines offer the capability of a tilt table for the base plate,
thereby allowing 5 axis manipulation of the baseplate. This is a significant advantage from a design standpoint. Recall
that all DED machines produce geometry without support material. By fabricating a DED part on a machine with a tilt
table, this allows for part features to be designed parallel to the baseplate thereby allowing the part to shift planes
during fabrication. With this approach, designers will inherently have more design freedom and not have to design
wasteful sacrificial support structure to stabilize part features during printing.

Wire Fed vs Blown Powder DED

DED systems have different deposition rates and use different material feedstocks (wire vs. powder), which have
implications on design and post-processing. This allows for flexibility if a part need be constructed in freeform or have
features added in a repair or modification scenario.

Typically, large scale systems deposit a thick melt puddle in scale and are wire fed. From a design perspective, if a part
needs to have features less than .39 inches (10mm) thick, then recognize that these features would be difficult to
produce using large scale wire DED systems without post-process milling operations. In addition, due to the relative
thickness of the melt puddle, note that sharp transitioning, overhanging features are problematic to produce with wire
fed DED systems.

However, there is an upside to large scale AM DED wire fed systems. For these larger metal components, DED may be the
only answer. In Figure 4.11, nearly 400 lbs of material was deposited to make the 7-foot boom on this mini excavator. The
boom was built vertically; so, the substrate was not integral to the structure. Holes were designed to be self-supporting,
and the geometry was hollowed out and symmetric to mitigate warping during the build. After deposition, only the
mating interfaces had to be machined at the connection points. "The 7-foot-long, 400 lbs. `stick' was printed entirely of
low-cost steel on the Wolf Robotics Wolf Pack printer in only 5 days."

Features of this build included:

  · "Throw Away" build substrate
  · Hollow symmetrical structure mitigated distortion
  · Holes designed with "tear drop" shape to accommodate self-supporting angle of DED process
  · Minimal machining (i.e., mating surfaces)
86 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

     Figure 4.11 Large-scale DED excavator boom 3D printed at the U.S. Department of Energy's Manufacturing
     Demonstration Facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (credit: Modification of "Project AME" by Oak Ridge National
     Laboratory/Flickr CC BY 2.0)
     For large scale wire fed DED design, it is very important to consider the build plate substrate as a sacrificial element to
     the design. This is why it is helpful to pick AM candidates that are symmetric about a build plate as the build plate
     becomes the part during the fabrication process.
     Medium scale systems typically require blown powder feedstock and can be hybrid or utilize conventional DED
     processing. From a design approach, these blown powder DED machines allow for easy buildup and repair of
     conventionally manufactured parts. Compared to conventional repair technologies such as welding, blown powder DED
     yields exceptional metallurgical bonding, less warping and distortion, lower dilution rates, is capable of automation, and
     lower heat input due to a smaller heat affected zone.
     However, the most fascinating aspect of blown powder DED systems is the ability to have multiple powder feedstock
     input streams. This allows for multiple materials to feed the laser deposition concurrently. In a practical sense, this
     allows designers to customize materials within a single part. Being able to gradually blend different composition of
     materials throughout a part produces what is known as Functionally Gradient Materials (FGM). From a design
     perspective imagine if a part had features that were 99% Tungsten to withstand abrasion or thermal loads, while on a
     different area of the same part could be comprised of 99% Titanium for its lightweight nature. Between the two areas of
     the part would be a gradual blend between Tungsten and Titanium. If these two materials were able to be functionally
     graded without adverse cracking effects, perhaps this could be possible. There exists an entire field of materials research
     looking into alloy and material compatibility for FGM. It is remarkable that a technology such as blown powder DED
     could enable the application of FGM into physical hardware.
     The small-scale blown powder systems offer a finer deposition melt puddle width achieved through a blown powder, but
     are typically reserved for smaller laboratory scale research. These smaller systems offer most of the functional capability
     of the medium scale systems, however, in a smaller format machine size.
     At the time of writing the below offers a snapshot of the manufacturers offering each type of system.
     Manufacturers of wire fed large scale DED systems include:

        · Sciaky
        · Norsk Titanium
        · WAAM

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           4.3 · AM Industry Design Challenges & Strategic Solutions 87

  · Lincoln Electric
  · EVOBEAM
  · Prodways
  · Gefertec

Manufacturers of blown powder large scale DED systems include:

  · DMG Mori (hybrid)
  · BeAM
  · RPM Innovations
  · Formalloy
  · MAZAK (hybrid)

Manufacturers of blown powder small scale DED systems include:

  · Optomec
  · RPM Innovations
  · Formalloy

Material Extrusion

Material Extrusion, commonly known as FDM, operates under very similar constraints as the other AM processes. While
the general golden rule to build at 45 degrees or steeper still applies, design for this process can be more lenient as the
support structures can be made to breakaway easily or in some cases, are liquid soluble. Much like other nozzle-driven
processes, the smallest feature size is constrained to the nozzle diameter. No feature can be made smaller than the width
of material laid. This makes complexity of the design, nozzle diameter dependent. This is important to keep in mind
when designing for a specific machine. Another important acknowledgement of nozzle diameter is how it will affect the
surface roughness. When building relatively small-scale parts, as Material Extrusion is often utilized for, the nozzle
diameter can impact surface roughness greatly. If a rough surface is problematic to the application, it should be
compensated for by inflating or adding stock to surfaces to have material removed later. Post-process material removal
can be done in a variety of ways such as a chemical bath for uniform smoothing, CNC machining of specific surfaces,
abrasive flow for passages, and so on. The exact process used to achieve surface smoothing goals should be planned for
specifically. Much like it should be in any AM processes.

4.3 AM Industry Design Challenges & Strategic Solutions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Comprehend design challenges around software.
  · Learn about alternative file formats to the .STL file.
  · Acquire knowledge about adopting AM within industry.
  · Understand the design maturity phases according to a maturity model.

As stated previously, a new technology does not come without its caveats. Successful designs in AM acknowledge and
address both technical and non-technical risks to implementation. This section discusses risks to design software users,
and development on the horizon to mitigate them. Also discussed is the cultural resistance to AM that impedes
adoption, and how to strategically address those. Phases of AM design maturity are defined and matched to a specific
design optimization technique.

Software Interoperability

From a design perspective, perhaps the largest challenge in industrializing AM revolves around the overall difficulty of
moving from a CAD concept to a software code that an AM machine can interpret. The software interoperability is
defined as the functionality of different programs to exchange information, share files and use the same protocols.
Within AM, this process flow path is what is known as the AM digital value chain. This digital value chain difficulty is
typically more problematic with metal PBF and DED processes as these processes can incur more thermal distortion,
require additional post-processing steps and cost more to fabricate. Therefore, the software landscape necessary to
perform all of these functions is convoluted.

The landscape of disparate software programs that don't communicate well with each other is the result of many things,
from developers rushing products to the market, to lack of investment by private investors to evolve or maintain
products. This results in working with an assortment of Minimal Viable Product(s) (MVP). MVPs can leave consumers at
risk.
88 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

Furthermore, because the AM industry developed so rapidly, individual software startup companies focused on single
basic functions. For example, startup software `X' focused on build planning while software company `Y' focused on build
process simulation, while software company `Z' focused on cloud-based systems that focuses on digital encryption of AM
data.

Given such a market, the AM software landscape is an assortment of large and startup software companies attempting
to meet consumer needs, while larger well-established companies continue to acquire startups. However, after
acquisition, true integration is a major time investment, so, often, modules of software or simply the MVP of the startup
is repackaged with a large company's branding. This results in the AM designer being flooded with software solutions
from companies both large and small for various steps of the process, with varying degrees of overlap from product to
product. The designer is left with questions such as: Which software has more functionality? Which software is more
reliable? Which software is the least expensive? Can't I simply have one software to represent the digital value chain from
concept generation to part fabrication?

Recall from earlier in this chapter the tables that showcase the different software companies that offer AM toolsets. You
can see that a single designer could utilize up to 6 different types of software to get from DfAM concept through
hardware inspection! This is a significant challenge for interoperability of digital files transfer and huge annual software
maintenance costs to maintain.

From an interoperability standpoint, imagine that you are a designer and you create a metallic AM Laser Powder Bed
concept where you want topological optimization, cellular features, and smooth surfaces in your 3D CAD program of
choice. After realizing that your 3D CAD software doesn't create these feature types easily, you need to export to a
standalone software to create these features so you import the 3D CAD definition into the standalone software to create
these features separate from their native format. It is important to acknowledge that at each step there are risks of
unintentionally altering the part model when entering a new software different than the native 3D CAD program.
Fortunately, leading developers are working on answers to these problems, mainly by providing platforms that allow
users to remain in native 3D CAD throughout the digital chain. The table below outlines the existing risks to users, and
acknowledges the solutions being developed today.

Step       Software                                 Risk                                        Development
  1         Process                                                  Rolled into one CAD environment, no import needed
            Function             Top opt software doesn't import
                                          geometry correctly
           CAD  Top
                Opt

Step       Top Opt               CAD software must change            Rolled into one CAD environment, no import needed
  2            CAD               'dumb' solid model correctly

Step       CAD  FEA              If part features too complex,       Rolled into one CAD environment, no import needed.
  3                               FEA sofware may not mesh           Special meshing and smoothing algorithms are being

                                               correctly                                           developed

Step       CAD  FEA              FEA sofware may not mesh            Rolled into one CAD environment, no import needed.
  4                               correctly on 2nd attempt           Special meshing and smoothing algorithms are being

                                                                                                   developed

Step       FEA  CAD              .STL file may be too large            Rolled into one fluid CAD environment that better
  5                               depending on triangle              handles high resolution models. Special meshing and
                                           resolution
                                                                            smoothing algorithms are being developed

Step       .STL  Build            Build planning software may        Rolled into one fluid CAD environment that better
  6             Plan             struggle with large .STL file size              handles high resolution models.

             Software

Table 4.9

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           4.3 · AM Industry Design Challenges & Strategic Solutions 89

           Software      Risk                              Development
            Process
           Function

Step       .STL fixing/  Support material may not be       Rolled into one fluid CAD environment with intelligent,
  7          support           generated correctly                         parametric support structures.
            structure

Step        Build plan   Process sim software may not      Further developing known failure modes and simulation
  8        software      capture all post-process effects                  algorithms via machine learning.

           Process Sim

Step       Process Sim   Pre-compensation may not be       Further refining compensation given empirical thermal
  9            CAD          accurate, displacement of                          data out of the machines.

Step       CAD  Build     features inaccurately in CAD       Further developing known failure modes for robust
 10             Plan                                                               support generation.
                         Support material may not be
             Software           generated correctly

Step        Build plan   Process sim software may not      Further developing empirical data capture and analysis
 11        software      capture all post-process effects                            for improved sim.
           Process Sim
Step                      Build planning software slicer                              Always possible
 12         .STL file                  inaccuracy
            Build Plan
             Software

Step       Build plan    Data storage and configuration    Solutions are in development to provide intelligent
 13        software             management of data         storage with reporting for increased user visibility

             AM PBF
            machine

Table 4.9

After following the digital workflow, the loop must be closed with feedback or empirical data from physical part
inspection. The inspection process is a light scanning machine that uses a different software to analyze the dimensional
conformance to the original 3D CAD definition. If fortunate, the part will pass dimensional inspection and you will not
need to further refine the part. If it is the first time attempting to fabricate your part, chances are that you will need to
modify it somewhere in the aforementioned digital chain.

Adoption of AM

Since DfAM is such a disruptive way of design thinking, it is often difficult for companies to change best practices and
standards that have been set in stone for many years. Similar to Lean Manufacturing Systems and Six Sigma practices
that require cultural changes to occur before becoming effective, DfAM behaves in a similar fashion. The availability of
designers that have the DfAM way of thinking is a challenge and it takes time to acquire the appropriate software, train
employees, set up capital investments, and conform to regulations and standards. Since re-architecting a product from
scratch is the essence of DfAM, each DfAM project can take many months to accomplish with many stakeholders
involved in meetings to discuss concepts. Often this additional labor cost and time is overlooked by executive leadership
seeking to cash in quickly on sensationalized organic designs that impress customers. So, it is essential to have
knowledgeable executive sponsorship when undergoing such projects.

In addition, it is helpful to broadly educate the benefits of DfAM within companies so that everyone can share the vision
of enabling new product designs. And because there is change, there will be skeptics. After all, the designs don't look
anything like what has been sold in the past, there is limited information for servicing complex, organic designs, and
more data is needed to prove such processes as DED hold up against traditional weld repair. Doubts will persist, but
agents to change will continue to conduct tests and draw data-driven conclusions to overcome such concerns. Recognize
90 4 · Design for Additive Manufacturing

     that you aren't alone in your journey to DfAM implementation and that the best approach is to prove your designs
     through testing and simulation.
     Aside from the change management aspect, one of the biggest challenges remains in the lack of awareness of AM
     designing within companies.
     Additive manufacturing is a relatively new fabrication process on the historical timeline of fabrication processes. Sand
     casting and investment casting has been on the earth for thousands of years. Machining has been around for a few
     hundred years. Additive manufacturing has been around for merely a few decades. As such, one must appreciate the
     large amount of legacy knowledge existing in traditional fabrication methods and the relative lack of knowledge with
     AM.
     Because of a relative gap in knowledge in AM processes in industry, let alone how to design for it, many industrialized
     companies are in different phases of their AM design journey, which are characterized using a maturity model. A design
     maturity model helps engineers and executives alike effectively strategize and streamline their AM efforts.
     For example, the Powder Bed Fusion Maturity Model progresses in five phases, increasing the value of AM contribution
     with each successive phase.

        · Phase 0: Rapid prototyping and tooling
        · Phase 1: Direct part conversion
        · Phase 2: Part design integration
        · Phase 3: Structural (topology) optimization
        · Phase 4: Full system optimization
     In Phase 0, most companies see the benefit of using AM for rapid prototypes and tooling in the form of polymer tooling
     and design aids meant to showcase design intent. Limited value is gained by a company focusing solely on the fringe.
     Next, in Phase 1, companies eventually try to run case scenarios where they attempt to build existing products the
     company already makes with AM. There are situations where value can be gained from this approach. Specifically, this
     benefit would include difficult to source parts and/or quick response part fabrication. However, often this approach
     doesn't favor AM from a business case standpoint as AM machines can be quite expensive to operate and the cost of an
     AM part can be pricey compared to the exact same part made from a conventional manufacturing process. In
     recognizing more inherent value in merging the design of conventional parts/features together in a single AM part, the
     company begins to understand more of what AM's design capabilities are and moves to the strategy of Phase 2 - part
     design integration.
     Realizing that the parts that were merged in Phase 2 are now quite heavy, perhaps they could be lightened using
     advanced topology optimization software to produce an organic-looking structure that is both structurally sound and
     lightweight. This leads to the epiphany of Phase 3, topology optimization. After a company becomes proficient using
     advanced topology optimization or generative techniques, then they begin to realize that new products should be
     designed from scratch using the design freedom AM affords to enable products that offer full product differentiation
     from any conventional designs used in the past.
     This brings us to Phase 4, full system optimization. From this point, new products are architected keeping AM as the
     primary fabrication method using system level requirements to drive optimized product design to a new potential.
     The maturity model phases are useful in navigating the adoption of AM, as well as defining a company's or design
     engineer's strategy for using AM. It should be considered a helpful tool for all levels of an organization, especially when
     trying to encourage adoption of the technology.
     Acknowledging the industry current and future states, especially in terms of software tools is critical to success with AM.
     Maintain awareness of risks and development on the horizon as the technology swiftly evolves, so as not waste time on
     dated workflows. This practice in conjunction with AM design maturity phase analysis will help ensure adoption and
     success with AM technology in a lasting way.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    4 · Summary 91

Summary

In summary, it is important to note AM design terminology and how they apply to product benefits.

  · Direct Part Conversion - Reproducing a conventionally manufactured product using AM.
  · MfAM - Modifying a conventionally manufactured product to be successfully fabricated with AM.
  · DfAM - Re-architecting a product form to take advantage of AM design flexibility.

As a company shifts from a strategy of direct part conversion to DfAM, more value is driven into the product in terms of
performance, part count reduction, assembly labor reduction and lighter weight.

MfAM of parts is a common transition when a company is working to leverage all the benefits of AM. Mainly this includes
MfAM of features to ensure that an AM part is able to be fabricated successfully, in which the main drivers are cost and
time savings. Though there are similarities when using MfAM for various AM processes, there are also many process
specific rules of thumb to keep in mind when modifying parts for AM.

DfAM could be considered a more mature state in the transition to leverage all of AM's benefits. It is a systems level
rethinking of a product that starts with concept ideation with the VOC. Ideas are developed by a multi-skilled team to
perform a morphological analysis that decomposes system level functions to ideate new concepts. These concepts are
sorted using the VOC on a Pugh Concept Selection Matrix. Concept solutions are then evaluated for what software is
needed to construct the concept, following generally along the same digital chain. Generative design and/or topology
optimization are used to guide AM hardware concepts that are later refined in analysis to be printed, and later inspected
for iterative improvement.

Exciting design tools are available in the world of AM to increase performance, reduce weight and provide thermal
solutions currently not manufacturable with conventional fabrication technologies. From cellular features found in
metallic PBF to Functionally Gradient Materials found in DED blown powder systems, to support-free designs in
polymeric SLS and material extrusion. incredible options exist to use AM as a way to enhance product offerings.

However, there are some caveats to heed. These would include modifying existing internal passageways, being mindful
of inspection and certification of cellular features, and the machine sizing considerations for each process.

Design for Additive Manufacturing (DfAM) fundamentally challenges engineers' and companies' ways of thinking when it
comes to advancing their products. Unconventional build processes permit unconventional shapes that improve designs,
product or system performance, lead time, and part counts. Specifically this is achieved through a flexible toolpath and
layer-by-layer nature of the build process.

This chapter discussed the general approach to DfAM, the tools available to aid the process, intermediate steps such as
MfAM when working towards fully advantageous DfAM designs, tools and techniques based on build process and
software constraints, and strategies for overcoming developmental challenges that the present industry is faced with.

Mastery of these methods and understanding the progressive design maturity phases of AM enables companies and
designers to viably fabricate with additive manufacturing to fully leverage the many benefits and opportunities the
technology has to offer today.

References

Daley et al, Journal of Mechanical Design, October 2016, Vol 138 http://www-personal.umich.edu/~gonzo/papers/daly-
comparing-ideation.pdf

L. Hao, et al., "Design and additive manufacturing of cellular lattice structures." The International Conference on
Advanced Research in Virtual and Rapid Prototyping (VRAP), Taylor & Francis Group, Leiria (2011)

Review Questions

 1. Describe the differences between Direct Part Conversion, MfAM, and DfAM.

 2. What is a build plan and why is build orientation and nesting important in AM design?

 3. Walk through a DfAM exercise to develop a new product. List the individual steps required to get from concept to
      hardware.

 4. What type of specific AM systems align with DfAM, why not other systems?

 5. What are three design tools a design engineer can use to increase performance or make an AM part lighter?

 6. What are some techniques used to avoid placing support material in internal passageways?
92 4 · Discussion Questions

 7. In your own words, list pros and cons of using DED systems in AM design.
 8. List the challenges associated with the .STL file. =
 9. Describe the challenge with software intoperability in the AM industry. How can it be changed?
10. Why do companies resist new approaches such as DfAM?

Discussion Questions

11. Why is it important to distinguish between Direct Part Conversion, MfAM, and DfAM?
12. Why would MfAM of metallic DED be different than polymer SLS?
13. Why is VOC so important when considering new designs?
14. From a design standpoint, describe a situation where you may want to use a hybrid DED blown powder system

      with a tilt table.
15. Rationalize an application where FGM may be useful in product design.
16. Think about the digital value chain in its current state and come up with different approaches to streamline the

      value chain beyond what is stated in the chapter.
17. Do you think the company investment to move up in value in the design maturity model increases or decreases?

      Why?

Case Questions

18. Disassemble a simple consumer product (i.e. computer mouse, bicycle air pump, etc.) and evaluate how you would
      orient and nest each component within a specific AM process. What MfAM adjustments would you have to make to
      ensure quality fabrication?

19. From the previous question, perform a morphological analysis and sketch a few concepts. Set up the concepts in a
      Pugh Concept Selection matrix and score them relative to the simple consumer product you originally chose as a
      baseline.

20. Explore www.Thingiverse.com and search `lattice' on their website. Pick 10 different designs and label each lattice
      design as `functional' or `aesthetic'. What does this exercise tell you about lattice systems used in product design?

21. Many companies are applying cellular features to heat exchanger design with published documents available from
      NASA, Lockheed Martin and others. Explain the benefits and the shortcomings when using cellular features to
      generate these structures.

22. Are you familiar with a company using 3D printing or additive manufacturing? Share your thoughts on what
      particular Phase that specific company is on the AM maturation model.

23. From the case company identified in the previous question, what steps would the necessary for that company to
      move up to higher Phases to enjoy more value out of AM design?

Key Terms

4.1 Design Approach

3MF, AMF, AM Process Simulation , Biomimicry, Build Plan, DfAm, Direct Part Conversion, Finite element analysis (FEA),
Generative Design, MfAM, Morphological Analysis, Profilometry, Pugh concept selection matrix, Staircasing, .STL file,
Tessellation, Topology Optimization

4.2 Design Optimization: Implementation while Considering Build Constraints

Cellular feature, Functionally Gradient Materials (FGM), Honeycomb structures, Internal Passageways, Isogrid, Lattice
structures

4.3 AM Industry Design Challenges & Strategic Solutions

Software Interoperability

Access for free at openstax.org
                  5 · Introduction 93

5  CERTIFICATION

Figure 5.1 An engine specialist checks the fit of a 3D-printed valve onboard the littoral combat ship USS Indianapolis.
The ship is 115 meters (378 feet long), with a typical crew of about 75 people, and carries several helicopters, surface
vessels, and submersible vehicles. For AM parts to provide core engine functionality on such a massive platform, the
crew must be certain they have been manufactured to exact specifications and pass multiple tests. (credit: U.S. Navy
photo by Mass Communication Specialist 3rd Class Austin Collins on DVIDS, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Certification
  5.2 Nondestructive Testing (NDT)

      Introduction

The topics of Certification and Qualification feature prominently in the future of Additive Manufacturing (AM). This is
because AM is being developed in a wide range of industries to produce products with superior performance (weight,
efficiency, cost, etc.), with the same reliability that conventional manufacturing has delivered for their customers. While
the many regulatory bodies and certifying agencies have very detailed definitions unique to their field, in their simplest
form the two terms are:

  · Certification - component meets design intent and is fit for service in a system
  · Qualification - the entire manufacturing process meets design intent, including the supplier, machine, and

      processing

Certification and qualification are not unique to highly regulated industries such as aerospace and medical. Because of
the severe consequences of unanticipated failure, these industries have some of the most codified requirements. At the
same time, not every industry, production process, or development team may refer to the terms separately or require
94 5 · Certification

     every step in the processes. For example, if a part is being made as a model only, or is being developed as a proof of
     concept, it may require very specific (or limited) certification and qualification. In this chapter, we will discuss certification
     in terms of AM, and how it applies over the full range of applications from both safety-critical to those that are relatively
     mundane. Since part and system certification methods can be very industry-specific, it will be covered in general terms,
     along with common types of certifications (material, part, operator, etc.). We will cover qualification in the next chapter.

   5.1 Certification

    Learning Objectives

     By the end of this section, students will be able to:

        · Discuss the range of product certifications.
        · Apply how certification impacts on the design, manufacturing, and use of additively manufactured components.
        · Describe the importance of material, part, and operator certifications.
        · Differentiate between average material properties and design values.

     Certification is the act of saying (certifying) that a product meets the requirements it was produced against. Certification
     can cover a wide range of products in an industry, from something as complex as an airplane, to something as simple as
     the raw material used to produce a part in that airplane. In this section, we will discuss the full range of certifications
     that would be encountered in the production and delivery of an additively manufactured part.

     The typical certification process starts before manufacture, when the user/customer/regulator states the requirements
     that the system must meet. In the case of a military aircraft, the user, customer, and regulator are the same, that being a
     country's air force. In the case of a civilian aircraft, they are different, where the user and customer are the same (airline)
     but the regulator is an airworthiness authority (FAA, EASA, etc.). In the case of a medical device, such as a hip implant,
     the user is the patient, the customer is the hospital, and the regulator is a medical agency (Food and Drug
     Administration, Public Health Division). In non-regulated industries, it can be even more complicated.

     Two more examples follow:

        · In the offshore oil and gas industry, the oil company is the user, an oilfield equipment company is the customer, and
            a third-party is the reviewer, such as Lloyd's of London.

        · In the case of an automobile company, while various government agencies have regulations regarding emissions,
            safety, and other aspects that provide basic requirements, the customer is the person who buys the car, and the
            head of marketing for the auto company essentially sets the system requirements to be something they can sell at
            sufficient profit.

     It is typically the job of the chief engineer to integrate the different requirements into a successful design. In the case of
     civilian aircraft, it needs to be safe to meet the regulator's requirements, while also being efficient, reliable, and
     comfortable, to meet the airline's requirements. In the case of automotive, the car needs to be efficient, comfortable,
     safe, and reliable, especially when one considers the cost of recalling and repairing a million vehicles.

     Once the overall system requirements are defined, it is then necessary to determine the requirements for the
     subsystem, followed by the individual components. This includes criticality (impact if the part fails), envelope, and
     reliability. With requirements established, components are then designed and analyzed. This marks the end of product
     definition and is followed by construction (building of parts and assemblies). The final phase is testing to verify that the
     part/subsystem/system meets requirements. This begins with part qualification, followed by sub-system testing, and
     finally system certification. In the case of system certification for civilian aircraft, this can include hundreds of flight tests,
     full-scale static and fatigue testing of the airframe, stand testing of the engine, along with analyses and simulations.

     Another aspect of certification that is especially applicable to a new manufacturing technology such as AM is known as a
     building block approach. When introducing a new material, manufacturing process, or both for either a new or existing
     system, development and certification proceeds in a series of building blocks, starting at the bottom in the following
     order:

       1. Selecting the material and process combinations that have the most promise to meet requirements
       2. Developing those materials and/or processes to lock them down and stabilize them
       3. Determining the design values
       4. Performing structural tests starting with small elements and joints, and moving to subcomponents
       5. Performing final component and system tests for qualification and certification

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                      5.1 · Certification 95

                                                     Figure 5.2 The building blocks to certification

System-level Certification

As the highest level of certification, system certification is the farthest removed from the manufacture of an AM part. As
mentioned above, a large part of certification has to do with system tests (flight tests in the case of an aircraft, crash
tests for automobiles), full-scale structural tests, subsystem tests, simulations, and software testing. When the AM part is
either carrying load or necessary to operate, a test of the system or subsystem is necessary for system level certification.
However, many parts in a system may not be fully loaded in a certification test.
Let's use an example: A bracket that attaches the overhead bins in an aircraft. The brackets are required to not fail and
drop luggage on the passengers if the aircraft undergoes a hard landing. Because of the difficulty and risk entailed to
correctly perform a test that fully simulates a hard landing, that part of the certification is done by analysis. That is to say,
the calculations related to the design, loads, and material properties are analyzed to show compliance with the
requirements.
In the case of an AM part used in the overhead bins, we are concerned with analyzing two aspects: 1) the design of the
part itself and how it attaches to the surrounding structure, and 2) the strength of the AM material comprising the part.
Because one of the benefits of AM is the ability to design parts of new, and more efficient geometries, additional
structural analysis and verification may be necessary. This may require subsystem tests in a lab on the part of the
overhead bin attachment hardware that includes the AM part. The part would be tested to a load greater than would be
encountered in such a crash landing. The other way in which the use of AM is involved in certification is the
determination of the strength of the actual material of which the AM part is made, and how consistent those properties
are. This will be discussed in a later section.

Part Certification

Unlike system certification, that may only happen a few times in the lifecycle of a product family (airplane type in the
example above), part certifications happen hundreds, or even thousands of times, in a single year for a product. This
certification, which is common across many industries and manufacturing processes, entails the manufacturer of a part
96 5 · Certification

     or a subsystem certifying that the part or subsystem being delivered meets its technical requirements. In the case of an
     AM part shipped from the part maker to the system builder, a document known as a Certificate of Conformance is either
     provided with the hardware or delivered electronically to the system builder. This Certificate of Conformance states that
     the manufacture is not only certifying that the part meets dimensional requirements, but that it was manufactured in
     accordance with the appropriate process, using the appropriate feedstock, and has passed all other inspections, such as
     metallurgical, mechanical property, nondestructive testing, hardness, and any other requirements.

    Operator Certification

     Another type of certification that takes place in AM is the certification of the operators of equipment. This is also not
     unique to AM, as many critical processes, such as welding, heat treatment, and composite part fabrication require
     certified operators. Operator certification usually requires a certain amount of classroom and on-the-job training, along
     with demonstrations of proficiency, such as written and practical (on-machine) examinations. Once an operator has
     demonstrated the necessary level of proficiency, they are then certified as operators, and allowed to produce production
     hardware on their own. These certifications are often tracked in a company's manufacturing resource planning (MRP)
     systems, that will only allow a certified operator to either initiate or electronically sign off a manufacturing operation.

    Material Certification

     The final level of certification relevant to AM is Material Certification. This has to do with ensuring that the feedstocks
     used to make the parts (liquids, powders, wires, foils) conform to the relevant specifications. Like part certifications, the
     Certificate of Conformance, which is a document certified by a competent authority that the supplied good or service
     meets the specifications, may be provided with the feedstock or delivered electronically. In some cases, they may just list
     the specification or specifications the feedstock conforms to, and in other cases, contain the actual test values and
     comparison with the specification values. While material is often certified to a public specification, such as an ASTM, SAE
     Aerospace Material Specification (AMS), or Military Specification, in the case of AM, many Original Equipment
     Manufacturers (OEMs, e.g. General Electric, Airbus, Toyota, Wabtec, Stryker) have their own proprietary specifications. In
     this case, a single lot of material may be certified to multiple specifications

    Development of Design Values

     Key to certifying a system made from engineered materials is knowing the properties of those materials. If the
     stiffnesses of the materials are not known, then one cannot be confident of the load paths or the stresses in the parts. If
     the strength properties of the materials are not known, one cannot be confident that the parts will be able to withstand
     the loads or stresses they are subjected to. If the thermal properties of the materials are not known, one cannot be
     confident of the operating temperature of that part and the surrounding parts, and their ability to withstand the
     temperatures without static, fatigue, creep, or excessive oxidation failure. Thus, in order to certify a system, it is
     necessary to know with confidence the properties of the materials that the parts are made from.

     This knowledge of properties includes the following:

       1. Knowing the strength that a significant amount of the population of a material will have
       2. Knowing the physical properties of a material
       3. Understanding the relationships between material composition, processing, and strength
       4. Knowing the impact of environmental conditions on the material properties

     The first of these often requires the development of what might be called "minimum" properties. They are minimum
     properties because it is a statistical characterization describing what can be expected to be achieve a very high
     percentage of the time, so therefore the process should always be able to deliver higher properties ensuring the part's
     success. One can imagine that if a design used median properties, it could be expected that as much as half of the parts
     used would have insufficient strength to meet service needs. In most industries, that would be considered a deficient
     design, and the system would not be certified. Therefore, many industries use minimum material properties in
     determining a design. Because knowing the true minimum properties of a material would require testing all of it,
     industries have developed methodologies for determining the minimum properties used for design.

     One of the most widely used methods is the aerospace industry standard known as Metallic Materials Properties
     Development and Standardization (MMPDS), currently in its 14th version. The methods used in this standard have been
     developed over several decades with participation by the global aerospace industry and its regulators. It contains a
     chapter of over 200 pages that lays out the methodology, requirements, and the means of presenting the data. The
     types of Design Mechanical and Physical properties published in this are listed below.

        · A-Basis Values - This is the value that 99% of the material will be stronger than with 95% confidence
        · B-Basis Values - This is the value that 90% of the material will be stronger than with 90% confidence

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                      5.1 · Certification 97

  · S-Basis Values - This is the minimum value that a specification will allow but does not have the statistical basis of A-
      Basis or B-Basis values

The criticality of the part will often determine the need for A-Basis, B-Basis, or S-Basis values. Because there are no
published design properties for AM metals in MMPDS, we will use examples from wrought metals to illustrate these
properties. The figure below contains the table of properties for 2024-T351 aluminum alloy plate, made to the Society of
Automotive Engineering (SAE) Aerospace Material Specification (AMS) 4050.

                Figure 5.3 MMPDS Design Mechanical and Physical Properties for 2024-T351 Aluminum Alloy Plate
The MMPDS table contains values for the following:

  · Tensile (Ftu)
  · Yield Tensile (Fty)
  · Compression Yield (Fcy)
  · Shear Ultimate (Fsu)
  · Bearing Ultimate (Fbu)
  · Bearing Yield (Fby)
Note that the properties are different for different directions, illustrating that the specific material, like most engineered
materials, is anisotropic. It also has S-basis values for elongation. Finally note that the physical properties (moduli,
Poisson's ratio, density, heat capacity, thermal conductivity, and thermal expansion) provided are not minimum
properties, but averages. This is because unlike strength properties, where bigger is better, and having a statistically
derived minimum value provides design confidence; higher or lower physical properties may not be any better, hence
the use of average properties. Note that in some very specialized applications, it may be necessary to have statistically
based physical properties.
There are different sets of columns for different thicknesses. In the case of wrought aluminum alloy plate made to
industry standards, there is an inverse relationship between strength and thickness. Additionally, these properties are
98 5 · Certification

     achieved in material that has received this specific thermo-mechanical treatment (solution annealed, quenched,
     stretched, and overaged). In the case of a developing technology like AM, the understanding of these variables is a work
     in progress.

     While the over 200 pages in MMPDS lays out the methodology, requirements, and the means of presenting the data is
     well established for wrought materials, the methods for AM materials still being developed. One of the primary
     questions for AM is establishing the range of part geometries and processing parameters to include in a data set for
     determining the design values. Until such methods are standardized and validated, design authorities are independently
     developing methods. Depending on the circumstances, different approaches are being used, examples of which are
     below.

        · Part Specific Design Values - This entails building a large number of the same part, excising test coupons from
            them, and deriving the properties based on the test results and applying the proper statistics.

        · Part Family Design Values - This can be developed from the start or can be an extension of Part Specific Design
            Values, and entails building replicates of a number of parts that are closely related in terms of geometry and
            processing parameters, and deriving the properties based on the test results and statistics. If done as an extension
            of Part Specific Design Values, it would usually involve building and testing parts similar to the original one and
            verifying consistency of properties.

        · Feature Based Design Values - This is very much like those shown earlier for 2024-T351 plate (thickness). The key
            challenge in developing these for AM is determining if there is any good relationship with features exist, and how to
            demonstrate that. Would the appropriate ones be feature thickness, overall cross-sectional area, layer thickness, or
            some much more arcane definition? Additionally, the appropriate feature for one material or process may not be
            appropriate for another one.

     Recall the property list above. Item four, knowing the impact of environmental conditions on the material properties,
     means that it is also necessary to understand environmental effects on material properties. For example, temperature
     has an effect on materials, such as impacting the temperature on tensile strength. So, if an AM part is to be used in
     elevated temperature conditions, it will be necessary to have an understanding of these effects. MMPDS may also
     include data tables or graphs/curves pertaining to environmental impacts such as temperature.

     Depending on the application, it may also be necessary to understand the performance of a material under cyclic
     loading (fatigue) conditions. S-N curves show fatigue values, and can be applied to a variety of material applications,
     such as a notched or unnotched item. In the case of fatigue (sometimes referred to as durability), the wide scatter often
     makes it difficult or impossible to determine a statistically based minimum value. In that case, an average curve may be
     developed and used for analysis, but the certification requirements may require that the part be designed to last many
     (2 or more) lifetimes than predicted. Depending on the fatigue environment encountered, it may be necessary to
     develop a unique curve for that ratio.

     In some critical applications (safety-of-flight aircraft parts, pressure vessels, underwater oil valves), it is also necessary to
     know the damage tolerance of a material. This requires knowing how quickly a crack will grow, and how long it can be
     before catastrophic failure occurs. These are based on properties known as crack growth resistance and fracture
     toughness. These properties (usually a minimum for toughness, and average values for crack growth), along with the
     assumptions of an initial crack size, which is related to the NDT methods used and the service environment; need to be
     known with some confidence to certify a system that has damage tolerance requirements.

     While most of the properties of interest are mechanical and physical properties, in some cases, product-specific
     properties are required. Examples of these are:

        · Flame, smoke, and toxicity for materials used in aircraft cabins and passenger rail cars to prevent small fires from
            killing the passengers or preventing them from escaping.

        · Chemical-specific corrosion properties in chemical plants.
        · Ignition temperatures in automotive braking systems.

   5.2 Nondestructive Testing (NDT)

    Learning Objectives

     By the end of this section, students will be able to:

        · Describe basic nondestructive testing (NDT) technologies.
        · Describe process control, process monitoring, and in-situ NDT.
        · Understand how NDT methods relate to certification and qualification.
        · Understand nondestructive testing methods and how they relate to certification.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            5.2 · Nondestructive Testing (NDT) 99

Most of the parts and materials used in the world are made using robust, repeatable processes with minimal post-
fabrication inspections. In industries where the consequences of failure can be high (aerospace, turbomachinery,
nuclear, medical, oil and gas, high-value costly to replace automotive), parts are often subjected to nondestructive
testing, which is process of inspecting components or assemblies for discontinuities, or differences in characteristics
without destroying the serviceability of the parts, to see if they contain any defects that would cause failure while in
service. Thus, the use of NDT to ensure freedom from defects that could cause in-service failure is integral to the
certification of many systems.

While more detailed definitions exist, for the purposes of this book, a defect is a discontinuity that may compromise the
ability of a part to meet design intent. While it can be expected that the above industries will continue to use NDT for AM
parts, the lack of long-term service history may cause other industries, such as automotive, to consider the use of NDT
until manufacturing and service history provides the data needed to eliminate it. One unique aspect of AM is that since
the parts are built in layers, the opportunity presents itself to inspect the part as it is built, known as In-Situ AM. Related
to this is the ability to gather and analyze significant amounts of data while a part is being built, which provides
unprecedented ability to perform Process Monitoring or Process Control while the part is being built.

Post-build NDT, often referred to as conventional NDT, is divided into volumetric and surface methods. Volumetric
methods look for discontinuities in the interior of a part or material, while surface methods look for discontinuities on
the surface of a part. Each of these methods have their own attributes, with surface methods generally considered more
critical. Surface discontinuities tend to have a greater impact on performance than subsurface ones due to higher stress
concentrations and the potential for crevice corrosion. It can be imagined one day, that in-situ NDT of AM may address
both volumetric and surface inspections. In the following paragraphs, each of the inspection technologies will be briefly
described with relation to AM, followed by an example.

Radiographic Inspection

This original method of NDT is almost exclusively used for volumetric inspections and dates back to the days of
Roentgen. It can be used for the full range of AM materials, and works by passing X-rays (although some systems use
Gamma rays or neutrons) through a part and onto a detector. Cracks and pores are found because they have less matter
to absorb the X-rays so more hit the detector. Inclusions (undesirable foreign material) are found because they either
absorb more X-rays (higher density) or fewer X-rays (lower density). General practice is that when more X-rays hit the
detector, the image is darker, and when fewer hit the detector, the image is brighter. It can be inferred that for a
discontinuity to be detected, it must be oriented so that it has some thickness in the direction of the X-ray beam. This
means that planar discontinuities, such as cracks, may be difficult to detect, unless one knows their preferred
orientation.

While photographic film was the preferred detector until the 1980s, more and more industries are now using digital
detectors to capture the image. These offer significant benefits in terms of time, sensitivity, and ability to analyze the
image. The most sophisticated, and expensive, radiographic method is known as computed tomography (CT). In this
method, the part is rotated while being continually exposed to the X-rays and the detector continually collects the data.
The data is then processed to generate a 3D reconstruction of the part. In addition to being used to detect and
characterize discontinuities, CT can also generate a solid model for comparison with the actual design. This extra
capability can be quite useful in AM to determine if a complex part with internal passages meets dimensional
requirements where conventional metrology would not be able to inspect.

For the purposes of this discussion, we will say the discontinuities of interest are pores, inclusions, and cracks.
Additionally, it is necessary to know whether internal passages are the correct distance from the surface of the part. A
series of radiographic shots, as shown below, could be used to look for pores and cracks, with a typical sensitivity being
2% of material thickness (thus if the part is 50mm thick, pores above 1mm across could be detected), and to provide
some information on the cooling channels. The use of CT, however, would provide the ability to determine the actual
geometry of the cooling channels and allow a digital comparison with the original model the part was built to. One
aspect of AM where complexity can be a hindrance is in performing radiographic inspections. Parts with a large number
for small features can have lots of noise around the edges of the features, making it difficult to interpret the
radiographic results.
100 5 · Certification

       Figure 5.4 A nondestructive aircraft technician holds up a magnifying glass in front of a radiographic image of an aircraft
       component in an effort to detect cracks or other defects. (credit: U.S. Air Force photo/Senior Airman Chris Willis on
       DVIDS, Public Domain

    Ultrasonic Inspection

       One version of ultrasonic inspection, called surface wave inspection, is used as a surface or near-surface inspection. This
       entails introducing a surface wave (called a Raleigh wave) into a part and then listening for it to reflect back off of a
       discontinuity. Because surface wave inspection is relatively rare in industry, and would be so for AM, we will focus on the
       use of ultrasonic as a volumetric inspection method. Ultrasonic inspection is effective in materials that transmit sound,
       such as metals and composites. It is less effective in porous ceramics, neat polymers, or elastomers. Volumetric
       ultrasonic inspection works much like sonar on a ship. A pulse, generally between 1MHz and 20MHz, is sent out from a
       transducer.
        1. In the most common mode, called pulse-echo, the transducer, then listens for the pulse. If it reflects off an internal

             discontinuity, the size and location can then be inferred by looking at the signal.
        2. Another approach, called pitch-catch, uses a second transducer that listens for the signal reflecting off of the

             discontinuity. This can be a benefit over the first for some geometries.
        3. A third approach, called through-transmission, uses a second transducer that records the volume (amplitude) of the

             signal transmitted through the part.
       While the first is used in metals and composites, and the second mainly in metals (especially welds), through-
       transmission is most commonly used for the inspection of composites. Inspection of flat shapes will use general service
       probes, while more complicated shapes may use customized probes other devices (called shoes) to introduce the sound
       into the part. The most complicated shapes often require building custom phased array ultrasonic probes, which contain
       an array of transducers specifically designed for the inspected geometry. All of these methods are best for finding
       discontinuities that are oriented perpendicular to the direction of sound. Thus, radiography (good at finding
       discontinuities parallel to the beam direction) and ultrasonic inspection can be very complimentary, which is why they
       are often used together in the inspection of welds.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            5.2 · Nondestructive Testing (NDT) 101

Figure 5.5 A non destructive inspection technician uses an ultrasonic flaw detector to analyze a damaged aircraft panel.
(credit: U.S. Air Force photo/Senior Airman Andrea Posey on DVIDS, Public Domain)
The primary challenges in performing ultrasonic inspection of AM parts are due to geometric complexity and surface
roughness. Because the sound needs to be introduced into and received out of the part, the geometry needs to be
relatively simple to allow both access for the transducer and the ability to have some area of contact. Additionally, a
predictable back surface is needed. Finally, the wave needs room to propagate, so thin or narrow features are difficult to
inspect. In conventional manufacturing, most ultrasonic inspections are performed on simple shapes, such as
rectangular plates or round bars. The rough or irregular surfaces of many AM parts also make inspection difficult, as a
smooth, consistent surface is needed to introduce the sound into the part.

Eddy-Current Inspection

Eddy-current inspection is primarily a surface inspection method, although discontinuities within 1mm of the surface can
be detected with the correct set-up. Eddy-current uses an electromagnetic coil (generally between 10Hz and 4Mhz,
depending on material and application) to induce eddy-currents in the part. Thus, only conductive materials can be
102 5 · Certification

       inspected. The presence of a physical discontinuity will disturb the eddy-currents, which is picked up the test equipment.
       Eddy-current testing requires a reasonably smooth surface, so the rough surfaces of AM parts can be a significant
       hinderance. It can also be very labor-intensive. As a result, it is often relegated to inspecting small areas, where a
       production discontinuity or fatigue crack is suspected.

    Magnetic Particle Inspection

       Like Eddy-current, magnetic particle inspection can detect surface and near-surface (also up to ~1mm deep)
       discontinuities. A prerequisite for this inspection method is that the material in question be reasonably ferromagnetic
       (alloy steels or PH stainless steels). Magnetic particle inspection works by inducing a magnetic field in the part and
       applying magnetic particulate matter to highlight areas where the magnetic field is disturbed. These are areas of
       potential cracks, laps, etc. Needless to say, the rough surfaces and undercuts in many AM parts would generate many
       false positive indications, so magnetic particle inspection would be limited to smooth surfaces.

    Penetrant Inspection

       Due to the ability to use a common inspection procedure, applicability to all nonporous materials, and quick examination
       time, penetrant inspection is the most common surface inspection method in industry. A discontinuity must be open to
       the surface in order for penetrant inspection to work, as the method entails using capillary action to draw the penetrant
       into the discontinuity, which then bleeds back out after the excess penetrant is removed and a developer is applied. Like
       magnetic particle and eddy-current inspection, linear discontinuities around 1.5mm and above are typically detected
       with high-sensitivity fluorescent penetrant materials. Also, like magnetic particle and eddy-current inspection, the ability
       to inspect is significantly compromised by rough surfaces. Additionally, surfaces must be free of grease and oils. Finally,
       for the high-sensitivity penetrants, machines parts with yield strengths under 1500MPa require a pre-penetrant etch to
       remove any smeared metal. The combination of these often means penetrant inspection requires cleaning and acid or
       alkaline etch tanks, which is why the inspection is often performed by specialist chemical processing contractors.

       Figure 5.6 An inspector finds a crack in a bulkhead from a jet aircraft. This two-hour inspection had four steps: soaking in
       a penetrant solution, rinsing, then soaking in emulsifier, drying, and finally examining the part under a high-intensity
       UVB black light. (U.S. Air National Guard photo by Senior Airman Emily Copeland on DVIDS, Public Domain)

    Resonance Inspection

       This method treats each part like a tuning fork, although in many cases the sound is outside of the audible range. The
       part is loosely held and tapped in a controlled method. The sound coming off the part will have a characteristic
       resonance frequency that is detected with a specialized microphone and analyzed. Changes in the resonance frequency
       may be the result of either discontinuities or discrepant geometry. Because it is quick to perform, resonance inspection
       can be used as the primary inspection to screen parts as acceptable or questionable, with the questionable part
       inspected using another method for final disposition.

    Thermographic Inspection

       Thermographic inspection involves imaging an area with an infrared camera to look for differences in temperature. The

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            5.2 · Nondestructive Testing (NDT) 103

inspection can be either passive (using background thermal energy to look for hot or cold spots) or active (applying heat
via flash lamps or the like and looking for hot or cold spots). Outside of AM, thermographic inspection is often used to
inspect areas where a coating may be bonded onto a surface to check for unbonded areas. This also takes advantage of
one of its advantages, which is being noncontact and able to inspect large areas quickly. Within AM, it is being developed
and implemented for process monitoring and in-situ NDT.

Process Monitoring, Process Control, and In-Situ NDT

Because of the difficulty of inspecting AM parts post-build, and the opportunity to inspect parts while they are being
built, process monitoring, process control, and In-Situ NDT are being implemented and developed. We will start with
defining the three terms:

  · Process Monitoring - Monitoring the inputs and responses of a process while it is being performed to see that it is
      operating within limits.

  · Process Control - Using data from process monitoring to change the inputs to a process to keep it within desired
      limits.

  · In-Situ NDT - Inspections performed while a part is being made using AM.

Because AM is an inherently digital process, and because the machines produce large amounts of data, Process
Monitoring is the most widely applied of the three. Ideally, Process Monitoring is performed while the process is active,
although it can be applied post-built as part of an accept/evaluate/reject decision tree. A wide range of process
parameters can be monitored. These include input parameters (laser input power, recoater voltage, arc current, gas flow
rate, etc.) or output parameters (melt puddle size, bed surface temperature, laser energy, etc.). The key is reliably
determining how the parameters correlate with either an acceptable part, a rejectable part, or a suspect part that
requires further evaluation, which is made more challenging in that the definition may be geometry dependent. Making
this determination is being helped by the use of a range of data analytics and machine learning tools that are now
available.

Process Control will often use the same sensors and data as Process Monitoring. The difference is that the AM machine
uses the results of the sensing and analysis to determine if a process is going out of the desired limits and makes
changes to the input parameters to keep it within its desired limits. Needless to say, this must be done while the process
is active so the changes can be made as part of a closed loop. While not as widely used as Process Monitoring, Process
Control is beginning to appear on newer-generation AM machines with increasingly sophisticated sensors and analysis
methods.

Making parts without discontinuities is always the goal. Depending on the industry and the part requirements such as,
the criticality of the part and the level of confidence in the process, NDT may still be required. In AM, the best time to
perform this may be while the part is being built, either to achieve desired level of sensitivity and reliability, minimize
NDT cost, or to avoid continuing to add value to a part that is not acceptable. In-Situ NDT may look very much like
Process Monitoring and use the same sensors and analysis methods. The difference, however, is that the output of the
analysis is a determination that a region of a part contains or does not contain an unacceptable discontinuity and its
approximate size.

The decision to use Process Monitoring, Process Control, In-Situ NDT, or Post-Build NDT or some combination of the four,
and the methods to be used requires the input of a combination of disciplines and needs to be integrated into the
overall design and build of the system as part of the overall certification of that system.

Integration of NDT with Design and Analysis

Key to the effective use of NDT is knowing the size of discontinuities that can be detected. Ideally, the NDT methods used
to inspect a part can detect discontinuities that are smaller than those that will cause a part to not meet design intent;
that is, smaller than the applicable defect size. One measure of this is knowing the smallest possible discontinuity a
method can detect on a part, often referred to as the minimum detectable defect size, Because of the complexities of
part geometry, discontinuity geometry, operator skill, etc., however, having an absolute size for what can be detected in
a part is rarely possible. Thus, the term Probability of Detection (PoD) is used to refer to the size of discontinuity that can
be detected with a good chance of success. A typical definition of success is being able to find 90% of the discontinuities
above a certain size with 95% confidence. Depending on the material, part geometry, type of discontinuity and NDT
method, parts with either actual or simulated discontinuities in the locations of interest and of a range of sizes will
undergo NDT multiple times to statistically determine that value.

The final stage in integrating NDT with design and analysis is determining the effects of defects (EoD). That is, how do
different discontinuities of different sizes impact the performance of a material. This type of testing is often done when a
new material or process is introduced, or it is used for the first time in a new application, especially one that is loaded in
104 5 · Certification

       fatigue or where damage tolerance is needed.
       EoD testing often requires the following:

         · Building test parts with intentional discontinuities
         · Performing NDT on the parts to see if the discontinuities are detectable and to characterize their apparent size
         · Testing the parts to failure to see the impact on either the static strength, fatigue life, or fracture stress
         · Correlating the size estimated by NDT, actual size, and impact on performance
       When this is completed successfully, the results are analyzed and the size of discontinuity that needs to be detected is
       determined. Ideally, this size is larger than the size that can be detected with confidence. If not, changes to the design
       and/or materials and processes need to be made. In the case of AM, many industries are just beginning studies to
       determine both the detectable sizes and the effects of defects.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   5 · Summary 105

Summary

Certifying a system containing AM parts from engineering materials requires an understanding of the properties of the
material as a function of composition, processing, and environmental effects on the part and the material it is made
from. As we now begin to cover qualification, it is important to keep in mind that the primary goal of qualification is
demonstrating that the production system (factory, personnel, AM machines, post-processing, feedstock, and quality
assurance measures) is capable of repeatedly and reliably producing AM parts whose properties are consistent with
those used to design the system.

Certification ensures a component meets specified requirements, which are defined according to industry, material,
regulatory agencies, and other factors. The process begins with defining system requirements by stakeholders (e.g.,
customers, users, and regulators) and proceeds through design, manufacturing, testing, and certification phases.
Certification includes system, part, operator, and material certifications.

System certification involves extensive testing (e.g., flight tests for aircraft) and analysis to validate performance. For
parts like AM components, both material strength and design efficiency must be assessed. Part certification is more
frequent, verifying compliance with technical and manufacturing standards through a Certificate of Conformance.

Operator certification ensures skilled personnel produce quality parts, requiring training and proficiency evaluations.
Material certification ensures feedstocks meet technical specifications, with standards varying from public to proprietary
requirements.

Certifying systems with engineered materials requires comprehensive property knowledge, including strength,
reliability, and environmental effects. Methodologies like MMPDS provide statistical design values for materials, critical
for safety and performance.

Nondestructive testing (NDT), essential in high-stakes industries, includes methods like radiography, ultrasonics, and
eddy-current inspection, identifying defects without damaging components. Emerging technologies like in-situ NDT
integrate real-time monitoring during AM processes, enhancing defect detection and system reliability. Combining
design, analysis, and NDT ensures robust certification practices, especially in evolving fields like AM.

Review Questions

 1. Which of the following certifications would one expect to see performed the least?
       a. Material Certification
       b. Part Certification
       c. System Certification
       d. Operator Certification

 2. Which of the following would one expect to be the lowest for a given material?
       a. A-Basis Design Values
       b. B-Basis Design Values
       c. Average Properties

 3. Which of the following NDT methods is limited to discontinuities open to the surface?
       a. Radiographic
       b. Ultrasonic
       c. Magnetic Particle
       d. Penetrant
       e. Eddy-Current

Key Terms

5.1 Certification

Certification, Certificate of Conformance, Criticality, Design Values, Qualification

5.2 Nondestructive Testing (NDT)

Nondestructive Testing, Process Control, Process Monitoring, In-Situ NDT, Effects of Defects, Probability of Detection
106 5 · Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
                           6 · Introduction 107

6  ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING
   QUALIFICATION

Figure 6.1 Qualification involves evaluating a manufacturer's ability to undertake each step in the part or system
creation process. This becomes even more complex when two or more processes are involved in the creation of a part.
This hybrid additive manufacturing system combines 3D printing with compression molding. It is capable of producing
parts made of one material as well as building multiple materials, such as interconnected metals and polymers. But
before such builds are done at production scale and pace, the machine, the build processes, the personnel, and the
testing approaches all must be evaluated and qualified as effective and up to standard. (credit: Modification of "Additive
Manufacturing Compression Molding System" by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0).

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Qualification
  6.2 Production Acceptance Testing
  6.3 Fixed Designs and Processes, Change Management, and the Future of Certification and Qualification

      Introduction

Like certification, qualification can apply to a wide variety of activities, ranging from a very high level (a factory is
qualified to make AM hardware) to a very low level (a part is qualified for production). While each of these qualifications
apply to different aspects of producing AM hardware, in the end, each of them points to the ability to repeatedly make
hardware that meets the engineering requirements and will perform as expected in service.

6.1 Qualification

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Differentiate the levels of qualification (part, supplier, machine), how they apply to different industries, and how
      qualification can be achieved.

  · Apply qualification to its role in facilities and processes beyond the printer.
  · Conceptually connect qualification to certification and design.

A simple example of the relationship between certification and qualification would be the design of a rope swing. Let's
say that the rope has to withstand a 10,000 N load. The engineer specifies a 10mm diameter nylon rope and hangs a
15,000 N weight from it (10,000 N x a safety factor of 1.5) from the rope as part of the certification process. Needing a
108 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

       reliable supply of rope, the rope swing company goes to a variety of rope manufacturers with a specification requiring
       10mm diameter nylon rope that can withstand 15,000 N without failing. The rope manufacturers submit to the swing
       maker the results of tests on their 10mm ropes showing that their rope can withstand 15,000 N without failing. At this
       point, the swing maker qualifies several rope manufacturers as suppliers, and adds them to a qualified producer list
       (QPL). In brief terms:

         · The swing maker certifies that their rope swing design is fit for service. The design that is certified specifies the kind
             of rope that can be used;

         · The swing maker qualifies rope manufacturers as suppliers of conforming rope.
         · Extending it further: the rope manufacturers qualify suppliers of nylon strand that conforms to the rope

             manufacturer's specification to be used for making 10mm diameter rope.

       To bring this into a common AM application - aircraft manufacturing - the analogy would be:

         · The swing maker is analogous to the the system builder - the airplane manufacturer.
         · The rope maker is analogous to the AM part maker.
         · The nylon strand supplier is analogous to the powder production facility.

       In the AM application above, to ensure proper, effective, safe, and efficient production, the airplane manufacturer needs
       to qualify the part supplier, and the part supplier needs to qualify the powder production facility.

    Facility Qualification

       Facility is the highest level of qualification and is usually the result of some of the other qualification types. Facility
       qualification also indicates that the facility (or the overall company) has the proper business, manufacturing, training,
       and other quality processes integrated throughout the operations. This qualification often involves the coordination of
       different organizations such as the following:

         · Facility Quality and Management - Organization that will be using the machine to make parts
         · Part Customer - Organization that will be receiving parts made on the machine
         · Industry Group or 3rd Party Organization - Organization that represents the part customer, as part of a larger

             industry organization. Examples of these are NADCAP, Lloyd's Registry, etc.
         · Regulatory Agency - Governmental body or industry group

       A qualified AM facility must be able to demonstrate a few key systemic, organizational, and process-oriented capacities,
       including having an overall quality management system, approved AM-related processes and equipment, and relevant
       non-AM-related processes and equipment. These three areas are described in more detail below.

       Overall Quality Management System: This often requires that the facility operates in accordance with an industry-
       approved specification, such as ISO-9000, AS-9100 (aerospace), or ISO-13485 (medical).

       Typical parts of the overall quality management system are:

         · Understanding customer and contract requirements
         · Organized and documented leadership roles and responsibilities
         · Involvement of employees, which includes personnel training and qualification
         · Control of business, manufacturing, and other processes. This includes control of materials, designs (build files)

             software, machines, work instructions (build programs), operators, inspectors, etc.
         · Closed-loop improvement processes - Monitoring production and making improvements in a controlled fashion, or

             taking timely corrective action when things go wrong
         · Data-based decision making
         · Management of relationships with suppliers and subcontractors

       Approved AM-Related Processes and Equipment: Prior to receiving a facility qualification, it is usually necessary for the
       AM-related processes and equipment to be qualified. Examples of these qualifications include feedstock handling and
       tracking, qualification of at least one AM machine, and qualifications of operators for the machines.

       Non-AM-Related Processes and Equipment: This can apply to processes outside of the actual print operations. In some
       cases, these processes are performed within the facility, or they may be performed in sister facilities or subcontractors,
       which have been approved.

       Examples of these processes and equipment that may require approval are:

         · Heat treatment
         · Machining and other post-processes
         · Nondestructive testing

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.1 · Qualification 109

  · Mechanical and material testing
  · Dimensional inspection

A qualified AM facility consists of qualified personnel, equipment, and processes working together in an integrated
fashion to reliably produce AM hardware that meets requirements and is consistently being improved in a controlled
fashion.

Machine Qualification

A qualified AM machine is one that can reliably produce AM parts that meet requirements. As the AM industry matures,
machine qualification is coalescing on a staged approach that closely aligns with medical equipment qualification. The
stages differ in the propose of the testing, feedstock used during the testing, types of testing being done, the pass/fail
criteria, and who is involved in the qualification testing, and determining a machine to be qualified.

The different types of organizations involved may include the following:

  · Machine Builder - Organization that designs and builds the machine
  · User - Organization (Facility) that will be using the machine to make parts
  · Part Customer - Organization that will be receiving parts made on the machine
  · Industry Group or 3rd Party Organization - Organization that represents the part customer, as part of a larger

      industry accreditation organization; examples of these are Nadcap and Lloyd's Registry
  · Regulatory Agency - Governmental body or industry group

Factory Acceptance Testing (FAT): Factory acceptance testing is usually conducted at the site at which the machine is
built and performed by employees of the machine builder, to determine whether a hardware and software of the product
satisfies the requirements. Since FAT occurs before the machine is accepted by the user, it is sometimes considered
outside the realm of qualification, but either way, it is considered a prerequisite to the other qualification stages. FAT is
also good practice as it provides data to a default or baseline known point. FAT essentially consists of the machine
builder verifying that the machine operates as intended. The involved parties are the machine builder and the user. In
the case of smaller machines (e.g. 250mm class Laser Powder Bed Fusion machines), this testing takes place at the
factory where the machine was built. In the case of large Direct Energy Deposition or Material Extrusion machines where
the machine is assembled for the first time in the user's facility, this would take place at the user's facility.

FAT consists of a number of operational tests to verify compliance with the machine specification. Some of these tests
will check the performance of individual sub-systems, including the items below.

  · Testing the optical train on a L-PBF machine by scanning the laser over the build area that has a series of detectors
      installed to measure beam profile, placement accuracy, consistency, and power.

  · Translating the deposition head on a DED or ME machine over the full build volume to verify accuracy and
      repeatability over that volume.

  · Measuring the protective gas flow on a machine to verify the lack of dead spots in coverage
  · Measuring the heating tip temperature on a ME machine.
  · Testing the powder recoating system over a range of powder sizes and layer thicknesses to verify range of

      operation.
  · Verifying operation of the feedstock handling system by checking material feed rates or dosing rates.

While the feedstock used for the actual tests may be a standard material specified by the machine builder, it is more
commonly that material the user intends to put in the machine in production. This is not only to avoid potential
contamination issues, but to have a continuity of material type from FAT through Installation Qualification, Operational
Qualification, and Part Qualification. After these tests have been successfully completed, FAT will often culminate with
making a series of test parts that validate the performance of the machine over a range of geometries and location
within the build volume. These geometries are generally determined by the machine builder as ones that provide the
best information on the performance of the machine in the shortest amount of time and cost. Post-build dimensional
inspection is the most common, with radiographic, CT scanning, and surface roughness measurements often employed.
Additionally, the log files that were generated during the builds are analyzed for any anomalies. After successful
completion of FAT, the machine is then disassembled to the extent necessary and shipped to the user's facility.

Installation Qualification (IQ): IQ Is a process that verifies that all aspects of facility, utilities and equipment that affect
product quality adhere to the specification, and that the equipment has been properly delivered and correctly installed.
IQ, sometimes known as Site Acceptance Testing (SAT), almost always takes place at the user's facility, after the machine
has been received, installed, and re-assembled. In the case of machines that are only assembled at the user's facility, IQ
and FAT may be performed simultaneously to reduce time and cost. In many cases, the first stage of IQ is repeating all of
the FAT testing to ensure that the newly re-assembled machine performs the same as it did at the factory. A SAT may
110 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

      include the FAT initially but then increase in scope to the user's definition if they possess or add capability to the
      standard machine and thus becomes the default condition for the user which is then different from the original factory.
      IQ will often consist of additional tests required by the machine user. In the case where final payment on the machine is
      contingent on passing IQ, the machine builder will also be involved in designing the tests and determining pass/fail
      criteria. Depending on the industry, the part customer or a 3rd party may also be involved. While some of these
      acceptance tests are subsystem diagnostic type tests, they will usually include building test parts that are representative
      of the geometries that the user is intending to make with the machine. The intended production feedstock is almost
      always used for this testing, for the aforementioned reasons. Figure F07_02_iq shows an example IQ component. In
      addition to the tests performed for FAT, additional tests sometimes include chemistry, microstructural, dissection, and
      mechanical property tests. Depending on the testing performed, post-processing may be necessary. Mechanical testing
      at this stage would generally require exceeding specification minimums.

      Figure 6.2 Installation Qualification test part example from the US National Institute of Standards and Technology.
      (credit: Modification of Figure 3 in "Gary Mac, Hammond Pearce, Ramesh Karri, Nikhil Gupta. "Uncertainty quantification
      in dimensions dataset of additive manufactured NIST standard test artifact." Data in Brief, Volume 38, 2021, 107286. CC
      BY 4.0)
      Operational Qualification (OQ) - OQ is series of tests which ensure that equipment and its sub-systems will operate
      within their specified limits consistently. This 3rd stage of machine qualification almost always involves the user and the
      part customer or 3rd party in defining the qualification tests and the pass/fail criteria. They may even collaborate in
      performing the actual testing, such as the part customer performing the actual chemical, microstructural and
      mechanical tests. This is generally the earliest instance for a regulatory body to get involved, although usually in a review
      capacity. Another prerequisite for OQ is that the basic processes for building and post-processing parts is locked down
      and documented in what is often referred to as a process control document (PCD).
      The requirements for OQ are generally found in the specification used by the part customer to procure production
      hardware. While in most cases, the specification used for OQ are proprietary to the part customer, the general push is to
      move to industry-standard specifications. Examples of this are AWS D20.1 (Specification for Fabrication of Metal
      Components using Additive Manufacturing) and AMS 7032 (Additive Manufacturing Machine Qualification). The
      specification will either include or reference a specification that contains the full range of qualification tests, along with
      the relevant pass/fail criteria.
      OQ will use the feedstock intended for production, as the end result is the approval to use the machine to make
      production hardware to a specification that includes the feedstock and final part material. Feedstock from a qualified
      source is also generally required. Full post-processing may need to be performed to properly perform certain tests like
      chemistry, microstructure, and mechanical properties. These will also need to be performed by post-processors who

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.1 · Qualification 111

have the necessary approvals from the part customer or 3rd party.
Because the objective of OQ is to demonstrate that the machine and feedstock combination are capable of repeatedly
making hardware that conforms to specification, the following are often part of an OQ:
Test material comes from the full volume of the machine that will be used for production: While this is potentially the full
build volume of the machine, in many cases, certain parts of the build volume, will not be used to make production
hardware. In this case, test material would not come from these regions, and the qualification documents would state
which areas of the build volume are excluded. An example of this is shown in Figure 6.3.Qualification Volume is the
portion of the build volume qualified to make the specified hardware.

                                  Figure 6.3 Relationship Between Build Volume and Qualification Volume
Multiple lots of material: While some specifications allow all of the test material to come from a single build, others will
require 2 or more builds. These builds may allow the same feedstock lots, or they may require different feedstock lots.
Producers consider the same options for post-processing operations. The objective is to show that the machine can
produce conforming material multiple times. The specification may even require that the builds be non-consecutive or
that the feedstock contain a range of chemistry within the range allowed by the feedstock specification. In the case of
this example, chemistry and microstructure tests will be done on material in the grip areas of the specimens, but
additional coupons or excess material could also be used. (A coupon is a small piece of material that is used as a
representative of the entire build for the purposes of testing. It is common in AM and other areas of fabrication.) It
should be noted that designing the test builds for qualification to meet all of the coupon size, orientation, and location
requirements can be quite challenging. Making spare coupons is recommended because it is possible to have a "bad"
test that would then invalidate the qualification by having insufficient tests.
Machine performance during builds meets specification requirements: This means that the machine being qualified
performs as expected during the qualification builds, without any anomalies that would require the build to be stopped
or the parts to be rejected, such as a loss of shielding gas or input energy.
Hardware meets specification requirements: This means that the parts and coupons built during the qualification builds
meet all of the specification requirements for chemistry, microstructure, dimensions, NDT, minimum mechanical
properties, and so on.
Consistent mechanical properties: While the specifications for many engineering materials require that their mechanical
properties meet the minimums in the specification, newer ones are beginning to require that the population of the
material used for qualification match or be more consistent that that used in generating the design values. The reason is
to show that not only does the material meet minimum properties, but that the process/machine is sufficiently in control
to prevent drift over the production run that could result in the part having low properties that are not detected in lot
acceptance testing. While only a few AM specifications currently require this, it may become more common as AM moves
to more critical applications.
An example of this is shown in Table 6.1. Note the bottom three rows of the table, which contain the mean, standard
deviation, and mean - 3 standard deviations. The high scatter in the X-Direction testing (41 MPa standard deviation,
versus 20 MPa for the design value population) means that the potential minimum values for the process (899 UTS and
849 YS) falls below that of the design value population, even though the actual values are all above the specification
112 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

minimum. There are many methods to compare data sets to see if they are the same population, some of which are
described in MMPDS. In this example, the high scatter in UTS strongly suggests that the process is different from that
used to develop the design values, and the machine would fail OQ if consistency were one of the criteria.

Data Set       Direction                             X direction               Y direction               Z direction

Design Value   Property                        UTS     YS   Elongation   UTS     YS   Elongation   UTS     YS           Elongation
 Population                                   (MPa)  (MPa)       (%)    (MPa)  (MPa)       (%)    (MPa)  (MPa)               (%)

               Mean                           1050 1000           14    1050 1000           14    1050 1000                15

               Standard                       20     20           1     20     20           1     20     20                1

               Deviation

               Specification 930                     860          10    930    860          10    930    860               10

               Minimum

               Test 1-1                       1090 1090           11.0  1085 1090           11.0  1090 1030                12.0

               Test 1-2                       1065 1065           11.5  1080 1065           11.0  1090 1030                12.5

               Test 1-3                       1040 990            12.0  1075 990            12.0  1040 1010                13.0

               Test 1-4                       1015 965            12.5  1065 965            12.5  1015 1000                13.5

Build Lot 2    Test 2-1                       1010 1030           12.0  1020 1030           12.0  1020 1030                12.0

Feedstock

Lot 2          Test 2-2                       1000 1020           12.5  1010 1020           12.5  1010 1025                12.5

               Test 2-3                       990 1015            13.0  1000 1015           13.0  1000 1010                13.0

               Test 2-4                       980    990          13.5  990    990          13.5  990 1005                 13.5

Build Lot 3    Test 3-1                       1070 1030           11.0  1075 1030           11.0  1070 1020                11.0

               Test 3-2                       1065 1025           11.5  1070 1025           11.5  1065 1010                11.5

               Test 3-3                       1060 1010           12.0  1065 1010           12.0  1060 1000                12.0

               Test 3-4                       1055 1005           12.5  1060 1005           12.5  1055 990                 12.5

Qualification  Mean                           1023 973            13.0  1023 1039           13.0  1029 969                 13.0

statistics

               Standard                       41     41           1.0   41     36           1.0   31     31                1.0

               Deviation

Table 6.1

Part Qualification

While prototyping, risk reduction, and pre-production development for a part may be performed prior to machine
qualification, part qualification may only take place on a machine that has been qualified, except in instances where the
engineering authority allows simultaneous machine and part qualification. In part qualification, the user is
demonstrating that the combination of the feedstock, machine, general build process (as documented in the PCD), and
the part-unique processes produces a part that not only conforms to the general part specification, but also to the
Engineering requirements for the part. This part qualification can consist of 3 to 5 activities:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.1 · Qualification 113

Build File and Build: After the qualification part or parts are built, the log file for that build, like the builds for OQ, are
reviewed and analyzed for any anomalies that would normally have caused the build to be halted or the parts rejected.

Engineering Lot and Part Acceptance: Once the build has been deemed to be acceptable, the qualification part or parts
are subjected to the post-processing, lot acceptance testing (chemistry, witness tensile coupons, etc.) and part
acceptance testing (dimensional and NDT). In the case where final part machining would prevent destructive coupon
testing, that post-processing may be omitted.

First Article Testing: In the general case, first article testing refers to any testing that is performed on a first article or
articles that would not be performed on production articles. For the purposes of this, it will refer to additional
dimensional and NDT. Examples of first article testing are:

  · While part acceptance testing may require dimensional inspection of key interface and other critical dimensions,
      first article testing may consist of making a 3-D point cloud of the whole part and comparing it to the model. This
      could also include detailed surface roughness measurements.

  · While part acceptance may require film radiographic inspection of the part, first article testing may also include CT
      scanning the part. This can also be used to generate a part model to compare to the Engineering model.

Destructive Testing: As has been practiced in the forging and casting industries for decades, or even centuries, one or
more of the first articles may be destructively tested. Examples of this type of testing are:

  · Excising mechanical test coupons from the part to verify that the mechanical properties of the material in the part
      meets specification requirements. In most cases, the only requirement is to meet specification minimums, but for
      parts that are critical or have low design margins, it may be required that sufficient coupons may be tested to
      compare the mean values and property scatter. Depending on the part and the number of coupons needed, it may
      be necessary to destructively test multiple parts. Additionally, the properties of the coupons excised from the part
      should be compared with any witness mechanical test coupons used for lot acceptance. This is shown in the table
      below. In this example, two parts were destructively tested, with 6 X-direction, 2 Y-direction, and 4 Z-direction
      coupons excised from the parts. In addition, 2 X-direction and 2-Z-direction tests were performed from the lot
      witness coupon. In the case of this data set, all of the tensile values are higher than the specification minimum, and
      the UTS and YS values are higher than the Design Value Population Mean. While the number of tests are too small
      for a true statistical comparison, it is apparent that the part properties are consistent or better than the Design
      Value Population. Finally, the values from the part are higher than those from the witness coupon, which indicates
      that the witness coupon will provide an early indicator if the process drifts out of control and the overall properties
      get lower.

Data Set    Direction          X direction               Y direction               Z direction

  Design    Property    UTS      YS   Elongation   UTS     YS   Elongation   UTS     YS   Elongation
   Value      Mean     (MPa)   (MPa)       (%)    (MPa)  (MPa)       (%)    (MPa)  (MPa)       (%)
Population

                       1050 1000            14    1050 1000           14    1050 1000           15

            Standard   20      20           1     20     20           1     20     20           1

            Deviation

            Specification 930  860          10    930    860          10    930    860          10

            Minimum

Destruct    Test 1-1   1090 1090            11.0  1085 1090           11.0  1090 1030           12.0

Part 1

            Test 1-2   1065 1065            11.5  1080 1065           11.5  1090 1030           12.5

            Test 1-3   1040 990             12.0                            1040 1010           13.0

            Test 1-4   1015 965             12.5

Table 6.2
114 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

Data Set   Direction                          X direction            Y direction        Z direction

Destruct   Test 2-1              1030 1010                 12.0  1020 1030        12.0  1020 1030    14.0

Part 2

           Test 2-2              1000 1020                 12.5  1010 1020        12.5  1010 1025    14.5

           Test 2-3              990 1015                  13.0                         1000 1010    15.0

           Test 2-4              980          990          13.5

Witness    Witness 1             1040 990                  12.0  1023 1039        13.0  1085 1035    13.0
Coupons    Witness 2             1035 985

                                                           12.5  41  36           1.0   1080 1030    13.5

Table 6.2

  · Excising macrostructure (approximately 10x-50x magnification) and microstructure (>50x magnification) coupons to
      make sure the material in the part matches what would be expected. For all materials, this would be looking for
      porosity, lack of fusion, laps, inclusions, etc. that are too small to be detected with NDT or visual methods. In the
      case of metals, this would include grain size, orientation, and the presence of strengthening or deleterious phases.
      In the case of composites, it would be reinforcement content, size, orientation, and distribution.

  · Perform dimensional inspection of features that cannot be accessed in normal production or with nondestructive
      first article testing, such as the roughness of internal cavities or the dimensions and straightness of micro-trusses.
      These can be compared with engineering assumptions.

If multiple parts are made in the same build or lot, a decision needs to be made to perform first article testing of one,
some, or all parts, and the extent of the testing. A common approach would be to perform the additional dimensional
and NDT tests on all the parts, but only perform destructive testing on either one or two of the parts, or parts in the
extremes of the build volume.

Part or System Component Qualification Testing: The most involved, and often most expensive form of first article
testing is performing a component qualification test on the entire part. This can consist of testing the part individually or
as part of a subsystem or system. They type of testing can be static, fatigue or even impact/fracture testing. In the case
of a subsystem or system test, the part is installed in a test system, is usually highly instrumented, and the entire
subsystem or system is subjected to qualification testing. An example of that could be the testing of an AM manifold for
a hydraulic system.

In the case of an individual component test, an elaborate fixture for introducing the loads into the part is designed and
built. The part is highly instrumented and installed into the fixture, like that shown in Figure 2, and the part is subjected
to the load or loads that the design authority has determined is appropriate for the qualification test. Because of the
time and expense of such testing, it is often done either for the initial qualification of a material/process combination or
design concept, with the results of the test used to support qualification of future parts without component testing.

Process Qualification / Validation

The previous paragraphs described a qualification structure where machines are qualified, and then each individual part
is qualified. While this approach is appropriate in many cases, it can be quite costly and time-consuming, especially when
a machine or cell of identical machines is making a large number of similar parts. An alternate approach, commonly
known in the medical industry as Process Qualification (PQ) or Process Validation (PV), and referred to in other industries
as a Part Family approach.

Consider the manufacture of implants for hip or shoulder replacements. The shape of the typical implant stem is
basically the same: A ball-like structure is connected to a curved stem, which attaches to the femur (in a hip replacement)
or the humorous (in a shoulder replacement). From there, however, there is a good degree of variance: Surgeons need
stems of various lengths, thicknesses, and with different surface details (ribbing, texture) for the purposes of
attachment. As a medical replacement part, it can be imagined that a manufacturer would need multiple machines to
meet the production rate on most of the parts, which will be discussed later. The desirability of performing PQ on this
family of parts is apparent. Instead of qualifying each part individually, the manufacturer could develop a common
process (location and orientation in the build chamber, build parameters, post-build thermal processing, finishing), and
qualify by testing the extremes and the middle of the process windows. As new variants are added, a lower level of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 6.1 · Qualification 115

qualification (potentially just NDT, dimensional, and a single destruct article) may be needed.

Figure 6.4 A shoulder implant, featuring the familiar shape of the ball at one end, which is inserted into the shoulder's
ball-and-socket joint, and the stem that is implanted in the upper arm bone. Hip implants have a somewhat similar
shape. Both types of implants must be manufactured in a range of sizes and lengths to accommodate the wide array of
sizes of people's bodies and bone structures. But each size must maintain the same level of quality, strength, and
material makeup to ensure long-term effectiveness and no adverse reactions. (credit: Modification of "humerous
endoprothessis-36" by Raimond Spekking/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA 2.0)

Personnel Qualification

Intrinsic to having a facility qualified, or to have an expectation of success on a machine or part qualification, is having
qualified personnel. Like many other industries, such as welding, personnel qualification consists of the operator or
operators undergoing a series of classroom (increasingly virtual or web-based) and practical training on the equipment
they will be qualified on. A certain number of on-the-job hours running the equipment under the supervision may also
be required. After completing training, they will then have a series of oral, written, and practical (on-machine)
examinations. After successfully passing these examinations, the operator certified to operate the equipment. In some
instances, especially for critical parts or ones that require skilled manual operations, an additional level of qualification
for that part may also be necessary. Like many of the skilled trades, AM levels of qualification could look like:

  · Apprentice - Able to operate equipment under supervision of a Journeyman or Master. Generally, not qualified for
      critical parts.

  · Journey-level - Able to operate equipment without supervision. May supervise apprentices. Could be qualified for
      critical parts.

  · Master level - Able to operate equipment without supervision and supervise apprentices. Qualified for critical parts.
      Responsible for other aspects of an AM facility, such as approving build files, signing off on maintenance,
      administering qualification of Apprentices and Journey-level.

Some industries, professional groups, and higher education institutions have been reconsidering the use of "master" to
indicate authority over other people, due to the term's deep association with slavery. Nearly all states, certifying bodies,
and college systems have decided to continue using the term, but those involved in the field should consider the
implications of its use and be conscious of the context and connotations of the word.

Some skilled workers, such as plumbers and electricians, are certified in reaching these levels through state-specific
evaluation and experience standards. (In other words, to progress from journey level to master level requires specific
evidence of experience.) Others, such as machinists, often do not have such formalized levels, but workers can still
showcase their experience and qualifications through evidence and resumes. AM may fall into the latter, less formalized
category, but the field is growing significantly and there will be plenty of opportunities for career progression.

Feedstock Qualification

Without feedstock that reliably meets specification, any manufacturing process will be hard-pressed to repeatably
produce hardware that meets requirements, hence the need to qualify feedstock. The use of a qualified feedstock is
almost always a requirement for OQ, Part Qualification, or PQ. The specification the covers printing and processing the
AM parts will generally require the use of feedstock qualified to a specification. ASTM and SAE (AMS Series) are issuing a
series of feedstock specifications for many of the commonly used powders, wires, and filaments. Where a public
specification does not exist, or where different controls are needed, organization will issue their own proprietary
specifications.
116 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

      Feedstock specifications contain requirements for items such as the following:

         · Classifications - Sub-categories
         · Chemistry - Intentional Constituents
         · Chemistry - Unintentional Constituents or Contaminants
         · Method of Manufacture
         · Product Form and Size - Powder size distribution, wire/filament diameter, foil thickness
         · Physical Properties - Density, Flow Rate, etc
         · Types and Frequency of Testing
         · Packaging, Safety, Handling, Labeling, etc.

      Many of these specifications also contain qualification requirements or call out another specification that covers
      qualification. Qualifying a feedstock to a specification generally requires sampling a certain number of feedstock lots
      (often 3 or more) and testing them against the requirements in the specification. If all of the lots pass, then a feedstock
      supplier will be considered qualified. Additionally, each lot of material that is produced will be individually qualified to
      meet the specification. A powder lot that passes the qualification tests, can then be certified to meet the specification, as
      mentioned above.

      Each company and industry has its own approach to who can be qualified against a feedstock specification. Industries
      that produce more critical hardware (aerospace, medical) will often only qualify the factory/plant where the feedstock is
      made from a precursor (monomer for polymers, bar stock for wire or powder, etc.). For critical parts, the facility that
      produces the precursor and its precursors (e.g. ingot or sponge for titanium powder) may need to be qualified. In other
      industries and applications, a distributor (facility that procures feedstock and re-sells to users) may be qualified.

    Qualification of Additional Facilities, Machines, Personnel, and Feedstock Sources

      The simplest and lowest-cost method of qualifying an additional feedstock source is to perform the same qualification
      tests (3 lots, etc) that were done for the original source. In some cases, however, the engineering authority may want to
      expand upon that qualification, which would include the building and testing of hardware. This may be driven by the
      criticality of the part. Another reason, especially in an emerging industry like AM, is to ensure that what is nominally the
      same feedstock from a different source also performs the same in processing. The extent of this additional qualification
      can range from building and testing and IQ test part, to one or more OQ builds and testing, to repeating the
      qualification testing for each part.

      Like additional feedstock sources, there is a broad range for qualification of additional machines. This range is also
      highly influenced by the similarity of the additional machines to the initial machines. The range of similarity can be
      expressed by the categorizations listed below.

         · Identical - Same model number with exact same hardware, firmware, and software
         · Very Similar - Same model number but slight differences in hardware, firmware, or software that do not influence

             the operation of the machine. Examples of this would be a larger spool for filament, or different software for
             uploading the build log file to memory.
         · Similar - Same model number but differences in hardware, firmware, or software that could influence the operation
             of the machine. Examples of this would be a larger heater tip for improved thermal stability, or a redesigned
             galvanometer that has higher reliability.
         · Not Similar - Same model number but differences in hardware, firmware, or software that will influence the
             operation of the machine. Examples of this would be a different laser, process control software, etc.
         · Different Machine - Different model number and design.

      While all of the machines would receive a full IQ, OQ or PQ could range from a full repeat of the OQ for the first machine
      (definite for a different machine, with a demonstration of equivalent material property values and scatter), to something
      abbreviated, such as a single build and a check of the material properties against the specification (Identical or Very
      Similar). Likewise, part qualification could range from full component and/or destructive testing (different machine) to
      first article testing without a destruct (similar or very similar) to part acceptance testing only (identical). Additionally, the
      criticality of the part will play a role, with more critical parts requiring more intensive qualification.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          6.2 · Production Acceptance Testing 117

6.2 Production Acceptance Testing

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe the types of hardware-accepted testing that are employed in industry.
  · Differentiate between lot and part acceptance testing.
  · Describe statistical process control and conceptually connect it to lot and part acceptance.

Everything thus far addressed in this chapter has gotten the AM part to the verge of production. Once a part has been
qualified, and the system on which part is installed is certified, production may now begin. It should be noted that in
some instances where certification can take a year or more, such as aircraft, parts may go into production before the
aircraft is fully certified for delivery and use. While parts are in production, they will undergo both lot and part
acceptance tests to not only ensure that the parts meet requirements, but often that the feedstock and processes used
to make them are in control.

Lot Acceptance Testing

Lot acceptance testing refers to testing that is performed on a group (or lot) of parts to show that the processing the
parts received meets specification. There is a range of definitions for a lot in AM, such as the following:

  · All of the parts in a single build in any process that go through key post-processing operations, such as thermal
      treatment, together.

  · A series of parts in DED that use the same lot of feedstock, the chamber atmosphere is never broken, and go
      through key post-processing operations together.

  · A series of parts in BJP that made in multiple consecutive builds, and undergo de-binding, sintering, and key post-
      processing operations together

  · A series of parts in VP that use the same lot of resin and are made consecutively

Note that each lot could theoretically consist of identical, opposite-hand, similar, or even different parts. What is being
checked in lot acceptance is that the process met requirements. So, one type of lot acceptance would be a check of the
build file and process monitoring that there were no unacceptable process events, such as energy source failure,
recoater failure, contaminated atmosphere, and so on. While another type of lot acceptance could be a check of witness
material in the build to verify that nominally acceptable material was produced. These types of tests consist of
mechanical (mainly tensile) tests, micrographic (mainly in metals) chemistry tests, etc. Since AM builds parts in layers,
careful thought must be put to the location of the witness coupons to ensure they are representative of the build
process.

As occasionally practiced in other industries, destructive lot acceptance testing is sometimes performed in AM. This
would be driven by a combination of part criticality, and overall maturity of the process. Destructive lot acceptance
testing would generally consist of selecting one or more parts from the lot and performing destructive testing on it, in a
similar or less extensive manner than destructive part testing for qualification. Different schemes may be used to select
the part to be tested, with some requiring the same location in the lot, and others requiring a random location.

Failure of one or more of these tests can result in the entire lot being rejected, require the need for additional testing to
demonstrate lot or part acceptability, or being analyzed by engineering authority to determine if any of the parts are
acceptable either as-is or with rework.

Part Acceptance Testing

Part acceptance testing verifies that the part meets key requirements. It is generally performed on each and every
part, although schemes for sampling (where some parts might not be qualified) do exist. Some examples of part
acceptance testing include the following:

  · Dimensional tests of key dimensions
  · Nondestructive testing of both the part volume and/or the part surfaces
  · Hardness testing to ensure proper response to thermal treatments

Failure of one or more of these tests can result in the part being rejected, indicate a need for additional testing, or
require analysis by an engineering authority to determine if the part is acceptable as-is or with rework.

Statistical Process Control

Modern quality management systems will often utilize statistical process control (SPC), sometimes referred to as
statistical quality control (SQC). SPC consist of recording data from either the process or the product and checking it
118 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

      against limits to determine if a process is in control. The goal is to use this tracking to get advance warning that a
      process is getting out of control before it happens and begins making unacceptable hardware. As a digital and data-rich
      technology, AM is ideally suited for this.
      Examples of process variables and outputs that could be tracked include the following:

         · Tensile properties of the witness coupons
         · Key dimensions of the part
         · Atmosphere gas consumption during build
         · Laser output power
         · Peak tip temperature in ME or peak current in an arc DED process
      Having an in-depth understanding of the key variables in the process can help a product team decide what inputs and
      outputs to monitor, with the default option being to monitor all and let advanced data analytics software to make that
      determination. The former is preferred, as the latter can generate numerous false warnings (crying wolf) that distract
      the product team from other tasks.

   6.3 Fixed Designs and Processes, Change Management, and the
   Future of Certification and Qualification

    Learning Objectives

      By the end of this section, students will be able to:
         · Understand the importance of a fixed process.
         · Understand the importance of having a disciplined change management process in AM.
         · Understand how Certification and Qualification for AM will evolve as more experience and confidence is gained in
             the technology.

      The design, manufacture, and use of AM parts should follow fixed design, fixed (also known as locked down) process and
      change management protocols used in modern industrial practice. This is in spite of the fact that by being a digital
      process that rarely requires tooling, it can be very easy from a practical standpoint to change either the design or the
      process. In essence, once a design or process is fixed (or locked down), any changes to the design or process need to be
      approved by the relevant engineering authority to ensure that the previously attained part qualification and system
      certifications are invalidated.
      The approach for change management is much like that used for qualification of additional machines. Depending on the
      type of change, the amount of re-qualification can range from a minimal amount (first article testing without a destruct)
      to a full repeat of part qualification (design or process change) to repeat of machine and part qualification (process
      change). Standard practice in organizations using AM is to initially require that all changes be brought to a change
      control board (CCB) to decide what requalification is necessary. As the organization develops a history of change
      management, standard practices are then developed to more quickly determine and plan the re-qualification steps. A
      good indication of the need for some form of requalification can be gained from reviewing the key process variables.
      AMS 7003 (Laser Powder Bed Fusion Process) lists 34 key process variables. A change in any of these could potentially
      trigger a requalification.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       6.3 · Fixed Designs and Processes, Change Management, and the Future of Certification and Qualification 119

Figure 6.5 A green part is formed by metal powder held together with a binding agent. In decaking the part, the
technician is removing any fine or residual powder from the part before it goes through the binder removal, or
debinding, process. Qualification would ensure that the tools, process, and the technician themself is capable of
producing the part repeatedly. If any element of the qualified process were to change, including a change in personnel
or a new sequence or location of the steps, requalification may be required. (credit: Morgan Blackstock on DVIDS, Public
Domain)
Another type of change that can happen is maintenance or movement of the AM or post-processing machines. In the
case of a minor maintenance action machine could be nearly identical to itself before the maintenance, which would
often just require a simple IQ. In the case of a major maintenance action, the machine could be considered not similar,
which would require IQ, OQ/PQ and part requalification. This would be similar if the machine is moved to a different
location. In most cases, an IQ would be all that is required, unless the IQ fails, and a maintenance action is required. Like
design or product change management, the initial requalification requirements for maintenance actions have a high
level of oversight until history and standard practices are developed. In the case of intermittent production, or if a
machine is idle for a period of time, some industries will require an IQ prior to resuming production, with a reduced OQ/
PQ or part requalification potentially required as well.

Future Changes in Certification and Qualification

As a rapidly evolving technology, AM will continue to develop and mature. Along with the general maturation of the
technology, certification and qualification will continue to mature to evolve as well. At this time, most organizations
qualifying AM parts on systems that require certification are being very careful in their approaches. The primary changes
in the future for certification and qualification will be to streamline those processes.
Because it is generally independent of the exact materials and processes used, certification will see fewer changes in the
future. The primary change to certification will be a better understanding of material/process/property relationships that
will enable a transition of design values from part-specific to part-family to feature-based. Advances in Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) combined with advancements in process simulation and part design/
analysis codes will give designers and analysts the ability to predict properties based on the part design. While the
design value tables may be multi-dimensional, versus the 2-dimensional format, it can be imagined that these could be
120 6 · Additive Manufacturing Qualification

       simplified if the potential performance impact of lower design values is minimal.
       Additional changes may include exploiting the same ICME advancements and developing the ability to more quickly
       generate design values as faster or more precise AM technologies are introduced. Also, we may transition NDT from
       post-build to in-situ, which may align with the future ability to undertake repairs during the build. This capability, along
       with the ability to predict maximum undetectable defect size will enable better analysis of critical components. Overall,
       we should we improved knowledge of the performance of AM-unique geometries to reduce the amount of full-scale
       component and system testing.
       Changes in qualification will be based on obtaining a better understanding of the key process variables and the impact
       on part performance.
       Qualifications changes may exhibit themselves in the following ways:

         · A more extensive, but more automated IQ, that will be able to make a better determination of the status and health
             of a machine than is currently possible.

         · A reduction in the number of builds and tests needed for OP or PQ, particularly due to improved IQ.
         · Improved characterization and better definition of feedstock requirements to eliminate the need for any feedstock

             qualification save acceptance testing.
         · Advances in process monitoring, process control, and in-situ NDT to eliminate the need for destructive testing for

             part qualification.
         · Lot and part acceptance based on process monitoring and in-situ NDT of the build, along with process monitoring of

             key post-processes, such as thermal treatments.
         · Integration of process monitoring with post-build evaluations as part of an integrated SPC program.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   6 · Summary 121

Summary

Qualification in additive manufacturing (AM) ensures that machines, facilities, personnel, and feedstock meet stringent
requirements for consistent, reliable production. It aligns closely with certification but focuses on production readiness.
Qualification involves several levels:

 1. Qualification: Verifies that an organization has comprehensive quality systems, approved AM processes, and related
      equipment. It encompasses training, materials control, and post-processing.

 2. Machine Qualification: Includes factory acceptance testing (FAT), installation qualification (IQ), and operational
      qualification (OQ). FAT tests machine functionality before delivery. IQ confirms proper installation, while OQ ensures
      consistent part production within specified limits.

 3. Part Qualification: Demonstrates that a machine-feedstock-process combination meets engineering and production
      specifications. It involves build file analysis, acceptance testing, and often destructive testing of first articles.

 4. Process Qualification (PQ): Common in medical and high-volume industries, PQ qualifies part families by testing
      process extremes, reducing individual part qualification needs.

 5. Personnel Qualification: Ensures operators are trained and tested for competence, with defined roles.
 6. Future advancements aim to streamline qualification through automation, better process control, and integrated

      statistical process control (SPC). Improvements in ICME, in-situ NDT, and predictive modeling will reduce destructive
      testing, allowing faster, more efficient qualification and production acceptance. Certification will evolve to enable
      part-family and feature-based design values, enhancing flexibility while maintaining safety and reliability.

Future advancements aim to streamline qualification through automation, better process control, and integrated
statistical process control (SPC). Improvements in ICME, in-situ NDT, and predictive modeling will reduce destructive
testing, allowing faster, more efficient qualification and production acceptance. Certification will evolve to enable part-
family and feature-based design values, enhancing flexibility while maintaining safety and reliability.

Review Questions

 1. Which of the following would not be expected for qualification of a wire/plasma DED facility?
       a. Quality management system
       b. Wire feedstock source qualification
       c. Wire/Plasma machine qualification
       d. NDT lab

 2. Which of the following is out of order for qualification?
       a. Installation qualification
       b. Operational qualification
       c. Part qualification
       d. Factory acceptance testing

 3. Which is not a feature of operational qualification?
       a. Multiple feedstock lots of the specified material
       b. Encompassing a defined portion of build volume
       c. Multiple machine operators
       d. Multiple coupon orientations
       e. Material properties

 4. Which is generally the most involved and expensive form of part qualification?
       a. Lot acceptance testing
       b. First article testing
       c. Component testing
       d. Destructive testing

 5. Which of the following is false?
       a. A given feedstock can be qualified to multiple overlapping specifications
       b. All industries only allow feedstock manufacturing facilities to be qualified
       c. Feedstock qualification often requires analysis of multiple lots
       d. Feedstock qualification can involve a full range of properties beyond chemistry

 6. Which of the following is not an example of lot acceptance testing?
122 6 · Key Terms

       a. Checking the chemistry of a witness coupon
       b. Tensile testing in the X and Z directions
       c. Review of build and heat treat data to ensure conformity to specification
       d. Radiographic inspection of every part in the build

Key Terms

6.1 Qualification

Factory Acceptance Test , Installation qualification, Operational Qualification, Part Qualification, Qualification Volume

6.2 Production Acceptance Testing

Lot Acceptance, Part Acceptance, Statistical Process Control

6.3 Fixed Designs and Processes, Change Management, and the Future of Certification and
Qualification

Fixed Process, Change Management

Access for free at openstax.org
                               7 · Introduction 123

7  THE ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING
   DIGITAL THREAD

Figure 7.1 The digital thread refers to the data that is associated with and required for the design, materials selection,
build planning, build, post-processing, and quality assurance processes in additive manufacturing. The digital thread
becomes very complex and may have compatibility issues as machines of different types and origin are integrated into
one process, as is the case in this hybrid manufacturing system. (credit: Modification of "hybrid manufacturing system"
by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Digital Trends Throughout Manufacturing
  7.2 The Digital Thread in Design for Additive Manufacturing
  7.3 Processing a file for 3D printing
  7.4 Simulation
  7.5 The Digital Thread in AM Quality Assurance, Post-Processing, and Standards Alignment

      Introduction

The digital thread has come to represent a series of concepts throughout the manufacturing industry. Specific to
additive manufacturing, it represents the accumulation of data that is generated at various steps of the 3D printing
workflow. This not only includes the production of the part from an individual printer, but also the information that is
generated at related steps including customer orders, design information, material details, and post-processing. The
digital thread can be quite overwhelming and challenging to navigate given the fact that printing modalities and
software solutions are continuing to evolve.
124 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

    7.1 Digital Trends Throughout Manufacturing

    Learning Objectives

       By the end of this section, students will be able to:

         · Understand the importance and role of the digital thread in both conventional and additive manufacturing.
         · Describe the end-to-end digital requirements for additive manufacturing.

       Additive manufacturing is a small piece of the overall manufacturing and production landscape. Within any
       manufacturing environment there will be multiple machines that in conjunction with the operators work together to
       produce physical goods. The interaction between machines, the facility, and the employees generate terabytes of data
       daily and insights through leveraging the digital thread have been transforming the manufacturing industry for many
       years.

       One of the principal trends moving the pace of development forward is that computing power, wireless connectivity, and
       the internet have allowed sensors and integration platforms to become less expensive. Functionally, the primary driver
       of any manufacturing organization is producing a physical product in a safe and efficient manner that allows the firm to
       make a profit. The systems within a manufacturing environment are oftentimes highly complex and rely on the
       integration of information from several processes and people over a sustained amount of time. Even the most optimized
       and high-tech manufacturing floor is rife with areas where sensors or increased data analysis could lead to efficiency
       gains that can influence the bottom line. Framing these questions and hypotheses is a central tenet to the digital thread
       because just capturing data at different points in the manufacturing process does not inherently add value. There needs
       to be some action or response tied to the outcome of this information. Listed below are some example hypotheses that
       manufacturing companies have sought to examine with increased digital connectivity:

         · How efficiently are my machines operating?
         · Are there machine optimizations that should be made to increase sustainability and decrease energy usage?
         · Where are the errors in my manufacturing process occurring and can we fix or predict them?
         · Can I predict when my machine is going to break down or when I have to replace a tool?

       Because the pace of development with sensors and wireless connectivity has accelerated more rapidly than most
       manufacturing plants have updated their machines, there are operational challenges to implementing digital strategies
       into an organization. Newer CNC equipment may have sensors already built in that allow easy downloading of analytics
       but older generation machines still perform their functional role very well but are not connected to any other parts of
       the plant. Now there are retrofit kits that enable users to install sensors on their legacy equipment in less than one hour.
       The functionality of the sensors varies, but users can typically select parameters that give them visibility into the machine
       status, heat generated from the machine, and operational statistics.

         Perisense offers low-cost retro-fit sensors that help inform production decisions on manufacturing lines. The sensors
         keep track of runtime, part count, process repeatability, and maintenance indicators.

         The challenge of digital connectivity may start with the data that one might be trying to capture. For example, a data
         component might be some error or inconsistency in the build. However, there is an increasing disconnect between
         how long it takes to acquire the data and the window of time that the information is relevant or actionable. If the
         error data is discovered after the build, the entire build may be disqualified, wasting expensive material and time.

         In conventional manufacturing similar gaps persists, especially as it refers to quality assurance. Presumably most
         organizations have some quality metrics in place to ensure that the parts that are being produced fulfill the customer
         requirements. Most of these metric systems are able to pick out an individual part or batch of parts that are out of
         spec once the full part is built. Digital tools based on the machine can now identify problems earlier on in the part
         manufacturing process. Signal irregularities or even electrical disturbances can be gleaned from mundane machine
         sensors and relayed back to computer systems that aim to keep a long-term cumulative view of the machine
         performance.

    Key Digital Requirements for Additive Manufacturing

       Additive manufacturing has many unique features that enable it to impact a wide variety of industrial applications.
       Fundamentally, the process is rooted in a digital ecosystem; no printing can take place without some sort of digital file as
       an input. The necessity of digital inputs avoids a major hurdle that faces other forming technologies where a 2-D
       drawing may suffice without any digital record. This has major implications for building a full-fledged digital thread

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    7.1 · Digital Trends Throughout Manufacturing 125

capability within the process workflow but arguably just as important, it requires those that engage with the technology
have at least some familiarity with operating in a digital ecosystem. The breadth of manufacturing sophistication and
workforce training is something that should not be overlooked. Even 30 years into its existence, the AM industry faces
limits on widespread adoption and operator/engineer training.

Throughout this chapter, the AM digital thread will be evaluated at each step of the process workflow. As it pertains to
the concept of the digital thread, we will try to maintain a consistent nomenclature; however, the nature of the additive
manufacturing industry is that the acceleration of development and advances is ever increasing. The table below
outlines the high-level concepts that will form the foundation of this chapter. We will cover five main sections of the
digital thread: Design, File Processing, Simulation, Build Monitoring, and Quality Assurance. Within each of these
sections, the methods that have been employed to retrieve data from the manufacturing ecosystem along with how end
users can leverage the information to make meaningful advances in their business will be discussed.

Design         File Processing              Simulation              Build Monitoring       Quality Assurance

Production     Transfer and dissemination   Digital simulation of     Data generated       Data generated from
   of the          of design files to the   the functional part,     from the printing       various workflow
                                            process simulation,      and operation the        steps, including
digital files    printer destination. This   and analysis of the
 for use in         includes formatting     final part, as well as        machinery        materials processing
                                                                       including yield/    and post-processing,
     3D        individuals into a complete     part processing      efficiency data, part  which contribute to a
  printing           build with multiple       aspects such as      production metrics,    complete view of the
 including            components and         support structures     and quality reports
   higher           designating printer                                                        resulting parts.
                            settings
   order
operations

Table 7.1

When considering which 3D printing workflow components have a significant digital component, the obvious
component is the fundamental design input - the STL and related files. However, several other elements have a
significant digital footprint, including the following:

  · Parts selection
  · Materials profile
  · Machine characteristics and requirements
  · Post-processing steps and data
  · Testing and inspection

By using digital inputs, parts selection can be automated to assist with the evaluation of whether a part makes sense for
a given AM printing system. Contained within the data of a digital part are things like geometry and part dimensions. As
one progresses through the workflow the material inputs become another element of construction. Data can be
generated on the type and caliber of material along with information that results in a more complete view of the
operations in the facility such as usage and price.

Next, the machine and process data provide a window into the actual operations that go into constructing the part. The
exact data stream coming from this step will be highly variable depending on the type of process modality. Similar to
traditional manufacturing, most early model 3D printers have limited ability to track and export build information to a
coherent platform. Most of the time this information ends up residing in the machine and unconnected from other
information generated in the full workflow. Aspects of the machine and process data that can be currently captured
include build height, timing, cost as well as more fundamental machine performance details generated from data from
embedded sensors. Many printers now have the ability to take a picture of each layer or provide user feedback on critical
parameters such as the environmental conditions inside the build chamber.

Once the parts are removed from the machine, there are a number of steps necessary to deem a production part
completed. This could include support material removal, heat treatment, machining, or finishing. Most of these steps are
conventional manufacturing processes that historically do not have a great deal of interconnectedness to digital
documentation. Nevertheless, several printer modalities have very specific post-processing requirements and equipment
that are being integrated into extensions of the printers themselves. This assists in the ability of the users to document a
full digital transcript of all the activities that take place following the printing process. The reason that these steps
become critical is two fold. First, since many of the processes can have a major impact on the final part properties, it is
126 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

       important that the end customer has visibility into the end-to-end process. Second, throughout the post-processing
       procedures there may be multiple employees or facilities handling each part. By documenting each part of that workflow
       errors can be minimized and long-term traceability preserved.

       Figure 7.2 Operators and manufacturers may not consider post-processing steps, such as sintering as shown here, to
       have a significant digital component. However, some printers, processes, and end-users may require a detailed transcript
       of the precise conditions of sintering in order to undertake further steps. (credit: U.S. Marine Corps photo by Cpl. Jamin
       M. Powell on DVIDS, Public Domain)
       The final stage of the AM digital workflow process is testing and inspection of the parts. There are multiple approaches
       to validating components and this is typically driven by the industry requirements. Many inspection methods are digital
       in nature whether it be dimensional analysis or material testing. Again, similar to traditional machine tools, the digital
       outputs may live on independent servers or platforms that are not obviously connected to a centralized repository. With
       all that in mind, the breadth of the 3D printing digital thread is expansive and is not uniform across even the same
       printing modalities.

    The Challenges of the Digital Thread for Additive Manufacturing

       The AM digital thread is by no means mature. While certain technologies are well established, most manufacturing,
       logistics, and related organizations would admit that the technology as a whole remains a new entity for manufacturing.
       There are three primary challenges to adoption of the digital thread in the additive manufacturing sector:

         · Stability of the AM Process and Technologies
         · Cost for Implementing End to End Solutions
         · Workforce that Can Build, Interact and Leverage the Digital Thread

     Stability of the AM Process and Technologies

       3D printers can be considered a platform technology that enables a wide range of applications for many industries.
       There are dozens of printer manufacturers accounting for thousands installations globally. The relative newness of the
       technology and the intensive research and development underway means that significant incremental improvements or
       capability expansions are represented by new machines and processes. As a result, many facilities may have multiple
       printer modalities. Each system may have a unique workflow with different part production and processing
       requirements. In an ideal world, these inputs would be centralized on a data stream where information could be
       connected from part to part. There are software tools that are starting to connect some of the machines to gain
       intelligence; however it is a significant challenge to adapt to such a wide array of technologies, materials and vendor
       platforms and do so in a way that makes sense for multiple industries.

     Costs for Implementing End-to-End Solutions

       One of the biggest factors that has pushed the concept of the digital thread throughout a broad user base is the cost
       reductions for sensors, data storage, and high-quality internet connectivity. This set of parameters makes it possible for
       even the smallest manufacturer to add low cost solutions to their facility such as cameras or temperature sensors.
       Ultimately, this is a positive thing, but in many cases, additional data streams become unique islands of information that

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     7.2 · The Digital Thread in Design for Additive Manufacturing 127

may not be connected to any other part of the manufacturing process. In order for the full concept of the digital thread
to be realized, a significant amount of infrastructure needs to be put into place including either cloud or local databases,
security protocols, and methodologies for maintaining the systems. Even more importantly, it may require
manufacturing facilities to recruit different types of employees to manage these processes. Expertise in data science,
machine learning, computer science, and artificial intelligence may be required alongside a fundamental understanding
of how the mechanical and material aspects of the production processes work.

Cost is measured not only by money but also by time for implementation. Depending on what sorts of legacy IT systems
are in place at a given facility, it may take some time for facilities that are trying to modernize to integrate new platforms.
This transfer becomes one of the biggest barriers to success and can push out time scales significantly. Finally, printing
technology and the digital thread are not static. Things will continue to evolve and organizations can be slow in deciding
when is the right time to make an investment that can pay real dividends but also not be obsolete in a few short years.

Workforce that can Build, Interact, and Leverage the Digital Thread

Assuming an organization can build a platform that enables widespread data analytics on their manufacturing
processes, success is not immediately guaranteed. Data is useless unless it has some contextual grounding. Certainly,
interesting insights can be gained developing machine metrics but the higher order benefits of the digital thread will
come from a close collaboration and translation of real life activities on the factory floor from employees partnered with
new information that is coming from the digital thread. There is a risk that having too much information being
generated during the manufacturing processes can be harmful or so confusing that the tools ultimately become
ignored. In many ways, the reliance on just numbers to provide top-down insight on an additive manufacturing
operation is likely not going to be successful. The hope of most organizations is that the digital thread augments a
workforce that together can become more efficient. This may mean that the tools will have to be designed with the
existing workforce in mind and additional training would be required to make the digital thread approaches worthwhile.

Long-Term Implications for Additive Manufacturing

As 3D printing technologies continue to evolve there will be many more platforms and even fundamentally new
technologies that will continue to add tools to the manufacturers' tool belt. It is likely that more capabilities that were
once segmented (such as post-processing, digital inputs) would be more integrated into the machines themselves so
that users starting new will have an easier time getting deploying a digital thread strategy. Ultimately, the potential for
building a robust digital strategy around 3D printing is extremely powerful. The process is driven by digital designs that
can be transferred around the world (or even out of this world) with the click of a button and can make supply chains
much more robust through distributed manufacturing.

The other hope for more digital engagement with the manual workflow of 3D printing is that the technology will become
more repeatable and stable. This has enormous implications for enabling business models for 3D printing, whether it is
customized part production or building a digital warehouse of files to support repair or replacement parts. These
promises are still more fantasy than reality for the average manufacturer; to implement them, the operators, engineers,
and customers will need to be engaged at a level to ground the possibilities in practical reality.

7.2 The Digital Thread in Design for Additive Manufacturing

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe the opportunities presented by software solutions in part selection and management.
  · Understand the impact of design choices on the digital thread.

The foundational step of any 3D printing operation is the creation of a digital design file. We covered the full process of
design for additive manufacturing in detail in an earlier chapter. As we break down each step of the additive
manufacturing workflow, we are going to discuss how each of these parts generate digital information that can be
strung together as part of a global digital thread strategy.

Digital design tools are not new for manufacturing. In fact, they have been around for the better part of several decades.
What is different for AM is that they are a requirement for starting the process. A two-dimensional drawing, even if it is
fully developed, will not suffice in the workflow process. Therefore, any user needs to be able to access a CAD tool to
build a 3D model. This often becomes a hurdle for organizations who are building their additive manufacturing strategy
because many or even most of their parts are generated for conventional manufacturing processes with 2-D drawings.
Even if the part is a good business case for 3D printing (perhaps a low volume repair part or some high value
component), the first step is building the model in three dimensions.

Throughout this chapter, we are going to be touching on two main aspects of how design interacts with the AM digital
128 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

      thread. The first is through the creation of these digital files and the types of digital tools are required to do that. The
      second area that we will be discussing is how the design approach influences all aspects of the 3D printing process and
      ways that companies are trying to build tools specifically for 3D printing modalities.

    Digital Design Creation

      There are many different software tools available that allow a designer or engineer to construct a part in three
      dimensions. Typically, these approaches live in the realm of parameter-based modeling where a solid model is developed
      and once it is ready for export to the 3D printer the file is converted to a triangle mesh. There are certainly other types of
      modeling based on scanning (point clouds) and more surface based modeling approaches that can be utilized in 3D
      printing, however for the most part the majority of 3D printing files start in the region of solid modeling.

      Figure 7.3 This model was made by 3D scanning an object with an ASUS XTION depth camera, then importing the scan
      data into an Autodesk software where it was made into a solid and captured as an STL file. (credit: Creative Tools/Flickr,
      CC BY 2.0)
      Because the vast majority of traditionally manufactured parts are not 3D printed, the legacy CAD and solid modeling
      companies have a wide range of software options that can be adapted to 3D printing. Some of the most common
      industry stalwarts are SolidWorks (Dassault Systemes), Onshape, PTC, Autodesk, and Siemens NX. There are also
      numerous free or low cost CAD software systems on the market. The primary function as it relates to 3D printing for
      these tools is the creation of the digital model. However, the CAD design process is actually a very small portion of the
      capabilities of these software tools. Most CAD systems have the ability to create complex assemblies, do different levels
      of part or process simulation, and manage bill of materials.
      Many of the traditional CAD systems also have embedded workflows that are dedicated to specific industry applications.
      For instance, in the dental or medical space, imaging equipment is often used to create digital designs to assist with
      surgery or medical implants themselves. In these cases, point cloud data from various scanning platforms needs to be
      converted to STL but at the same time patient data and prescription information should be documented alongside this
      information. These types of workflows are where the current landscape in 3D printing is often limited because operators
      start to have multiple files that connect to the same patient. Manufacturers must then come up with a system to
      continue to manage that information as it goes into the printer and a subsequent database, ultimately landing back with
      the customer or patient.
      Something to keep in mind as we think about the digital thread is the way in which designs are built and disseminated
      amongst a team. In some cases, part designs are managed by a single individual that is enabled by their own single

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     7.2 · The Digital Thread in Design for Additive Manufacturing 129

software platform. In many other cases there tends to be a sharing of CAD or design files between numerous people in
an organization. This is often one of the big reasons that individual companies will tend to have a company wide policy
of only using one brand of design software as it can be challenging to move design files between different CAD
platforms.
There is also a trend to deploy cloud-based CAD design tools that further enable collaboration within an organization.
The principle advantage of having a cloud-based solution is that software tends to become obsolete over time without
routine updates. Cloud-based systems are updated at a more regular basis, often with a subscription model for the user.
It is important to always keep in mind that 3D printing is one of many tools in the manufacturer's toolbelt, and that the
use of the technology does not always guarantee improved outcomes on every dimension. We have discussed in earlier
chapters the ability of 3D printers to produce parts that are highly complex with design features like internal
passageways that may not be easily replicated in conventional manufacturing. The addition of these features may allow
for lightweight parts that can improve overall performance. Typically, a complex structure may only be a portion of the
overall part geometry, but can still cause challenges within existing CAD files because the geometry file becomes larger.
Long term, it is also a consideration as most designs are not static. Users should consider how and who might be able to
edit a part in the future for improvement or including advanced features.
We have been discussing the basic tools for creating the digital files required for 3D printing. As you think about the
application of the technology within an organization, a part design is not something that just materializes one day and is
complete. Instead, any design file goes through numerous iterations through the prototyping process before it is
finalized for production. The current STL file format does not offer an embedded iteration history in the file. A user can
use an internal naming convention on the specific file to signify changes, but this is certainly a limitation of the file type.
From a digital thread perspective, this does introduce potential version control issues into the process of production
printing. In order for full traceability to be documented, there needs to be at minimum a process to ensure that a file is
locked at a particular version signifying date and time of the last change. Not only is this important for internal
organizations, but is important for organizations that are outsourcing their printing to service bureaus or contract
manufacturers because there are limited controls to who can make changes to a design once they have the digital files.

Part Selection and Management

We have covered throughout this text the mechanics of designing parts for AMalong with software tools that enable that
process. Up until this point, we have neglected a discussion on the ways to digitize the selection of what parts should be
3D printed. We already know that there are good and bad part choices when it comes to the technology, but as the
technology becomes more improved, the hope is that the combination of geometry, materials, cost, and performance of
3D printed parts becomes more comparable to traditional technologies.
There are basic screening techniques that can be applied to help organizations decide what is a good candidate for 3D
printing. Organizations must consider the digital design information such as part dimensions and features. They must
also gather and assess costing and material requirements, which are critical elements of the 3D printing digital thread
and ultimately help inform the pathway of production for many parts.

Figure 7.4 An engine cylinder head cast from a 3D printed mold. Deciding on whether such a critical part could be
produced through AM - even indirectly - is a complex process that can more deeply associated with digitally supported
decision making. (credit: Modification of "Automotive cylinder head cast from aluminum cerium alloy in a 3D printed
mold" by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
At the moment, the process of selecting suitable parts and design spaces for AM components is mostly a manual
process. The process is relatively slow, and requires a team with expertise in the 3D printing technology space to
evaluate all the potential options. Emerging digital decision approaches have been commercialized to streamline that
process. For example, Castor is an automated part screening software that informs manufacturers when it is beneficial
130 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

       to use additive manufacturing.

    Design Implications that Impact the Digital Thread

       We have emphasized the importance of contextualizing your 3D printing designs within the entire process workflow.
       Many of the elements involved in design approaches require a strong partnership between the user and the software
       tools to enable a successful thread of information. There are efforts to enhance the connection nodes between design
       variables with underlying file types like 3MF. However, the adoption rate of new fundamental approaches to replace files
       like STL will undoubtedly take time to iron out of the system.

       In the meantime, users should focus on best practices to engage the operators and technicians of the equipment to
       leverage the most appropriate software relevant to their industry. This may sound obvious, but some organizations may
       not need the most expensive or advanced design tools with all the latest features because they may only use a small
       subset of their capabilities. As with most applied elements of the manufacturing sector, a thorough understanding of the
       critical workflow elements, led by those who operate the equipment, typically gleans the most insight.

       The 3D printing sector should not be thought of as a static entity. There is a constant updating of processes and
       procedures in relation to the overall organization, facilities, and machinery. In some ways, the job of the user is never
       done in finding a way to optimize the process of structuring designs both for functionality in the real world but also in a
       digital sense to optimize the process for their construction. Part design is not only the foundation of the overarching 3D
       printing process, it is also the foundation upon which the 3D printing digital thread is built. The software platforms that
       are utilized in the beginning of the workflow to create a part underpin what decisions can be made with the digital
       thread later on in the process of part production.

       In some cases, all design tools will reside within a single operational platform. In other cases, the software tools used to
       perform one aspect of the design process may be incomplete for a future step, and we need to connect that information
       to another software platform. These connection points are what make the digital thread so "bumpy." We rely on
       operators and engineers to know what data is meaningful to keep across the timeline of the part. But the body of
       knowledge is not always transferable to every printing platform, new material, or design need. Many organizations go
       through a painful growth stage where the nuances of each machine are mapped out over a period of several months or
       even years to identify what signals are strong and impactful for the process.

       Design factors that influence final parts and the digital thread include:

         · Software platform
         · Design approach (CAD, surface modeling, etc.)
         · Build orientation
         · Printer
         · Materials
         · Collaboration requirements
         · Intellectual property considerations

       The creation of the digital file is only the first step in the printing workflow. As we build upon the subsequent steps we
       will continue to discuss how the data generated can influence the outcome of each 3D P\printed build but hopefully
       provide you with the tools to consider how best to construct your own AM digital thread that is most relevant to your
       industry and organization.

    7.3 Processing a file for 3D printing

    Learning Objectives

       By the end of this section, students will be able to:

         · Describe and prioritize the impact of the digital thread in file processing.
         · Explore various software solutions for AM file management.
         · Identify opportunities and impacts of AM-based distributed manufacturing on the digital thread.
         · Understand the basic intellectual property and information security considerations of additive manufacturing.

       The previous section highlighted the process of producing 3D printing ready files and the data concepts that go into
       their production. As we move into the next part of the workflow, we want to focus more precisely on the connection that
       the file has to the broader 3D printing process and business model for the organization. While 3D printing has a heritage
       in prototyping, the fact remains that the push for most organizations, involved directly or indirectly with the industry, is
       for production. This means that the volumes of parts are going to be potentially higher (meaning more data loads) and
       higher stakes for data management throughout the lifecycle of the parts. For instance, medical device parts would

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          7.3 · Processing a file for 3D printing 131

require a lifelong traceability story that connects the part with the manufacturer and ultimately the patient. Also, those
that are operating manufacturing facilities for 3D printing will certainly have multiple projects, customers, and part
requirements. These elements need to be documented correctly to maintain operational stability but also to more fully
understand the business of 3D printing. Data points such as printer up time, material usage, and reject rate are
important for users to assess how well their operations are functioning.

Figure 7.5 This 3D printed implant has been developed to treat spinal cord injuries. Nerves would grow across the soft,
textured surface to repair a break or gap in the spinal cord, healing injuries that are often difficult to treat. Because of
the precision in size, shape, and materials, and because the part will "live" inside a person permanently, every aspect of
the design, build, and post-build process must be deeply documented and traceable. (credit: Modification of
"Chen_spinal_cord_implant-03109-8MP" by UC San Diego Jacobs School of Engineering/Flickr, CC BY 2.0).

3D printing Job Management

One of the biggest advantages of 3D printing is the fact that no tooling is required to build an individual part.
Conceptually, you are able to produce a set of parts every build that is produced on a given printer. This has many
implications including the ability to customize components for several customers in a single job or do small batch
production in a cost effective manner. However, as you start to think about the combinations of parts, build data, cost,
material usage, and customers, it gets overwhelming quite quickly. As the industry moved along the transition from
prototyping to production, many companies had built solutions by hand in spreadsheet software to document some of
these values. However, more machines and builds makes some of these basic approaches challenging.
One of the first steps for many production manufacturing operations is building in a tool to connect their printer usage
and the cost of operations. This step is often required as part of basic operations for many companies because the
upfront investment in equipment is on the order of several hundred thousand or even millions of dollars. The most
common approach is to build a cost model for each printer that calculates the cost of each part in the build based on a
set of variables such as material, recycling rate, build geometry, number of parts in the machine, machine cost, time,
post-processing, and finishing requirements. Building an exact cost model can be quite challenging and even more
complex at the organizational level because there may be several types of printers involved in the production process.
The outputs from these cost models typically have two functions. One is to provide insight for the printer operator on
how much usage the organization is getting out of the machine as well as to guide things like personnel required or
material ordering. The other critical use is the understanding of how much to charge a customer.
A good way to understand how some of these models work is by exploring the websites of service bureaus around the
industry. These companies enable their customers to submit a digital design online and will print the part for a fee.
There are large service bureaus that have multiple printers, materials, and technologies in which you can select the
appropriate fit for your part. Pricing will often differ based on those selections along with the lead time required.
AM is not a one-size-fits-all solution for every physical part. It is better to consider AM as one of several manufacturing
processes. With that in mind, the cataloguing and management of parts and inventory already has a digital environment
built around it. Database companies such as SAP, Oracle, Microsoft, Salesforce, JobBOSS, and IBM have created products
that allow for end-to-end supply chain management for organizations to track customer orders and manufacturing.
Many of those products were built prior to widespread AM integration into that industry or application, so the
integration between these legacy platforms and the information generated during the AM process and customer
requisitions was not always connected. It is also the case that the methods of production that are unique to AM don't
always align with traditional manufacturing tools or could quickly overwhelm the systems. The other challenge has been
that there is limited software integration between the printers themselves and management software tools requiring
manual entry of data.
There are several companies in the additive manufacturing industry that have built solutions to address these problems.
132 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

The companies are listed below along with links to their websites showing a more complete view of their feature set.
Fundamentally, these companies are aiming to add another link in the additive manufacturing digital thread to connect
the full story of the digital design with the business of operating a facility where manufacturing is taking place.

Company        Relation to                         Application or use case
             digital thread

Link3D        Link3D helps       EOS North America performs benchmark studies for its customers to gauge how
             organizations       additive manufacturing can be used in a distributed manufacturing model. In an

                scale their           effort to enhance this process, EOS looked to Link3D's AMES and Additive
             manufacturing            Workflow Software. The software helps speed up order turnaround time,
                                  maximize machine utilization, and allows for all engineers to gain access to the
               process and         supply chain. EOS has also used Link3D's Build Simulation software to provide
             automate their
                                                                             quotes for clients.
                workflows.

3YOURMIND     3YOURMIND          Erpro 3D Factory has utilized 3YOURMIND to streamline their production of high
             optimizes end-      quantity products, such as 17 million mascara brushes they produce for Chanel.

                to-end AM          Erpo was able to consolidate their various tracking systems into a single tool,
             processes and        helping reduce potential for human error that can arise with the complexity of
               provides the
                                                                       organizing so many parts.
                 tools for
                  efficient
             scheduling and
                 tracking.

SAP          SAP enables                           US manufacturer Jabil has been using SAP to support its supply chain and

             collaboration,                        manufacturing operations

             streamlining

             the entire

             process of part

             certification

Materialise    Materialise        Nissan Motor Company uses 3D printing to prototype and experiment with new
              Stremics is a        vehicle shapes. However, due to the print bed limitations, larger parts need to
                                 broken down into smaller, separate prints. The process of manually dividing parts
                 software           into subparts was time consuming and inefficient. Using Materialise Magics,
               system that       Nissan was able to reduce the time required for this process by over 50%. Magics
                                    comes with a feature that allows for the easy splitting of a part at a specified
                 helps to        location, along with the ability to automatically create positioning pins, reducing
                automate,
             centralize, and                                             the final assembly time.
             streamline the

                 additive
             manufacturing

                workflow.

Table 7.2

Distributed Manufacturing

The concept of distributed manufacturing states that a single product can be made in parallel from multiple
manufacturing sites that are closer to the end customer. Thinking about this in the context of AM, we come to the
definition of a single digital file being able to be manufactured at multiple locations on similar or the same equipment.
This is in contrast to most conventional manufacturing approaches where a part is mass-produced at a singular location,
then shipped to multiple customer or warehouse locations. The advantage of AMin this equation is that by having a
series of locations that are able to produce 3D-printed products on demand is that supply chain challenges offered by
traditional approaches such as high inventory costs and over producing products becomes more manageable. The
model for 3D printing allows for a more nimble approach to manufacturing that could result in the product being closer
to the end customer and leaves companies with flexibility to better manage their stream of product. From a digital
thread perspective, this fully relies on the ability to transfer data between multiple organizations in a consistent manner

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          7.3 · Processing a file for 3D printing 133

without compromising the quality of the product.
Some companies such as Fast Radius and UPS have teamed up to apply this model in a real-life context by having
printing facilities near regional air distribution centers that give companies the ability to print a part during the day and
ship it to anywhere in the US overnight. Ultimately this success of this model would require end-to-end connectivity with
the digital design, printer, and material information but just as important is the communication between all the parties
involved to manage quality along these dimensions to incorporate the approach into a sound business model.

Figure 7.6 A Stratasys F900 3D printer manufactures a replacement part for an aircraft fuel mixing chamber on site at
134 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

       the airfield. Large aircraft rely on thousands of parts, and airlines and other organizations have can have significant
       logistical challenges to keep them in stock at every possible location they may be needed. Shipping them takes time and
       money, so distributed manufacturing is an efficient and effective means of repair. (credit: U.S. Air Force photo by Staff
       Sgt. Marquis Russel on DVIDS, Public Domain).

    Security and IP Considerations

       The digital nature of the AM process has many positives that enable the flexibility in production approaches, rapid
       collaboration, and the ability to produce parts without costly tooling. However, one of the implications of this flexibility is
       the reliance on digital files that on the surface do not have much in the way of intelligence built into them. A standard
       CAD, STEP, or STL file may dictate geometric requirements, but other details such as materials, quantity, and who (or who
       is not) authorized to print the file are not controlled as a default. Compared to traditional manufacturing, this has
       profound implications for manufacturers as they think about AM as an end-to-end solution for production and how it
       relates to the security of their product designs as well as intellectual property.

       From a design security standpoint, we have to take a step back to understand the different models that organizations
       may use to produce 3D printed products. The first approach may be to have an internal 3D printing production capability
       that allows them to control the full process from start to finish. In this scenario, the main security considerations remain
       internal to the employees and systems of the organization. An alternative approach to fully internalized AM is the
       scenario where the printing is done externally at a contract manufacturer. This tends to organize itself in which the
       parent organization develops and owns the engineering designs and shares these digital files with a manufacturer. Users
       should make sure that they fully define the extent of these relationships and how much leeway the final manufacturer
       has in building the parts. For example, defining the full extent of the production process is very important. Aspects such
       as build orientation, printer, and material parameters should be well defined and documented in any relationship. It
       should also be made clear that there are strict limitations on production of the parts to the amount ordered.

       This brings us to a second and important consideration for the digital thread: intellectual property (IP). The wider
       availability of AM technologies, due to lowered costs and increased quality, has increased access to the machines and
       materials. The ability to produce an individual design is available to far more people and organizations. This means that
       control of the digital designs, especially those with critical IP design data, opens up new risks for manufacturers. One
       risk is that someone or a competitor may copy a design and produce it on their own 3D printing system. Additionally,
       someone may take a design and produce it in such a way that was not intended. For example, a part could be
       counterfeited or produced on a subpar printing process; if subsequently delivered to a customer, the lower-quality,
       knock-off part if it could cause injury or equipment damage. In such a case, it is not always clear where the liability or
       fault lies: Is it the design owner, the material supplier, or machine operator/manufacturer? While these are all serious
       concerns, there are companies such as Identify3D who are looking to enhance the security of the 3D printing file
       process.

       An alternative risk is the one posed by the technology capabilities itself. For example, 3D scanners were developed in
       part to capture the geometry of existing parts. When used within an organization, there is no IP risk. However, the same
       devices can be used to copy other designs and completed products in order to counterfeit them or repurpose the
       design. To counter some of these efforts, companies can use novel materials or create elements that show authenticity.
       For example, the geometric flexibility of 3D printing allows also unique markings to be made on the inside/outside of the
       part in such a way that it cannot be easily scanned or replicated. With other types of IP theft, such as copying the
       materials mix, companies may protect information and issue non-disclosure agreements among their employees,
       contractors, and suppliers. There are even practices of inserting tracer materials to show the authenticity of a build.

    7.4 Simulation

    Learning Objectives

       By the end of this section, students will be able to:

         · Describe the use cases of simulation and their impact on the digital thread.
         · Differentiate between part simulation, build simulation, and other simulation types.
         · Understand the importance and several means of build monitoring.

       Part simulation is a part of the additive manufacturing workflow that has been becoming increasingly more prevalent.
       Visualizing and analyzing the structural properties of a part is an integral step in producing high-quality, effective
       components with the hope to reduce iterations and failed builds. We discussed simulation approaches in earlier chapters
       and the aim of this section is to tie in the technical approaches we've covered with the digital thread structure. There are
       two main facets of simulation that will be considered for this context including part simulation and build/process
       simulation. Ultimately, these two approaches are heavily reliant on one another as well as the full context of the printing

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                       7.4 · Simulation 135

of a part.

Part simulation

Part simulation consists of evaluating a part's mechanical performance when subjected to a variety of different
conditions. The simulated introduction of different physical loads, temperatures, deformations, etc can help identify the
structural integrity of the various geometries that make up a part. These processes are incredibly useful in finalizing the
design of a part that will be efficient in terms of material usage (and therefore cost) as well as mechanically sound
enough to withstand its intended use. An additional aspect of part simulation is design optimization. Many simulation
softwares geared towards additive manufacturing include the capability to optimize a part's design for 3D printing.
Design optimized parts take advantage of unique capabilities of 3D printing, utilizing geometries that would not be
possible with traditional manufacturing. The two main types of part optimization we will go over are lattice creation and
generative design. Both of these design optimization techniques result in parts that require less material to print, while
maintaining the same physical properties of the original design.

Lattice creation

Lattice structures are design configurations based on a repeated unit cell which can be a hexagonal, honeycomb, or
other geometric pattern. Integrating lattice structures into a part's design can help reduce the part's mass, and therefore
weight without compromising the structural integrity of the design. Many software programs are capable of
automatically generating them into an existing part. Companies like Altair, Autodesk, and nTopology provide software
that automatically integrate optimized lattice structures into your part designs, with options to change parameters such
as the unit cell geometry or lattice density.

Generative design

The second type of part optimization, generative design, achieves similar results to lattice structures in that it helps
reduce a part's weight without compromising strength. The generative design process is iterative, meaning that the
simulation tool will attempt to meet a set of defined constraints through many different design options. The generative
design software will identify the most integral geometries of a part and keep them as intact as possible, while removing
any unnecessary mass that serves little to no purpose in terms of structural strength. Also similar to lattice structures,
generative designs are unique to additive manufacturing and would be impossible to produce using traditional
manufacturing methods.

Build Simulation

Build simulation is another part of the additive manufacturing workflow and is used to visualize and obtain insight of the
3D printing process of a part. Build simulations can be used to predict the layer-by-layer results of a 3D printing process
under specified machine parameters and can help ensure that 3D printing jobs will not fail. Mitigating possible print
failures is a key aspect of maintaining the efficiency and cost effectiveness of an additive manufacturing operation.

Process optimization: Simulating part builds helps identify all of the possible reasons for print failure, and will allow you
to ensure that parts are printed at the best possible quality. Process simulation software will allow you to set the
different parameters for the 3D printing process, and visualize how they will affect the final printed part.

Build speed: Nearly all AM build simulation software will indicate the time in which it takes the specified printer to
produce a part. This information is valuable not only for identifying the turnaround time on individual parts, but also for
ensuring efficient machine utilization. Additionally, the mechanical properties of printed parts is affected by the
orientation in which it was printed. Different orientations can result in different print times, as an orientation that
requires more support will generally take longer than a print that does not. Build speed is a key element to track in an
additive manufacturing production line, as it plays a notable role in optimizing machine uptime and ensuring that
production is as efficient as possible.
136 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

      Figure 7.7 This Siemens software can drive multiple printer heads along five axes, and incorporate multiple types of
      manufacturing in one design. Simulation is an important component prior to the build to understand sequence, timing,
      and overall process. (credit: "NX Cam Hybrid Additive Manufacturing" by Siemens PLS Software/Flickr, CC BY-ND 2.0)
      Part optimization: The insights gained from process simulation can also be used to identify important mechanical
      properties of the part to be printed. Part deformation is one of the key factors you are able to simulate, and provides an
      accurate representation of how a 3D printed part will deform after being printed. Additionally, the temperature gradient
      of a printed part can be simulated to help identify areas where mechanical properties may be affected. Since this
      simulation can be quicker than the full deformation simulation, it is useful for locating places where deformation may
      occur.
      Support Structures: Support structures, generally, are needed when a part has overhanging features that are not
      supported by anything below them. These structures are usually printed at different settings (density, infill, etc) than the
      actual part, and are constructed so that they are easily removed from the final printed part. Most build simulation
      software will automatically generate supports based on the overhanging features of the part. The need for supports also
      varies from printer to printer, with some machines being capable of printing larger degree overhangs without any
      support structures. It is important to determine your printer's capabilities before including support structures in your
      prints. This can be done with a number of "overhang tests" that can be found online. While including support structures
      will increase a part's build time, and results in additional post-processing steps, it may be necessary to ensure that a part
      is properly printed.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              7.4 · Simulation 137

Company    Relation to Digital       Application or Use Case
                   Thread

Dassault      Dassault Systeme's     Eviation Aircraft set out to create a nine-passenger, 100% electric-powered
Systemes   SIMULIA Portfolio offers   aircraft that could reach a cruising speed of 280 miles per hour. Utilizing
                                            Dassault Systemes's software, Eviation was able to simulate the
               software that can     aerodynamic behavior of their design, and identify the dynamic and static
              simulate structural
                                     loads that would occur during flight. The cloud capabilities of the software
                    mechanics,           allowed the easy sharing of ideas and collaboration across different
              computational fluid                                                disciplines.

                 dynamics, and
            electromagnetic fields.

nTopology    nToplogy's platform     Cobra Aero, a US-based UAV designer, wanted to find a way to design and
            provides the tools to     manufacture lighter engines in order to decrease drag on their UAVs and
           effectively lightweight   increase flying efficiency. Utilizing the nTop platform, Cobra Aero was able
           part design, as well as   to introduce an internal lattice structure to their air-cooled engine cylinder,
           automatically optimize    replacing the external fin structure which they used previously. In testing,
             the topology of the
                                          the new design was more efficient at cooling in every possible case.
               part's geometry.

Table 7.3

Build Monitoring

As we continue to build out a model of the digital thread that for the AM workflow the area that arguably has the most
data (in terms of pure memory required) is monitoring of each layer in the build. Any 3D printing process is built on the
concept of consolidating layers upon other layers to build a fully dense part. Most printing processes have a layer
thickness somewhere in the range of 40-150 microns which translates to potentially thousands of build layers per part.
This ultimately becomes the single biggest area for variability for a 3D Printed part. From a 3D printing digital thread
perspective there are a few concepts that we will cover.

The first area is simply being able to document process details about each build during the process of construction as
well as compiling data from each individual layer. Depending on the printer modality there are different levels of detail
that can and should be monitored during the process. In nearly all printers some elements of the machine operation
should be documented (temperature, layer thickness, inert gas flow, energy inputs). For most machines, the operator
has some levers to pull on this when they start the build. Lower cost printers generally do not have much in the way of
sensors that can output to an accessible software data stream. This leaves the user in a trusting position to make sure
that the part is constructed in a way that meets the requirements. As the industry targets more applications in the
production environment, the demand from customers is that machine manufacturers allow access to a variety of sensors
within the machines to enable full build visibility.

Some examples of build monitoring platforms are shown in the following table. EOS and Renishaw enable build
monitoring data through their DMLS Platforms. 3D Systems Examines the Build Process of Polymer Laser Sintering
138 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

Company    Relation to Digital                     Application or Use Case
                   Thread

EOS        EOSTATE is a modular                    MTU Aero Engines has been using EOSTATE for process development and

           solution for end-to-                    quality assurance in the additive series production of borescope bosses for

           end build monitoring                    Airbus A320neo engines. This has allowed them to completely eliminate any

           of all production and                   downstream quality assurance procedures.

           quality-relevant data

           in industrial 3D

           printing.

Renishaw    Renishaw's InifniAM                     IMR, a Dublin-based manufacturing company that has been working with a
           enables near real-time                    variety of clients to explore the capabilities of 3D printing medical devices.
                                                   Spinal implants was a device that was identified that could benefit from being
            insight into ongoing                    additively manufactured. Metal AM would allow for the integration of lattice
            builds and allows for                  structures into the implant's design. Using Renishaw's RenAM 500M metal 3D
           the in depth analyses                   printer, IMR was able to confirm that their AM spinal implants had mechanical
            of completed builds.
                                                            properties greater than those of their traditionally manufactured
                                                                                                counterparts.

   3D        3D Systems offers                     Node-Audio manufactures high-fidelity speakers with a distinct cabinet design
Systems      DMP Monitoring, a                         that distinguishes itself from the rest of the hi-fi speakers on the market.
              real-time process
            monitoring tool that                   Using a 3D Systems SLS printer and 3D audio simulation software, Node-Audio
           allows the user to see,                     was able to design speakers that produced sound similar to that of a live
           analyze, and fine-tune                                                                 experience.
            their metal additive

                manufacturing
                   processes.

Table 7.4

The second area that is important to consider due to the layer upon layer process is that any error in a single layer could
potentially be catastrophic to the build process or render the part not usable. So while we have been talking about many
aspects of the digital thread being historic in nature (recording data that has occurred) there is another forward-looking
application: Manufacturers can use information during the build process to prevent or solve for error-prone directions in
building a part. While this is an opportunity, it has a significant data load. Even a simple thermal scan of each layer of a
build will result in terabytes of data that needs to be stored and analyzed. To do that at scale for multiple machines on
every build is extremely challenging. However, there are tools that are being developed to quickly analyze this
information use it to solve for issues in the build.

Ultimately, all of this information could be documented and transferred for every part that is generated, allowing
manufacturers and product companies to have a before, during, and after set of data for the construction of the
component with the hope of providing a robust quality summary.

7.5 The Digital Thread in AM Quality Assurance, Post-Processing,
and Standards Alignment

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe the importance and impact of quality assurance on the additive manufacturing digital thread.
  · Identify post-processing steps and decisions that impact the additive manufacturing digital thread.
  · Discuss the was in which industry and related standards and external requirements impact the digital thread.

One of the most exciting opportunities for the implementation of the digital thread into real world production
applications in the 3D printing sector is for quality assurance. A digital data approach, as described above, can provide a
deeper perspective on the end-to-end process of part development, which quality assurance personnel and software
could incorporate into their efforts.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        7.5 · The Digital Thread in AM Quality Assurance, Post-Processing, and Standards Alignment 139

With this opportunity, there also challenges, such as the following:
  · Many variables, no consistent framework. Currently there are over 100 variables that need to be resolved,
      documented and stored for each production AM Part.
  · No centralized data source. Companies are having to build bespoke tools to track and store this information or are
      allowing teams to stand up siloed solutions, which may or may not map to industry standards.
  · Knowledge transfer and data retention is fragmented. Teams warehouse their own data and documentation is
      inconsistent - when people leave, so does the information.

Figure 7.8 This highly magnified view of a weld reveals a gap in the form of the darker region to the right of the center.
Quality assurance personnel (or software) would need to assess whether or not this gap constitutes a risk, and whether
it requires repair or a complete rebuild. Ideally, that quality assurance data - including the size and location of the gap
itself - would be captured in the digital thread. (credit: Modification of "Art of Science 2023" by Oak Ridge National
Laboratory/Flickr, CC-BY 2.0)

If we examine the full 3D printing workflow, we see that there are a number of entries that should be documented in
order to maintain a traceability record on each component.

Design           Material          Process             Post-Process        Inspection

· File Name      · Feedstock       · Machine ID        · Material Used     · Non-Destructive
· File Format        Material      · Model                 (Amount)            Test Methods
· Build                            · Serial Number
                 · Material        · Configuration     · Restart Criteria  · Tensile Strength
    Orientation      Vendor                            · Post-Processing   · Tensile Modulus
· Desired                              Date                                · Yield Strength
                 · Powder Blend    · Recoater              Steps           · Elongation at
    Surface      · Batch Number                        · Date of Post-
    Finish       · Production          Configuration                           Break
                                   · Build Plate           Processing      · Date of Inspection
                     Method                            · Post-Processing
                 · Particle Size       Material
                                   · Preheat               Technician
                     Distribution
                 · Melting             Temperature
                                   · Purge Gas
                     Temperature   · Ventilation Flow

                                       Rate
                                   · Oxygen/

                                       Temperature
                                       Limit
                                   · Layer Thickness
                                   · Build Date
                                   · Operator

Table 7.5

Organizations seek to address this issue and keep track of these variables. For example, TRACEam is a software tool that
allows users to document and input all their production 3D printing data into a single platform, tied directly to the
machine workflow that is most relevant.
140 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

One of the greatest challenges with quality management for additive manufacturing approaches is the fact that each
individual user of the technology may need or want to be presented with different data. This could be driven by a specific
printer but also the user's industry. For instance, the qualification requirements for the medical device industry differ
greatly from that of aerospace or automotive. There are a handful of standards that are listed in the literature that
provide a benchmark for these data sets and many can be found in the documents listed below:

Standard                                           Primary Focus

ANSI/AMSC                                          Roadmap for AM standards

ASTM Material Test                                 Numerous standards materials testing and characterization
      Standards

ASTM F42                                           AM specific testing procedures for limited subjects

           FAA                   Memo released covering the Engineering Considerations for Powder Bed Fusion Additively

                                                   Manufactured Parts

SAE AMS 9001                                       Ni Base 625 Alloy for Add Mfg Machines

           FDA                   Technical Considerations for Additive Manufactured Medical Devices

           NASA                  Em20 MSFC Technical Standard Specification For Control And Qualification Of Laser Powder
                                                                        Bed Fusion Metallurgical Processes

           NIST                                    Technical Note 1801

Table 7.6

Another element of quality management is the warehousing of information that is pertinent to the materials and
processes of the applications in the industry. There are several areas where this information is being stored for users to
analyze and apply in their digital data ecosystems:

The Digital Thread in Post-Processing

Post-processing varies by the printing modality, and may include heat treatment or surface treatment of parts. The
quality requirements most often documented are simple completed/non-completed. For some organizations, there are
broader (and more expensive) end-to-end ecosystems where a series of machines for material and part inspection are all
connected in the same software platform. This allows a single part to be transferred inside an existing database
connected to a set of machines.

Let's work through an example for metal powder bed fusion. When a part is ready for production, a material needs to be
selected. If this part is going to be produced to fit a specific standard or industry requirement, most likely there will be
some documentation of the material characteristics of the feedstock going into the machine. In some cases, the material
vendor shares a written Certificate of Conformance with the entity that is printing the part. This will include
characterization details such as material composition, particle size distribution, and morphology details.

For those organizations going beyond this specification, they may need to do additional screening on their in house
equipment such as particle size analyzers, SEMs, flow meters, or DSC's. Each of these tests typically take place on
external test equipment (which is designed for all types of materials, not only AM materials), and the data can be
outputted to a spreadsheet or test report. Even at this early stage, the team has created a substantial amount of data
that may not be directly tied into an organization's digital thread. (Think of it like an island within the workflow.) Next, the
material is processed in the machine and goes through a variety of thermal change before consolidating in its final
shape. The machine and process data is another island of information.

Finally, a third island of data is created during post-processing and inspection of the part once it is removed from the
machine. This could take the form of part scanning like CMM or even CT Scanning to offer users a validated inspection
record.

In other words, the data can be analyzed after the fact but in-situ changes or trends are much more difficult to process

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        7.5 · The Digital Thread in AM Quality Assurance, Post-Processing, and Standards Alignment 141

because the amount of data that is connected in a standard additive manufacturing is a combination of data islands and
operator intuition.

An additional hurdle in quality management of 3D printed parts is the difficulty of achieving process repeatability and
part-to-part reproducibility. The multitude of different process parameters, along with inconsistencies in buld-to-build
job management, can make it difficult to 3D print identical parts across multiple build cycles.

Trends and Consolidation in the Quality Management Digital Thread

Inspection equipment of manufactured parts is becoming more digitized, which allows manufacturers and organizations
to leverage machine learning and artificial intelligence. Since part inspection is not unique to the AM production process,
the companies in the space have been looking to improve these tools for all manners of manufacturing. Some have
taken the approach to build a suite of hardware and software systems that can talk to one another in a similar
ecosystem. Others have approached the problem by applying lower cost scanning tools and matching them up with high
powered data analysis tools.

With inspection, one of the fundamental challenges is deciding what to inspect and to what degree. Part complexity,
material, and size all come into play when thinking about approaches. Alongside our discussion of the digital thread is a
conversation about automation. There are certainly inefficiencies in most current 3D printing workflows requiring heavy
manual inputs, and part inspection is often one that relies the most heavily on this integration with the user.

Overall, when considering the digital thread for quality management, manufacturers must think about the balance
between how much data is being manually captured versus automatically captured, and, perhaps more importantly, how
much is being analyzed by operators and engineers versus being automatically analyzed.

Applications of Standards in the 3D printing Digital Thread

Based upon the rapid pace of change throughout the sector, the addition of standards to benchmark and ground
approaches to the technology has lagged behind. Most of the standards that have been generated in the industry have
been rightly focused on the process and materials. The American Society for Testing and Materials has a working group
dedicated specifically to additive manufacturing (ASTM F42). Collaborations between them and the international
community, embodied by the International Organization for Standards (ISO), have produced a series of detailed
documents to help guide users along their AM development cycle. Many of these standards do provide details on
elements of vocabulary and structure for a consistent language across the various platforms but very few report on
specific standards relative to the digital elements of 3D printing.

In addition to the AMMD system architecture, the NIST team along with a series of collaborators have created a common
dictionary to help users, machine producers, and software companies across the industry develop new tools to increase
capabilities among the AM digital thread.

As with many elements of the 3D printing sector, analogous efforts have been taking place in technologies such as
machining for a number of years as well. The MTConnect platform is a device information model that helps
organizations and teams define a series of structures within their machines that can be outputted to a common data
structure. This is an effective tool for some aspects of manufacturing; however given the range of data streams that
could be tapped for AM, the variable set can become much wider than a technology like machining. This has led to an
approach by many machine manufacturers of 3D printing equipment to build their own software connectors (APIs) that
can transfer data to partner software platforms. In some ways having a unique API is a competitive advantage for these
organizations but the ability for software developers to have widespread interoperability is highly limited with this
approach.

Approaches to integrating the Digital Thread in an Organization

The opportunities presented by the potential of an end-to-end digital AM thread are enormous. We have discussed how
the fundamental inputs (a 3D Digital CAD) start the process of 3D printing, and that through the workflow there are a
number of interactions that reside both in the digital as well as the physical realm. As we think about how this ecosystem
will have an impact on the additive manufacturing sector, it is useful to think about this question from three different
perspectives: the printing machine manufacturer, the operator processes and support equipment, and the end user.

The first is within the 3D printing machine manufacturer space. There are dozens of different machine manufacturers
producing equipment for different materials, end uses, and customers. Most equipment manufacturers are focused on
providing their customers with a stable platform that delivers parts on a repeatable basis. Historically, because many of
the platforms were targeted towards the prototyping market, the necessity to have additional software integrations
outputting machine analytics or costing was not really necessary. It was also the case that most printer manufacturers
were not considering how the technology could relay data from other parts of the 3D printing workflow. That is slowly
142 7 · The Additive Manufacturing Digital Thread

       changing, and the ability to connect machines is coming down in price. WIth that said, the structure and format of these
       data flows remain at the early stages of usefulness. Efforts such as the MTconnect platform alongside third-party
       vendors in the AM software space are building that digital functionality space along with efforts from NIST and other
       standards organizations to structure the data for the end users.
       The second perspective is from the standpoint of support equipment and steps involved in the 3D printing workflow.
       There remain a number of steps that are not machine-centric and often rely on actions of people involved in the
       operations. This includes aspects such as those associated with the material and material characterization alongside all
       the post-processing and inspection elements that come with any build. These aspects are starting to get integrated into
       the digital thread and are critical elements for end-to-end quality assurance for the process.
       Finally, the third perspective is based upon the end user. There is a wide range in knowledge regarding AM technology
       throughout the greater manufacturing environment. Current manufacturers may not have deep experience with the
       technology, and personnel may not have had AM as a core part of their education or training. Also, there are so many
       technologies that it is hard for any one person or even one organization to be an expert at every single platform. Often,
       the adoption and investment in AM equipment and processes comes with high expectations and showing feasibility for a
       particular application is the first order of business. Ultimately, a mature digital thread that enables users to have an easy
       way to increase the effectiveness of their operations will help drive more usage and business models for the technology.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   7 · Summary 143

Summary

Even though there is still a lot of work to be done when it comes to the 3D printing Digital Thread the long term
implications of the potential will continue to drive innovation in the space. The key learnings from this chapter rest
fundamentally on being able to assess the digital data being generated at each step of the additive manufacturing
workflow and being able to tie this information back to meaningful and beneficial areas for users of the technology.
Certainly as you continue on the journey of understanding and applying the lessons of this textbook, keeping in mind
the AM digital thread is an important element to further enhance your ability to leverage the technology in a way that is
beneficial to your career, business, and customers.

Review Questions

 1. What industries could most benefit from a thorough digital thread?

 2. What data might be most useful to manufacturers in these industries?

 3. How can manufacturers leverage this data not only for their own internal purposes, but as a method of providing
      value to their customers?

 4. Which is the least commonality of all AM processes?
       a. A layer by layer approach
       b. Use of powders
       c. They can be described with describing the layer, energy and material
       d. Starting at the design concept phase

 5. Which is not a question used to define any AM process?
       a. How is the layer created?
       b. How is the energy applied?
       c. How is the DfAM applied?
       d. How is the material applied?

 6. What layer or layers of a part might be most worth monitoring at higher detail?

 7. How can you utilize build monitoring data to inform decisions regarding subsequent prints?

Discussion Questions

 8. What industries or companies do you think might most benefit from distributed manufacturing?

 9. How might the increased prevalence of personally-owned 3D printers affect a manufacturer's ability to sell
      replacement parts?

10. How can companies that utilize additive manufacturing best convey to their customers that their 3D printed parts/
      components are quality checked to the latest standards?

11. How would you manage the quality inspection of a product that contains both additively and traditionally
      manufactured components?

12. What do you foresee as possible roadblocks to the widespread adoption of uniform AM quality standards?

Key Terms

7.1 Digital Trends Throughout Manufacturing

Data stream

7.3 Processing a file for 3D printing

Distributed manufacturing, Intellectual property

7.4 Simulation

Build monitoring
144 7 · Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org
                             8 · Introduction 145

8  THE BUSINESS OF ADDITIVE
   MANUFACTURING

Figure 8.1 A 3D printed dwelling can revolutionize the speed and flexibility in home construction, camping, and
emergency management. On the other hand, the promise of innovation must also make business sense; if the AM
structure costs more to build, process, or maintain than a conventional one, it might not be worth developing at scale.
(credit: Modification of "1.0 Hero Mountain Rendering," by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0).

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Managing AM in Your Business
  8.2 Pre-Production to Production: Factors to Consider in a Business Case
  8.3 The Business Case: Definitions and Considerations
  8.4 AM Economics
  8.5 Sustainability Impacts of AM

      Introduction

Even considering all the various materials, processes, design considerations, and certification/qualification details, the
business of AM could be the domain's most challenging aspect. Being able to seize on the disruptive nature of AM in an
effective, revenue-positive manner is essentially what will define its success. It is said that innovation isn't innovation
until "someone writes a check for it". The bar is quite high here, because not only does it need to be creative or inventive,
it doesn't become innovative until people are buying it and using it in commercial practice.

Because AM is disruptive, it can create opportunities in higher performance, lower cost or schedule benefits. We will use
these three project management criteria throughout the chapter, also known as the project management triple
constraint. In project management teachings, you can choose one, optimize for the second and the third must float.
Trying to achieve more than one has rarely proven to be successful.

Thinking about the business of AM will create conversations around how AM should be adopted in a business. What is
the role of design led thinking? Do you have the necessary skills? Are you a parts manufacturer today and should you
make AM parts or design them and have them made? Are you a consumer of AM parts in assembly? What do you need
to know to specify them and integrate them safely?

We will review the business case(s) for AM and offer suggestions on ways to monetize the flexibility created by AM
through a deep understanding and appreciation of the cost drivers of AM. The cost drivers create opportunities when
truly understood. They also become integral in making a business case for AM, or even choosing the right form of AM for
the requirements.
146 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

    8.1 Managing AM in Your Business

    Learning Objectives

       By the end of this section, students will be able to:
         · Describe what makes AM disruptive.
         · Propose ideas to improve the success in implementing AM.
         · Understand how functions, roles, responsibilities, and interfaces may need to change to successfully implement AM.

    AM is Disruptive, Not Easily Adapted

       Additive manufacturing is considered a disruptive technology because it can offer an entirely new way of doing
       something with potential superior solutions. Innovations such as AM are called disruptive when they displace the
       original method of operating by offering a method or product that is significantly preferred to the original. One of the
       best examples of AM disrupting traditional methods is found in the orthodontics industry. In 1997, Invisalign was formed
       with the idea to dramatically change the braces experience with a teeth-alignment tool that is superior to braces by
       being removable, discreet, and custom fit for each individual's mouth. AM offers the flexibility to create these unique
       molds required for mass customization of the alignment tools. Each customer requires several custom molds to
       accommodate different stages of the alignment process. This would be impractical and extremely expensive using
       traditional injection molding technologies.
       The dental industry is the first big example an industry disrupted by AM, originating from a startup. Startups, inherently
       small and agile, often bring disruptive technologies to the marketplace first, whereas it is more difficult for larger
       organizations. Although additive manufacturing can offer better solutions for certain applications, large corporations
       often struggle to adopt disruptive technologies. These well-established organizations that currently enjoy industry
       dominance with legacy design and production methods, high certification and qualification requirements, experience
       barriers adopting AM such as inexperienced staff, resistance to change, and intensive capital requirements to try AM in-
       house. It's hard to know where to start. Which part of the organization will take on this initiative? What's the right level of
       staff and investment? What's the strategy for the specific industry with respect to materials, processes, machines, and
       people? With all these big looming questions, it's easy for an organization to casually explore the technology, maybe
       make a few trinkets, and move on to shelve AM for another 5-10 years.

       Figure 8.2 Dentistry was one of the initial widespread consumer applications of AM, and remains an advanced and

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         8.1 · Managing AM in Your Business 147

substantial business area. (credit: Modification of "Variety of Dental Resin Material Results from Formlabs Form 2 SLA 3D
Printer" by Formlabs Inc./Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Leading Change, Design-Led Thinking

In order to lead a successful introduction of additive manufacturing into a business, the motivation must be defined.
Clearly defining the business benefits and justification will drive adoption more effectively than any corporate initiative.
This motivation comes in the form of requirements. For example, the product must be lighter, the design cycle must be
faster, the envelope occupied by the part should be smaller, the performance must be improved, etc. AM is a toolset for
accomplishing innovative designs that can achieve the requirements in new and sometimes superior ways. With the
exception of reducing the consumption of high-cost materials, it is not an alternative production method to be
considered at the end of the design cycle for an existing part already tailored for traditional manufacturing. This is a
common pitfall in additive adoption and often gives newcomers the impression that AM is expensive, slow, and full of
design rule exceptions. The best way to approach an AM project is to let the requirements drive the design, and design
for the process from the onset.

Trade It Before You Try It

Now consider that an application has been identified with some great DfAM features and associated business benefits.
While it is tempting to dive in with personnel, program plans, and target delivery dates, it is prudent to first conduct a
paper trade study to define what actually needs to be true for there to be a value proposition. A trade study is a
documented decision-making process to narrow and choose the best solution based on assumptions and desired
characteristics. The trade study should also identify key assumptions and associated risk mitigation strategies that prove
or disprove those assumptions. One specific risk mitigation strategy explained by The Lean Startup includes creating a
series targeted low effort versions of the product and associated low effort tests to quickly verify the assumptions before
further investment. This allows a team to collect the maximum amount of validated learning with the least amount of
effort. This approach of paper study first, followed by strategic risk reduction plan, will greatly reduce investment
uncertainty.

When considering the decision of when to utilize AM, consider the extremely fast pace of change in such a new domain.
In a quickly maturing technology like AM, a constraint one year could be an opportunity better the following year. New
printers, materials, and processes can improve speed or efficiency by 10-30 percentage points in less than a year's time.
With such knowledge, companies can determine when a specific process or decision might be profitable. For example,
replacing a conventional part with an AM part might not make sense now (the business case may fail), but it could
introduce cost savings as soon as the print speed increases by 10%.

Skills and Capability

Following a successful trade study, the project begins, but even this can be disruptive to the typical organizational
factions. Although the traditional groups like design engineering, quality assurance, etc., are all still required just like for
any manufacturing process, initially some upskilling for AM will be required for each of these core competencies.
Additive manufacturing is a team activity, with a team composed of many personnel - or even teams of personnel -
working closely together. Some of the necessary team areas may include design engineering (with DfAM skills),
manufacturing process engineering, material science, environmental health and safety, quality assurance, quality
control, procurement, operations, program management, and sales or business development. In a typical organization,
these functions would be spread across the business, but at least in the early adoption levels of AM, it may be
advantageous to form a more agile cross-functional AM team. One reason for this is that for existing manufacturing
processes, the different roles, responsibilities, and interactions between the functions has been established; while in the
case of AM, it may be necessary to make adjustments in these to better accommodate the new technology.

Let's run through a detailed situational example:

Traditional situation: If a part machined from solid plate is determined to be too porous during penetrant inspection, the
part may be scrapped - wasting time and resources - particularly the plate itself. IOn this case, the plate producer is
generally responsible for providing a new piece of plate for free, while the machine shop winds up absorbing the wasted
machining cost. The machine shop is willing to sign up to this because they know from experience that about 0.1% of
parts will be scrapped for porosity, so they build that into their cost.

AM situation: Now consider the part is made using AM. In this case, while it is expected that the AM producer needs to
replace any parts (and the underlying materials) that are scrapped, the machine shop may be less willing to absorb the
wasted machining time because they don't know how often this may happen. In order to resolve this impasse, it may be
necessary for the organization (specifically the procurement personnel) to change the standard contract wording so that
the machine shop can be reimbursed for any scrappage due to porosity in the AM part.
148 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

       The above example delves into different personnel (procurement) and processes (contracts) than we have considered
       throughout most of this text. That is because, again, the business element brings in nearly every facet of an organization
       or organizations. As complex and multifaceted as we have seen AM to be, it goes even wider than the groups working on
       the parts or builds.

       Figure 8.3 Maintaining expertise through training and augmenting personnel is citical to sustaining an AM business and
       maintaining a competitive edge. (credit: Modification of "Composites Innovation Group - summer students working with
       equipment at the MDF 2" by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       The AM team will look different depending on what part of the application of AM the organization is focused on. A
       service bureau, for example, will require a team with deep expertise in making and delivering quality parts and will
       benefit from a strong team of manufacturing process engineers, quality engineers, and customer focused sales /
       business development personnel. A manufacturer, however, may choose to partner with a service bureau with those
       skills to make parts and focus instead of design, analysis, and qualification of the AM parts. In this scenario, the
       manufacturer should train and deploy a team of skilled design engineers with deep, system level product knowledge,
       armed with DfAM skills, to create new value and product differentiation through AM. In all of these scenarios, the
       organizational functions are the same as before, but the skillsets to understand and implement AM will need to be
       trained or hired into those groups.

    8.2 Pre-Production to Production: Factors to Consider in a Business
    Case

    Learning Objectives

       By the end of this section, students will be able to:
         · Determine where an AM application fits in overall AM maturity.
         · Apply maturity levels to impacts on the overall product.

       There are different business case considerations depending on the type of AM application or reason for doing AM. In
       chapter 1, the AM Maturity Model was introduced to describe the various AM products and the appropriate learning
       lessons which accompany it.
       The TBGA AM Maturity Model breaks down potential AM products into 5 levels or levels of AM maturity, each level having
       its own business case considerations. These 5 levels are:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    8.2 · Pre-Production to Production: Factors to Consider in a Business Case 149

  · Level 0: Pre-Production
  · Level 1: Production Influence
  · Level 2: Substitution
  · Level 3: Functional Designs
  · Level 4: Multi-Functional

The business value of these levels is further described in the following sections and evaluated with respect to the triple
constraint of project management, namely Cost, Schedule and Scope.

Level 0

Level zero is Pre-Production and encompasses using AM prototypes for product development, and short run production
until the final manufacturing method is deployed.

Cost: It is possible to impact program costs through applying AM prototyping to condense schedules, but direct product
costs are likely unaffected with the use of prototyping alone.

Scope: This level of AM is useful for enhancing the scope by prototyping important scope-enhancing features of the
product design, but scope is not directly impacted by prototyping.

Schedule: The primary outcome of using AM for prototypes is condensing schedule. Level zero describes activities such
as using AM to make test parts for an assembly, gathering data, or avoiding hard tooling, all of which work towards
compressing the development cycle.

Level 1

Level one refers to indirect application of additive, namely tools and fixtures, that can be used to manufacture or
assemble other parts.

Cost: Product cost can be affected by application of AM in Level one through improving assembly time, reducing tooling
inventory, or improving the cost of poor quality by ensuring a robust, repeatable process. For example, a fixture or tool
used on the assembly line that enables faster build time would lower cost.

Scope: Level one parts will not likely benefit from any scope enhancement from the use of AM, since AM is not used for
direct production of parts, and therefore cannot affect the final product performance.

Schedule: It is common and relatively easy to find business value applying this level of AM and recognizing savings in
schedule, assembly, tooling inventory reduction and cost. This level also includes examples like using AM to produce
prototype castings for validation or initial production, enabling overall program schedule improvements.
150 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

      Figure 8.4 This 3D printed engine block mold has a variety of internal structures, passageways, and subcomponents that
      will be filled with specific alloys. (credit: Modification of Velie Engine Mold Complete Core Package" by O.K. Foundry
      Company/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Level 2

      Level two covers making AM production parts that look similar to existing legacy manufacturing designs.
      Cost: It is possible to find cost savings in part for part replacement examples in level 3 if the parts are made with
      complex, multi-step manufacturing processes and/or with expensive materials such titanium.
      Spare parts are a good example of a level 3 application where in-kind replacement prolongs the longevity of an
      expensive asset, which may command a higher price due to its overall business value.
      Scope: Since the parts in level 3 are the same as was produced with traditional methods, there is not likely any benefits
      to scope for the majority of these parts. It is possible that a higher value material will be substituted, which may bring
      some benefit to mechanical properties.
      Schedule: As discussed in chapter 1, this could be useful to deliver spare parts where the original supply chain is no
      longer viable or practical. Excepting the high-cost material case mentioned before, typically, parts not designed for AM
      are more expensive (part for part) when made with additive manufacturing vs. their intended manufacturing method. In
      this case, the business value comes from a condensed schedule, for example eliminating lengthy lead times through
      delivering low volume spare parts quickly.

    Level 3

      Level three describes AM parts which take existing part designs and apply the benefits of AM by combining these parts
      into one.
      Cost: This can be financially beneficial by reducing recurring part cost, manufacturing assembly time, potential systems
      weight savings, creating more robust systems without joints and potential failure points. This also reduces the cost to
      manage individual part numbers and suppliers which is hard to quantify, but a real cost, nonetheless.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                               8.3 · The Business Case: Definitions and Considerations 151

Scope: In this level, the scope of the AM application is paramount and unlocks the value of AM by enabling system level
solutions with improved performance and reduction in processes.

Schedule: Part combination does not directly impact schedule, though it is possible to realize some efficiencies by
minimizing the number of new parts introduced.

Level 4

Level four, referred to as Multi-Functional or Engineered Capability, although hard to achieve, offers the greatest financial
benefits of AM. This maturity level describes parts which can only be made economically through AM methods. These
parts take advantage of the design freedom in AM to create system level value such as performance, reliability, and
weight.

Cost: These parts are market leading and therefore command a premium price, making cost the largest driving factor to
business value.

Scope: In this level, even more than level 3, the scope of the AM application is enhanced by enabling system level
solutions with improved performance and reduction in processes.

Schedule: It is difficult to couple schedule efficiencies with game-changing AM applications such as fit in this level.
Developing novel AM solutions takes time and will often require significant validation and qualification since these parts
are often critical to the product if they bring system level value.

8.3 The Business Case: Definitions and Considerations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe cost drivers for different types of AM processes.
  · Compare the trade-off between different AM processes in terms of size and detail.
  · Understand the interactions between design and cost.

Developing the AM Business Case

A critical part of the trade study is developing the AM business case to define and validate what must be true financially
to have a successful AM implementation. An AM business case is much the same as any product or part business case
and includes considerations such as volume, price point, recurring and non-recurring costs, capital investment, etc. In
addition, there is also a heavy AM specific portion of the business case which considers the AM technology and material
selections, design considerations, as well as any quality, safety, and regulatory considerations. Some considerations by
category would include:

AM Technology: What process did you choose and why? What other processes did you assess? Use the ASTM F42 terms
and relevant specifications to describe. How long has this process been used? What are the pros and cons associated
with it relevant to the requirements? What development would you recommend overcoming?

Materials: What material form is required to be used? Is there a specification today? What considerations are needed to
procure and use the input feedstock. How might the process affect the material as an output consideration (cost,
strength)? Will any post treatments be required (HIP, heat treatment, chemical conversion etc.)?

Design Considerations: Illustrate orientation/angles to build and why? Is support structure necessary? Do you have
added stock for machining or datums? How would you achieve surface finish requirements? What inspection methods
could be used? What tools would assist in design for this AM process? Could additional design time benefit cost and/or
weight? Where would you put additional emphasis? What level of the AM Maturity Model would you place this? What
additional opportunities for AM implementation exist?

Economics: Would buy the equipment or use a service bureau? What estimate did you make for purchase of equipment
and facility? What is the material cost difference and where is the cost savings? Describe the challenges faced when
developing an AM business case? What strategies would you implement to face challenges?

Quality and Safety Considerations: What process and material hazards in an AM production environment? What gaps
exist with AM Quality and Safety processes to assure production parts meet industry quality and safety standards? What
gaps to known industry requirement did you identify? Is the AM process inspectable to the degree necessary? How does
the AM design impact the failure mode and impacts of part failure?

AM Cost Model

Although the business case considerations are much the same as any traditional methods, calculating the recurring
152 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

costs, more specifically, the part costs of an AM part are specific to the AM process and material. To determine the AM
part cost, a cost model can be applied. The AM cost model is specific to each AM process and generally is made up of
printing costs, material costs, and post-processing costs. A simplified cost model created by Dr. Tim Simpson of Penn
State is shown below. This cost model describes the Metal Laser Powder Bed Fusion process for a single laser, but the
same type of thought process can be applied to any AM process to generate an equivalent cost model.

User-defined inputs:

 1. Material (see Table 8.1)
 2. Part Volume (mm3), including supports
 3. Max part height (mm)
 4. Machine operating cost ($10-30/hr)
 5. Pre-Processing/Post-Processing Cost (30%-40%)

          Am Material Data                        Ti64   IN718   SS316L AlSi10Mg
          Density (kg/(mm3)                     4.41E-6  8.5E-6
          Build rate (mm3/s)                                     7.9E-6  2.67E-6
                                                   9.0     4.2
                                                                 2.0     7.4

          Layer Height (mm)                     0.06     0.04    0.02    0.03

          Recoat Time (sec)                     9        9       12      12

          Powder Cost ($/kg) $250-500 $120-$180 $70-$100 $70-$90

          Table 8.1

Outputs:

Starting with material, you must consider that the metallic powder feedstock is 5-10x more expensive per kilogram than
the equivalent bar stock of the same material. If you were to consider the cost of material alone, you would have to
reduce material by 80-90% to have a good business case for AM with a part-for-part substitution. This is achievable only
in rare cases where you have significant processing and associated material waste from the original stock material.

Next the hourly cost of the machine is calculated by estimating the depreciation per hour over some assumed useful life.
Typically, this is 5-7 years at 4000-6000 printing hours since this technology is changing so rapidly.

Printing speed is where this cost model should be calibrated to a specific machine to be more accurate, and certainly
depends on the number of lasers and even the part geometry as parts with extremely complex or thin wall features can
take longer to scan. For a first pass estimate, a single laser build rate is considered around 8-30 cm3/hr. for most single-
laser PBF systems. Unfortunately, this is more like an entitlement number, so it can be assumed that you'd achieve on
average about 80% of this build rate consistently. To account for this, the build rate is divided by 80% in the cost model
formula. Printing time is not only a function of laser speed, but also needs to account for the recoating time where fresh
powder is spread over the build box to get ready for the next layer of printing. This is called the recoat time and is
typically 6-10 seconds on current Laser PBF machines. The total time spent recoating is based on part height and layer
thickness and this per layer recoat time as relayed in the formula above.

The final part of the AM cost model is the post-processing. The next section dives into why the post-processing costs vary
by AM process, and they also vary by application since it is very design driven. For this simplified cost model, the post-
processing costs can be considered between 30-40% of the total part costs. (We typically use a source such as the
Wohler's Report to attain baseline costs.) The total part costs can then be calculated by scaling the AM printing costs +
material costs by this 40% markup to account for final post-processing.

While this cost model is specific to Laser Powder Bed Fusion with a single laser, it illustrates how you could build a
process specific (even machine specific) cost model for your organization by including factors such as material costs,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                               8.3 · The Business Case: Definitions and Considerations 153

build time, and post-processing.

AM Technology

One of the first steps in building a business case for AM is selecting the process that will be used for manufacturing. This
decision is driven by a thorough analysis of the application and selecting the best AM process to meet the requirements.
Just as parts made with additive manufacturing should be intentionally designed for the AM process versus the
traditional process. More granularly, AM applications should be designed for the specific AM process selected, and
sometimes even the specific machine. Selecting the right 3D printer requires careful study of the requirements and the
end to end AM process. At a high level, each of the 7 ASTM classifications has its own considerations and value chain as
determined by the process and post-process steps required to realize a fully finished part. These steps in turn feed the
business case. Each of the processes introduced in Chapter 2 Core AM Technologies and Supporting Processes have
different business case considerations including printing, post-processing, and feedstock.
Laser Powder Bed Fusion is tailored towards small, detailed parts, and can transition from thin to thick sections fairly
well. At some point, there is a tradeoff between achievable detailed features and size of the part due to the residual
stresses that are built up in a large part.
Binder Jet is capable of detailed features in small parts where sintering effects are less of a concern. It is not ideal for
larger parts in general, and there is a space where detailed features may not be achievable alongside thick sections due
to sintering distortion and the effects of gravity while the part is going through densification in the vacuum furnace.

Figure 8.5 An ExOne Binder Jet machine uses a radiant heater to cure a layer of binder deposited into the metal powder
bed. (credit: Modification of ExOne Binder Jet machine by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Sheet Lamination is a hybrid process that only makes sense to select for very detailed parts that take advantage of the
in-situ machining element of the process due to its low productivity. The low productivity makes it an impractical process
for large or simple parts.
Material Extrusion (direct metal) and DED will also require post-processing to achieve details and are ideal for larger
parts. The DED process can make the largest parts since often it works with a robotic arm that is not limited to a defined
machine bed size.
There are specific designs which are a best fit for a particular process, and some designs which may overlap into 2 or
more processes. These overlapping sections are perhaps the only limited cases where it may be possible to trade off
costs of one AM process versus another. However, the most important takeaway is that part design drives the process
selection, which in turn has business case implications. The printing cost is driven by the time the part occupies the
154 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

      printer, which is a factor of design and machine productivity. The other cost drivers include feedstock and post-
      processing, which are both also process specific.

      In AM, the material input is typically in the form of powder or filament, except in sheet lamination where it is a thin foil.
      Powder, wire and foil have additional processing done to them in order to get them into this form, so the price for these
      materials can be higher than common mill products or bulk plastics. However, it is important to note that the process is
      doing more of the "work" so the material input for AM is typically the minority cost element.

      For most metal AM processes, printing represents the single largest cost element. For the most part, this is the
      depreciation of the machine represented in a dollar per hour basis. The less time on the printer, the less cost is added.

      Lastly, post-processing can be a large cost driver, and more so in some AM technologies versus others.

     Laser Powder Bed Fusion

      Printing time is the largest cost driver for the Powder Bed Fusion (PBF) process. As mentioned above, part design and
      productivity are the factors that contribute to the printing costs. Because productivity is mostly influenced by the
      machine makers, the focus for the AM user should be first on part design. Thoughtful integration of design for additive
      manufacturing into part design will drastically affect total costs. Other factors that drive printing time for L-PBF include
      number of lasers and layer thickness. These are further explored later in this chapter, but at a high level more lasers and
      thicker layer thickness yield higher productivity but must be traded off with cost of equipment to add more lasers and
      part density for thicker layers.

      The other cost drivers of PBF are feedstock and post-processing. PBF feedstock is expensive as compared to traditional
      manufacturing feedstock and as compared to most other AM technologies. This is due to the process yield and strict size
      requirements which is further explained in the subsequent section.

      Finally, post-processing is also a major cost driver in PBF parts and includes the cost to depowder, stress relieve, remove
      parts from the build plate, and perform typical machining for interface points and tight tolerances.

     Directed Energy Deposition

      Directed energy deposition (DED) is a broad range of technology that uses a focused energy source to melt and apply a
      feedstock material. The various types of DED can have very different economic implications depending on their energy
      source and feedstock. In this section, the financial considerations of the following DED technologies will be explore
      further: DED Powder, DED Wire, and DED Cold Spray.

      Directed Energy Deposition with powder is one of the highest cost processes second only to Laser PBF. This is likely
      because they both use a similar laser, have a small puddle size (2mm diameter or less) and create similar productivity.
      Due to the low productivity and high capital costs of these machines, the printing cost is the biggest cost driver. Post-
      processing for powder DED always includes stress relief because of the heat input to the part in the welding process.
      Although this process can create nearly final (near-net) shapes, it's still often necessary to final-machine these parts for
      the fully finished part. Finally, the powder feedstock, although still expensive due to its low process yield, is the smallest
      cost driver for this technology.

      Unlike DED with powder, Directed Energy deposition with wire is very efficient at printing. It will always require heat
      treatment for residual stresses and machining since the large (>4mm diameter) puddle inhibits the ability to produce
      fine details, making the post-processing the highest cost driver for this technology. Next in line is the feedstock, since
      wire can be an expensive product form.

      Cold spray has a very similar cost breakdown as DED with wire and is very fast and affordable. It does not make near net
      shapes so additional machining will almost always be required, again making the post-processing the highest cost driver.
      In some cases, a heat treatment could be necessary as well. The powder cost for cold spray can vary wildly depending on
      the chemistry or alloy from very inexpensive to more expensive than laser powder bed fusion, specifically in titanium.

     Sheet Lamination

      Sheet lamination is the third-highest-cost AM process after L-PBF and DED with Powder, again driven by machine
      productivity. The machine does more, therefore costs more. Sheet lamination has minimal printing costs partly because
      the print speed is higher but also because the material input is expensive, and the process provides details at the
      expense of material wastage. The printing and machining are coupled leaving post-processing to traditional metal
      working and final finishes.

     Metal Binder Jetting

      Metal binder jetting is also a metal powder bed process but has a very different solution space as compared to other
      metal AM processes. Not surprisingly, it also has very different cost drivers with post-processing being the main driver
      followed by feedstock and finally printing costs.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                               8.3 · The Business Case: Definitions and Considerations 155

As metal binder jetting is probably one of the fastest methods of AM, it's easy to assume it's also the cheapest. The
costliest portion of metal binder jetting however, is actually in the post-processing. The printing process of binder jetting
produces a "green state" part, which must be cured and sintered before a finished part is ready for final finishing such as
machining or surface finishing. Both curing and sintering are lengthy processes and use additional equipment, and
sintering furnaces can be quite expensive.
The second cost driver of metal binder jetting is the feedstock. The powder for metal binder jetting is typically less
expensive than other powder bed AM feedstocks such as laser PBF. This is because the binder jet process is built off the
legacy Metal Injection Molding process which is mature and used for extremely high-volume applications in automotive
and other heavy industries that have driven down feedstock costs over decades.
Finally, the printing cost of metal binder jetting is the lowest cost driver due to this technology's high productivity and
lower cost of machines. The machines can be 2x or even lower cost compared to laser PBF machines. This is because
they are made up of relatively simple and commoditized hardware such as inkjet printheads instead of lasers. The
technology is also inherently faster than laser PBF because and among the fastest of AM processes. Like inkjet printing,
there is a consistent layer speed parameter defined that is independent of how much part vs. empty space is on that
layer. Binder is jetted only where that layer requires solid material, but the amount of solid material is irrelevant to speed
of the jetting pass.

Figure 8.6 Autodesk setup showing 3D nested parts stacked together in the same build box. As you have probably seen
in other images, this image is just the start of how complex these nesting approaches can become. (credit: Modification
of "Autodesk meshmaker layout packing" by Creative Tools/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
In addition to efficient nesting, the parts also print faster because they do not require supports for printing. Sometimes
supports are required for sintering, which reemphasizes the high cost and difficulty of post-processing binder jet parts.
In summary, metal binder jet printing is a fast process which has great potential for relatively niche design space given
today's technology maturity, however the full process must be considered to validate the AM business case.

Direct Extrusion

Direct Extrusion is quite fast and not very expensive. It is an efficient method for building with larger amounts of
material. For metal extrusion, the feedstock is more like bar stock, therefore readily available and inexpensive. It does
require similar post-processing to DED with wire due to its inability to make near-net shapes, which is why the post-
processing is the highest cost driver for this technology.
156 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

     Polymer Material Extrusion

      Most of the focus of this section has been on metal 3D printing, but similar concepts and cost drivers apply to the
      polymer processes. For Polymer Material Extrusion, the most widespread of any of the AM technologies, it is hard to
      categorize the cost-drivers due to the wide variety of available machines in the market. In general, this is a slow process,
      so printing time is high, but the printers are often commoditized and cheaper than the other process machines. The
      feedstock cost also varies widely and can be anything from hobby level, low end plastics, to high strength, flame
      resistant, polymers made for industrial end use parts. Typically, filaments are a more expensive version of the polymer
      versus pellets common to the injection molding industry, with some of the larger machines using pellet feedstock for
      precisely that reason. Finally, post-processing is still required to remove supports, paint or finish surfaces, but it typically
      is lower cost to finish plastic parts as compared to metal.

     Photopolymerization

      VAT Photo-polymerization is the oldest and most mature of the AM process technologies, yet still very costly as
      compared to other AM polymer processes. The original process uses a similar laser tool path tracing method as Laser
      PBF and has similar low productivity. The machines are also quite expensive, making the printing category a high cost
      driver. The feedstock is a resin-based polymer and can be an expensive form of the material. The printed parts require
      washing and post-curing, but after that is complete, the parts produced have excellent surface finish and detailed
      features eliminating the need for further processing. A more recent iteration of the Photo-polymerization process called
      Continuous Liquid Interface Production (CLIP) is significantly higher productivity, claiming 25 to 100x faster than the
      original photo-polymerization methods. It works by continuously curing the 3d parts instead of tracing each 2D layer's
      blueprint. This method would still have similar feedstock and post-processing considerations but significantly reduced
      printing costs.

     Material Jetting

      Material Jetting is the process in which droplets of build material are selectively deposited by a horizontally traversing
      nozzle onto a build surface where they solidify. The process has a similar setup to binder jetting and shares the same
      level of productivity and common inkjet industry hardware. The material is the highest cost driver since
      photopolymerizable resins and molten polymers are an expensive form of polymers as compared to filament or pellets.
      This technology uniquely allows for varying materials to be deposited during the build, allowing for dissolvable supports
      (which are always required) or different colors. This benefit minimizes the post-processing steps necessary after the
      build and makes the post-processing a small contribution to cost. Despite the low cost of post-processing and the
      processes' high productivity, this form of printing is still among the costliest polymer printing processes.

    AM Materials

      As mentioned earlier, the form of the feedstock is a driving factor to the business case, but another cost consideration is
      the actual material selection. Both the feedstock form and the specific material determine the cost of the material and its
      processing cost. The cost per kilogram of AM material can be shocking compared to more common product forms, but
      the cost per kilogram cannot be separated from the efficiency of the process to reduce material waste and machining
      steps. Also, since there are fewer choices of material currently marketed for AM, sometimes it makes sense to choose a
      superior material versus its incumbent and optimize design (i.e. minimize material). Other financial considerations when
      selecting a material include the material form, existence of a specification, method of procurement, required post-
      processing, waste produced, material recyclability, and productivity for the process since some materials print faster
      than others.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 8.4 · AM Economics 157

Figure 8.7 Titanium powder, shown here, can be remarkably expensive compared to conventional materials. But the
overall cost savings in manufacturing, including transport, can make its use financially viable. (credit: U.S. Navy forward
by Zachary Martyn on DVIDS, Public Domain)

AM Design

All these cost drivers originate from the requirements, which govern the design of the part. Cost can be controlled
through thoughtful application of design for additive manufacturing methods. Consider a part designed for PBF that is
fully self-supported and nests multiple parts neatly into a well-packed build plate.
These roof parts optimize the process cost by eliminating supports completely, avoiding wasted material and associated
printing & support removal time. The parts were built to snap off the build plate, eliminating the need for part removal
by EDM. Cost is further optimized by the nesting strategy that maximizes the number of parts in one print cycle.
Normally in AM, part costs are said to be flat, independent of volume. Although this is mostly true, processes include
build set up, turn over, and stress relief cycles that are additional costs, regardless of the number of parts on the build
plate.

Regulatory Considerations

A final consideration that should be built into a business case for AM is an evaluation of any regulatory requirements for
the part or equipment. Typically, these are similar, if not the same, as what is required for these parts and equipment in
any manufacturing method. For example, it is easy to consider in-sourcing parts made today at a supplier or thinking
that any in-kind AM machine can create the same parts, but some industries require strict adherence to standards to
ensure quality parts and services. Some examples include Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) followed strictly in the
medical field, AS9100 in aerospace, Lloyd's Register for marine, and NADCAP covering special processes for aerospace,
defense and many other industries. Each of these examples carry a cost to achieve and maintain and this cost needs to
be considered in the overall AM business case.

8.4 AM Economics

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:
  · Describe the relationship between overall productivity and the balance between the different processes.
  · Understand learning curves and how they relate to AM and CM.
  · Describe how MfAM, DfAM, complexity, and quantity are interrelated.
158 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

      Appreciating the economics of additive manufacturing iw core to understanding AM at all. Economics is the study of
      production and consumption, which helps us to decide when to use and not use AM. While there are scenarios where
      cost is not the primary driver such as schedule and performance, most of the time, those events ultimately have a cost
      penalty, or a price premium associated with them. In this section, we will address productivity and examples of what can
      drive productivity in AM. We will also assess the impact of throughput or volume, what goes into a business case for an
      AM application and the application of learning curves.

    Impact of Productivity

      A 3D printer is a tool just like other forms of manufacturing. If the productivity of the tool is low, its usefulness or
      application will ultimately be limited to items that are not cost sensitive. The Organization for Economic Co-operation
      and Development (OECD) defines productivity as, "a ratio between the output volume and volume of inputs." It is the
      measure of how efficient inputs, such as lasers, are being used to produce a level of output, i.e. parts. If adding a second
      laser increases the cost of the system without increasing its output, it would decrease productivity. It will be through this
      lens that we will examine the impacts to productivity in some 3D printers and associated processes like metal powder
      production.

      We will examine the productivity of the supply chain, or the process steps required to make the feedstock material
      through to a finished part. In doing so, we can appreciate the contributions of each step in the productivity of the
      process. The alternative often is to only examine the productivity of the 3D printer itself. This is an important step to
      understand, but it is only a step in a multi-step process where to squeeze more productivity out we must look at each
      process step and how it contributes to or limits the productivity of the process.

     Feedstock

      For metal PBF, the feedstock is a powder. Traditionally, the metal powder is made via an atomization process whereby the
      metal is made liquid by heating and the molten droplets fall into a tall chamber. The droplet is broken up by a variety of
      methods which cause many smaller droplets to form before the they cool and solidify as they fall through the chamber.
      The output of the process tends to be a spherical powder with a Gaussian distribution of diameters. Not all metal
      powders are made this way, however, and there are many variations on the concept. Atomization is done via gas
      atomization, water atomization or plasma atomization which vary in the medium used to break the liquid metal droplet
      and the raw materials to create the liquid metal. Other forms of powder production exist and have been used in powder
      metallurgy such as Hydride De-Hydride (HDH) and mechanical methods. In polymeric PBF, the powder can be
      synthesized or mechanically ground which gives very different characteristics in terms of roundness and size
      distribution. For our purposes in this chapter, the size distribution will be a particular focus because it drives the yield
      and therefor productivity that process to make feedstock.

      Powder Size Distribution (PSD) is a key factor in any powder production process. This is mostly because the printing
      process has prescribed a fairly narrow PSD to be used in the process, while atomization produces a fairly wide PSD,
      regardless of which method is employed. The selection of PSD contributes to surface finish, the ability gets a desirable
      Packing Factor in the bed, the ability to move the powder and ultimately cost. PSD can contribute to cost in the powder
      price, the printer performance and the downstream processing so it is a pervasive cost driver. It is also important to
      point out that size is a factor in the ability to move particles with smaller particles flowing more poorly than larger, which
      is why roundness or sphericity is often discussed. Spherical particles flow better than non-spherical particles, so when
      the requirements call for freely flowing, narrow PSD and small particles; having spherical particles helps. Naturally,
      having fewer smaller particles also helps as well as having particles that can be moved versus having "high flowability"
      are important specifications. If over specified, the powder costs more than the AM process truly needs to produce a
      desired output.

     AM Process

      Within the AM process, the speed of creating a layer and melting the material is critical to productivity. The layer creation
      step is influenced by the speed at which the powder can be moved into place, the utilization of the powder (i.e. how
      many times it can be re-used) and the thickness of the layer. In PBF, for example, the scanning step where the laser (or
      electron beam) is melting the material and thereby creating the part is influenced by the number of lasers and the part
      thickness. Another nuance is the addition of lasers to create a larger bed size where more parts or larger parts can be
      made. All of these factors affect the productivity of the printing process. They also then impact the upstream and
      downstream processing as well.

         Thick layer vs Machining

         Printing a thicker layer could drive a larger PSD, but also require more machining due to lower resolution. If the part

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 8.4 · AM Economics 159

  were going to be machined anyway, the bulk of the cost would accumulate in the setup, so machining more can be
  more productive when printing parts faster.
  Using more of the atomization output increases the productivity of atomization and therefore should decrease cost.
  The thicker layer improves productivity by reducing the input costs and optimizing the downstream costs.

Print Speed

Print speed is often mentioned when discussing productivity or comparing various AM processes. It is important to take
this into context as increasing the print speed alone may not increase the speed at which a part can be made and, in
some cases, a faster print speed can be more expensive at the part than a slightly slower speed. It is logical to assume
with expensive capital expenditure (CAPEX) items, like 3D printers, that faster would be better, but this often obfuscates
several important factors. There is a difference between the print speed, the effective print speed, and then the actual
cost to produce the component. We will discuss:

  · Actual print speed: Speed at which the printer makes a shape
  · Effective print speed: The resolved speed of the printing when considering the print time and required steps to

      make the print useful
Finally, the final part cost is the ultimate metric if the productivity of the entire process has been improved or not.
AM is a series of processes, and those processes must be matched or optimized to get the maximum benefit. Inherent in
these examples has been the ability to make thicker layers. We will now look specifically at the economic considerations
of thicker layers in a series of processes.
Printing thicker layers can be more difficult than it sounds. We've already mentioned that thicker layers can have
implications on the powder input. Thicker layers will also impact the processing downstream because of the lower
resolution. If the part is extremely detailed, thicker layers may not work but for larger parts or parts without a high
degree of detailing, using thicker layers is a means to making more parts faster.
By increasing the layer thickness, we effectively reduce the print time. Going from 30-micron layers to 60-micron layers
isn't exactly a 50% improvement, but it is close. Thicker layers only impact the time during printing when the part is
being scanned or made. Recoating time is unchanged as is the set up and cool down time.
The figure below shows the resulting calculation to examine the impact of thicker layers on part cost due to reduction in
print time. Increasing the layer thickness by 50% leads to a reduction in print time and consequently part cost of
approximately 20%.

                                        Figure 8.8 The calculated impact of layer thickness on part cost.
The next focus then becomes the cost of the powder because we have shifted our part cost contribution. The figure
below shows the new cost implication as escalating the impact of powder as the downstream processing is more or less
unchanged.
160 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

         Figure 8.9 Cost driver impact from a 30-micron layer baseline to a 60-micron layer, and same powder PSD and cost/kg.

    The Four Lenses of AM and The Business Case

       This chapter primarily deals with the financial aspects of AM. After the mechanical approach of adding the material cost
       plus the equipment time etc. there is the time to appreciate how the situation is improved and optimized. After all,
       economics is the study of what is the best use of financial resources. In order to provide a holistic view, we will divide this
       consideration into four domains: Machines, Materials, Digital and People. In these sections we will explore the additional
       possibilities and potential sources for new performance or savings.
       Making a business case considers employing the right AM technology or process, with the right material which meets
       the design intent which requires people to have experience. AM is sufficiently diverse and within technology types there
       are many suppliers, brands, makes and models. The material of interest and the design are critical influences on the AM
       process choice. The process must meet your requirements and those requirements are both technical and financial.
       Meeting the technical intent but failing to provide some kind of value proposition will not lead to success.

     Machines

       As the printers or machines are the single biggest factor in the cost of making parts, we will consider them first. With
       some AM technologies, the printer comes with the peripheral equipment required to finish the part. Polymer PBF, for
       example, does require some post printing treatments, but due to the maturity of the technology, there are multiple
       suppliers and automations available. Metal AM, which is less mature by comparison, has a very immature supply chain
       and is somewhat scattered. We will examine two aspects of machines in a business case: batch vs. series production and
       operational cost.
       In production, the processes must be aligned in a fashion to optimize the part flow. Through this optimization, the
       producer can get the most from the operational uptime of the equipment. AM can be thought of as a series of batch
       operations. Batch operations are where a service is performed on a group of parts at the same time, like heat treatment.
       Several parts are placed in a furnace, and it runs for hours. The cost of running the furnace is the same whether it is full
       of parts or has one part.
       Clearly, we would be wise to optimize the maximum number of parts we need with the chamber size of the printer and
       the capacity of a furnace. When these are matched well, we can see a benefit close to series production called batch
       series. Batch series simply describes where two batch processes are matched so that they in effect act like series
       production. Series production is more closely related to the original Ford model of assembly line efficiency. The biggest
       difference here is that we have a printer which is good at making many different designs so keeping it running may
       mean making one part in the first week and a different part (same material) the next. This is most commonly referred to
       as "agile" manufacturing where capital equipment is capable of making many different things as they demand arises.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 8.4 · AM Economics 161

  Calculating Costs to Increase Productivity

  Let's consider the case of a fictional company that just bought and installed the fastest binder jet printer available, at
  a price of $500,000. The CEO is unhappy because their costs are higher than expected, causing the profit margins to
  be very low. After conducting an audit to map the production process, they discovered that the printer output was
  fast but did not align to the next two process steps: curing and de-powdering. Consequently, the printer was making
  12 parts in 12 hours (1 part per hour) but the remaining steps could only manage to process 12 parts in 16 hours (1.3
  parts per hour).

  The manufacturing group wanted authorization to buy an additional sintering furnace to handle the part flow. The
  cost of the sintering furnace was $1,000,000. However, doubling the sintering capacity would result in excess capacity
  in that step, which would in turn cause the furnace to operate with excess capacity. Again, the printer was purchased
  for $500,000. So, it was better financially to reduce (throttle) the printer output to 1.3 parts per hour to align to the
  other processes which were more expensive.

  We can see that the role of manufacturing then has to respond to the demands of the market. While on the one hand,
  AM is agile and a printer can make many parts, on the other, it does not mean that the downstream processes are
  equivalently agile.

  This brings us to the second point, operational cost. Regardless of what we are making, keeping the machines making
  parts is the most desirable situation. The cost of the capital equipment is high and will be amortized (spread) over a
  set period. Most AM equipment see the use of seven years for amortization but could be shorter for technologies that
  are advancing quickly. Spreading costs over seven years is desirable because it reduces the hourly burden of the
  equipment. Effectively, you divide the capital cost by the amortization period to get your annual cost. By dividing the
  annual cost by the planned operational hours gives us the $/hr. to use that machine.

The economics or operational effectiveness of AM equipment and the legacy manufacturing equipment are essentially
the same. The Accounting of the depreciation of the capital equipment sets in place the hourly cost of using the
equipment. The cost of using the equipment then drives how we can design the parts to balance cost and performance.

Beyond the hourly cost of the machines, the next factor is being able to deploy them such that our processes are aligned
as much as possible to seek efficiency. Aligning our production so that part flow from the printer to the furnace is an
example of lean manufacturing. Lean manufacturing is a methodology that focuses on minimizing waste within
manufacturing systems while simultaneously maximizing productivity. In some ways, lean and agile manufacturing have
opposing requirements, but both promote minimizing waste and focusing on productivity. The difference is perhaps that
lean would prefer to make the same widget every day whereas agile responds to the market demand. Agile is then more
difficult to predict and therefor harder to manage in manufacturing.

While we have focused on the AM machines, we have also discussed the need to align production capacity with
downstream processes. This is more prevalent in metal AM than polymer AM as metals are more exposed to supply
chains. The premise of our discussion and examples however are the same. It will be necessary to match the production
output of the printer to the stress relief furnace to the HIP vessel to other finishing processes. The ability to do this
effectively will drive a decision on what can be done in house more efficiently than outsourcing where you seek market
efficiency.

Process-by-Process Discussion: Emphasis on Metals

PBF and DED with powder have the majority of cost in printing and post-processing. Materials, while perhaps more
expensive than typical mill products are used so efficiently, most of what you print with you use and remove very little.
The AM equipment is expensive, so the depreciation drives the overall cost. Using the printer very productively is key. A
key value proposition is making very detailed, very near net shape products either from the platform up or adding on to
an existing product form or repair.

Sheet lamination has minimal printing costs partly because the print speed is higher but also because the feedstock (thin
gauge sheet) is expensive, and the process provides details at the expense of material wastage. The printing and
machining are coupled leaving post-processing to traditional metal working and final finishes.

Binder jetting has more post-processing intensive than other processes because it needs to sinter the part in order to
achieve full density. The material cost is somewhat artificially inflated because we have normalized the whole cost to
100%. Materials in BJP are typically less than laser powder bed fusion, for example.
162 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

       DED with wire is very efficient at printing. It will always require a heat treat for stress relief, perhaps multiple times, and
       machining due to its inability to make details. Wire can be an expensive product form due to the diameter that is
       typically required is around 3 mm. Wire is made from bar stock and drawn or swaged down which is a lengthy process.
       Direct Extrusion is quite fast and not very expensive, so for putting a lot of material down, it is very efficient. The
       feedstock is more like bar stock or could be waste material, so readily available and not expensive. It does require similar
       post-processing to DED + wire due to its inability to make near-net shapes.
       Cold spray is very fast and very affordable. It does not make near net shapes so additional machining will most likely be
       required but the deposition rate can be tailored to produce acceptable surfaces. In some cases, a heat treatment could
       be necessary as well. The powder cost for cold spray can vary wildly depending on the chemistry or alloy from very
       inexpensive to more expensive than laser powder bed fusion, specifically in titanium.

     Materials

       In some instances, the material will help decide the AM process needed. In other cases, where equivalent or superior
       performance is all that is required, a superior material could be used with better performance and no effect on cost. In
       some cases, like PBF, the material cost as a percentage is low. In this instance, evaluating alternative materials means
       getting higher performance at negligible cost impact. Consequently, in Sheet Lamination where the material input is
       high, further investigation would be required.

       Figure 8.10 Each of these canisters contain 10 kilograms, about 22 pounds, of powdered steel, used in the construction
       process with the EOS M 400 3-D metal printer. Each container is valued at $7,000. The 3-D printer also used soft
       aluminum or titanium powder to construct hard to find parts or design and build tools specifically for a project at PPB,
       MDMC. (credit: Marine Corps photo by Keith Hayes on DVIDS, Public Domain)
       The choice of material can inflate the importance in processes like BJP and SL because the PSD and thin gage
       requirements are more expensive in titanium than they would be for example in steel which is more easily rolled to thin
       gage. However, this choice also drives the point in PBF and DED powder which is that titanium whilst having a high
       relative $/kg than other materials is <20% of the overall cost.
       In consideration of the business case, it would be necessary to consider how the AM feedstock price compares to the
       legacy form price. This assumes material substitution is not a possibility. If the cost of AM feedstock, being a powder,
       wire or sheet is multiples higher than the legacy method, it begins to describe how productive the AM process is going
       to have to be as a first order estimation.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 8.4 · AM Economics 163

  Aluminum Versus Titanium

  The price for plate of 7000 series is ~$10/kg and aluminum machines quite easily, an order of magnitude faster than
  nickel or titanium. Aluminum powder can sell for $70/kg. In this initial look, the productivity of AM is going to have be
  quite good to provide economic value. If the raw material to final part mass ratio were 11:1 with the legacy approach,
  we would have 11x$10/kg or $110 of raw material which would need to be machined. If the AM approach had a ratio
  of 2:1, we would have 2 x $70/kg or $140 of raw material needing to be additively manufactured. With all things being
  equal, we are starting $30 in the negative before we've employed the manufacturing tool.

  The price for Ti 6Al4V plate is ~$45/kg and machines very slowly. Titanium powder can sell for $150/kg. Assuming
  similar ratios as in the aluminum example, our raw material input comparison is $495 legacy and $300 for AM.
  Immediately, we are already in a positive situation. The comparison to machining titanium versus AM can be expected
  to be similar, simply because titanium machines slowly.

Accurately predicting the waste is another consideration. If the powder is converted to part efficiently, as in cold spray,
the wasted material is quite low. In powder bed processes like PBF and BJP, powder may be re-used multiple times but
for some reactive materials and polymers, the chemistry may dictate a limited number of uses before it must be
scrapped. Wire or filament processes are typically very efficient at converting the feedstock into a usable part.

For AM processes that allow nesting of parts, there are details associated with support structures or sacrificial material
that is used to improve the survivability of the part. In some cases, like the support structures used in PBF will consume
material and then also require work to remove, there is a double effect. In other cases, where a plate is used in the part
design, careful selection and placement of the deposition will help minimize the material wastage. Needless to say, when
multiple material input forms are used, such as in DED, sacrificing the lower value material is typically preferable.

Digital

The digital component for AM encompasses a large catch-all of activity, as described in the chapter on the digital thread.
First, it includes the designing for AM activities as well as the complete workflow associated. Generative design tools,
topological optimization (T.O.), simulation tools are all separate components although some integration exists. From an
economics point of view, all of these tools must overcome the cost of the tool in order to be productive.

It is easy to find the value in designing for AM, both MfAM and DfAM components. Without this view, it is unlikely for any
value to be derived using AM where cost is the ultimate goal. Tools like generative design assist in finding the optimal
shape for the given structural or thermal load. We find economic value not only in the higher performance but in the
preservation of material as well. Topological optimization can then be used to further optimize the shape but can be
used in other ways as well, where traditional CAD tools would be very laborious. Creating repeating or scalable non-solid
sections like lattices would be very tedious and time consuming in CAD, whereas it is very efficient with T.O.

Of course, minimizing the design effort for new or re-design for existing applications, have significant economic benefits
to the business case. These efforts are required and represent costs that will have to be recovered by the AM production
to be of economic benefit.

Analysis and simulation tools are very helpful in achieving early print/build success. The time spent on the simulation
tool and operation, however, is significant. So these tools are typically applied where series production is likely,
otherwise, employing expensive tools might be more expensive than trial and error for a prototype.

Even with the optimization tools that we have, just as in conventional manufacturing, sometimes it is necessary to move
forward with an imperfect solution as the analysis can continue to optimize but with diminishing value. Realizing when
you've reached a point of diminishing value can often be difficult for technically driven organizations.

It is worth emphasizing again that designing for AM doesn't stop at the printer. Providing location and data features to
the design as it moves through post-processing is a key AM component, and further evidence that AM is a series of
processes. Consequently, there is significant economic benefit when the design is optimized for the entire value chain,
and not just the printer. The printer may not always be the most expensive piece of capital
164 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

       Figure 8.11 Considering that AM is a series of processes, manufacturers and decision makers must realize that the
       printer may not be the most expensive part of the process. Here, a line of complex machines is arranged to produce
       advanced carbon materials. The investment goes far beyond the AM machinery and software. (credit: Modification of
       "Carbon fiber technology facility" by Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
       Once the manufacturing processes are complete, capturing and interpreting the data from the build and inspection
       processes is also of importance. Through a series of dimensional and volumetric inspections, the manufacturer can
       determine if the part is capable of meeting the final requirements. This is no different than conventional manufacturing.
       Knowing when to apply non-value-added tasks like inspection is key, since they consume resources and time. Strong
       inspection practices throughout the process can ultimately reduce the cost of manufacturing a product, such as by
       immediately scrapping a part that is not going to meet the requirements before it is fully finished.
       One last component of the digital perspective is the quality assurance (QA) and intellectual property (IP) protection. With
       digital files, QA and IP. protection are two sides of the same coin. With current tools, it is possible to pre-check the setup
       of a build to ensure what is to be made can be made. Additionally, tools that observe the build/print process can
       leverage machine learning to determine if human intervention is required or if the build should be terminated.
       The build files themselves can be encrypted. There are several reasons for wanting to encrypt the build file:

         · Protect the IP of the design which has economic value,
         · Ensure that the wrong file isn't used, and
         · Ensure that the file to be built is what gets built and no damage or interference will occur.

     People

       Investments in people are usually of good value. In addition to building engagement with the team, investing in skills
       will yield a productive benefit. If anything, AM shows us that training and upskilling can be the difference between
       economic success or failure. Simply by looking at the role of design in AM, it has been shown numerous times how the
       design impacts the viability of AM.
       It should be noted that investments in people should be made across the organization, not only in engineering or
       manufacturing. AM is disruptive so when an organization uses the same alphabet, they can more accurately and quickly
       communicate. The economic benefit to upskilling the organization is getting the design community to think and uses
       DfAM skills, but also engage and drive support from program management, accounting and supply chain as all of these
       organization can drive value in AM if they truly understand what is possible and not viable.

    Outsourcing and Learning Curves

       As has been discussed so far, AM is a series of processes. To achieve the best economic outcome, determining which
       processes should be done in house or outsourced is a logical step. From an economic standpoint, we achieve optimal
       efficiency when all of the capital equipment is utilized as much as possible. From an innovation perspective, innovating
       on several fronts is inadvisable and expensive. In this section we will review typical reasons for outsourcing in AM. As a

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             8.5 · Sustainability Impacts of AM 165

part of this discussion we will also introduce the concept of a learning curve. A learning curve is used where multiple
processes are coupled together to reflect the learning over time to make the per unit cost decrease. The cost to produce
the first part is always higher than the Nth part due to learning.

Outsourcing

If there is limited in-house expertise, outsourcing is a compelling option. It could be that a company specializes in design
versus part manufacture. Even if the company is competent in part manufacture, should they be involved in every aspect
of AM production? Integrating all of the processes into a single facility can be very expensive, especially when the
minimum capacity for one process far exceeds the maximum capacity in another, as in the previous sintering furnace
example. Additionally, adding in-house capability that will go underutilized increases overall costs without adding any
offsetting revenue.

Logistically, being able to align the processing can add many queues. This could be critical when assessing the overall
manufacturing time and working inventory. A company often pays for the material when it arrives, but isn't able to
receive payment for its effort until the part is built and delivered. The time in between requires the company to keep
inventory, and reducing this time is strongly encouraged.

Ultimately, the decision to outsource or insource (keep everything in-house) involves several factors, but typically
requires a balance between efficiency and quality. Access to customers, knowledge of materials, protection of intellectual
property, or competitive experience could all be compelling reasons to insource a process. A company must know why it
is keeping a process in house, so that if the rationale is no longer true at some later point, the company can consider
outsourcing and make the correct choice.

8.5 Sustainability Impacts of AM

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Describe potential ways in which AM can improve sustainability in manufacturing.
  · Describe potential ways in which AM can improve sustainability in product usage.

There are less-tangible and perhaps less-quantifiable benefits of additive manufacturing as it relates to the supply chain,
work in progress, inventory and sustainability. We will again use our maturity model as the framework for this
discussion.

AM is generally considered to be sustainable because of the following reasons.

  · Less waste because of the nature of the additive process, unlike parts that are stamped or sculpted out of a larger
      piece of material

  · No specialized tooling or fixtures required for AM
  · Can build functionally light weight parts, while maintaining strength that reduce energy consumption while the part

      is in service
  · Reduces the need for large amounts of raw material within the supply chain and transportation
  · Largely material-efficient when compared with traditional machining and casting
  · Can produce optimized geometries with near-perfect (compared with wrought material) strength-to-weight ratios
  · Less impact of the part over its life cycle, resulting in a lower carbon footprint, less embodied energy, and better

      economic model
  · Can create on-demand spare parts, reducing or eliminating inventory
  · Can produce complex parts with reduced peak stress or high-corrosion areas that will require fewer replacements in

      the lifecycle of a system or facility

In the following sections, the Maturity Model will be used as a reference for the product and the Supply Chain, Inventory
and Sustainability benefits of AM will be described.

Level 0

Supply Chain

At level zero, organizations are flexing the first elements of the AM supply chain to understand what is possible. They
need to understand the AM supply chain and that begins to reduce risk.

Work In Process and Inventory

If they can use AM for prototypes, they are likely to have less Work in Process (WIP) and less need for inventory. AM
printers become the tools used, and they are not fixed to a special part or part number necessarily.
166 8 · The Business of Additive Manufacturing

       Reductions in both inventory and WIP are possible at Level 0.

     Sustainability

       The use of AM promotes more efficient use of materials in the first instance. First products typically use materials very
       inefficiently to show product viability first and foremost. Avoiding fixed tooling can then be another benefit when in
       product design, the final geometry is likely to change based on test feedback which means more tooling may be
       required.

    Level 1

     Supply Chain

       At level one, companies are reinforcing supply chain benefits through temporary or flexible tooling and fixtures. The
       supply chain can become less complex because the organization is agile and flexible and can print on demand.

     Work In Process and Inventory

       WIP is reduced on one hand through tooling minimization and less tooling. Shop fixtures and jigs may add some
       complexity but are generally low value and pay for themselves. In general, trackable inventory of tools should decrease.

       Reductions in both inventory and WIP are possible at Level 1.

     Sustainability

       Producing fixtures and shop aids promotes less time re-working parts and better productivity through a reduction in
       injuries from repetitive tasks. Where fixed tooling comes into the picture, companies can use processes like casting for
       shorter runs because the tooling is easier and cheaper to make, thus making use of existing assets. The case for material
       efficiency is the strongest.

    Level 2

     Supply Chain

       At level two, organizations are dynamically exercising the a new supply chain, and maintaining schedule is very
       important to maintain cost efficiency. At this stage, the organization is learning and reducing risk.

     Work In Process and Inventory

       Companies are likely to have less WIP and less inventory at level two because they are putting most of the effort in the
       printing process. AM printers can be used to make more than 1-part number.

     Sustainability

       AM will drive the more efficient use of materials. It is likely that companies are reducing the overall path of the part and
       therefore reducing carbon emissions to move the part from one location to another.

    Level 3

     Supply Chain

       At level three, the supply chain is compressing as the company reduces part count and process steps.

     Work In Process and Inventory

       The company has fewer parts and therefore less inventory. Because it has reduced process steps, the company may also
       have less tooling and WIP.

       Reductions in both inventory and WIP are expected at Level 3.

     Sustainability

       AM begins to make an major impact on sustainability at Level 3. Using more efficient use of materials is a start. Less
       energy is consumed because they are are making fewer parts. Unitizing also then enables savings in emissions moving
       and shipping them around by consolidating the supply chain. It also makes an impact on reducing the weight or
       increasing the efficiency of the overall system.

    Level 4

     Supply Chain

       At level 4, the company has largely optimized the supply chain around AM. The process is much leaner and exhibits the
       90% learning curve mentioned earlier.

     Work In Process and Inventory

       The company has consolidated parts and processes so WIP and Inventory are optimized for financial performance.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             8.5 · Sustainability Impacts of AM 167

Sustainability

The AM solution has higher performance or is enabling better performance of the system it is in. It has all of the benefits
of Level 3. It helps the system perform better, which itself could reduce energy consumption.
168 8 · Summary

Summary

Humans have carved things out of rock and wood, or formed parts from metal for centuries. Building up a part is
relatively new. While there are some foundations and borrowed technology from casting, powder metallurgy and
polymer manufacturing, how we define a layer; how we use energy and how we input feedstock mix together to create
this additive approach.
Ultimately, understanding the economics of AM unleashes its potential, but also requires asking and answering a series
of questions. What requirements need to be met or what must be true for you to succeed? Are you seeking to save
money? Reducing schedule? Improving performance? Can you monetize schedule or performance? These analyses will
assist the business case.
Developing a business case for Additive Manufacturing (AM) involves assessing technology, materials, design,
economics, quality, safety, and regulatory requirements. Key considerations include the selection of AM processes,
material cost and performance, design efficiency, and post-processing requirements. The AM cost model comprises
material, printing, and post-processing costs, emphasizing the impact of layer thickness, build speed, and machine
productivity on overall expenses. For instance, thicker layers can reduce print time but may affect resolution and
downstream costs.
Each AM process has unique cost drivers. Laser Powder Bed Fusion (PBF) incurs high costs in printing and post-
processing, while Directed Energy Deposition (DED) varies by feedstock type. Metal Binder Jetting features lower printing
costs but requires extensive post-processing. Materials like powders and wires are often more expensive than
conventional forms, but AM's efficiency in material usage can offset these costs. Understanding these cost drivers isn't a
one-time process; new equipment, material types, and methods can change the dynamics at any time.
Economic considerations also include sustainability benefits such as reduced waste, on-demand part production, and
optimized geometries.
Business cases must align processes, machines, and people to maximize productivity. AM offers flexibility, but success
depends on careful alignment of technology, materials, design, and operations to achieve cost and performance goals.
References: Ries, E. (2011).The lean startup: How today's entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically
successful businesses. New York: Crown Business.

Key Terms

8.4 AM Economics

Actual print speed, Effective print speed, final part cost, Capital Expenditure (CAPEX), Batch Series, lean manufacturing

Access for free at openstax.org
Index                               Direct Part Conversion 77                                                        Index 169
                                    Directed Energy Deposition 6
Symbols                             distributed manufacturing 132        Layer 18
                                    DLP 21                               LCD 21
.STL file 70                        DLP and LCD 23                       lean manufacturing 161
(ASTM) F42 18                       Dosing wheel systems 24              Liquid 19
3D Manufacturing Format (3MF)       durometers 48                        liquid silicone rubber 44
71                                                                       LOM 33
                                    E                                    Lot acceptance testing 117
A
                                    Effective print speed 159            M
acrylate 43                         Electrical Resistance 19
Actual print speed 159              Electron Beam 19                     Machines 4
Additive Manufacturing File (AMF)   electron beam gun 25                 Maraging 58
71                                  Electron Beam Melting wire           Material 18
AM digital value chain 87           process 29                           Material Extrusion 7, 18
AM Process Simulation 75            Energy 18                            Material feedstock 19
Annealing 50                        energy source 18                     Material jetting 27
Approved AM-Related Processes                                            Material Jetting 7, 18
and Equipment 108                   F                                    Materials 4
Atomization 52, 53                                                       Mechanical fusion from nozzle 20
Austenitic 59                       Factory Acceptance Testing (FAT)     melt flow index 43
Austenize 50                        109                                  Metallic welding wire 31
                                    Ferritic 59                          Modified for Additive
B                                   final part cost 159                  Manufacturing (MfAM) 77
                                    Fluid Flow 19                        morphological analysis 78
batch series 160                    foil feedstock 33
binder jet technology 26            Friction 20                          N
Binder Jetting 6, 18                Functionally Gradient Materials
Bingham plastic 46                  (FGM) 86                             Non-AM-Related Processes and
biomimicry 79                                                            Equipment 108
build cake 35                       G                                    nondestructive testing 99
Build Monitoring 137
build plan 73                       Generative design 71                 O
                                    glass transition temperature 44
C                                                                        Operational Qualification (OQ) 110
                                    H                                    Overall Quality Management
capital expenditure 159                                                  System 108
Cellular feature 82                 Hard knife blade 24
Certificate of Conformance 96       High Pressure Gas 19                 P
Certification 93                    Honeycomb structures 82
Cold spray 34                       hot isostatic pressing (HIP) 50      Part acceptance testing 117
Compression 19                      Hydride - Dehydride 54               Pellets of polymer 19
criticality 94                                                           People 4
cryogrinding 47                     I                                    Plasma 19
crystalline melting temperature 44                                       Plasma Rotating Electrode (PREP)
Curing 20                           In-Situ NDT 103                      52
cyanate ester thermosets 43         Infiltration 27                      poly(vinyl alcohol) 47
                                    ingot 51                             Polymer filament 19, 32
D                                   Installation Qualification (IQ) 109  Polymer pellets 32
                                    intellectual property 134            polyurethanes 43
data stream 125                     internal passageways 82              post-processing 35
De-powdering 26                     Isogrid 83                           Powder 19
debinding 27                                                             Powder Bed Fusion 7, 18
DED blown powder process 30         K                                    precipitation hardening 50
DED wire fed process 31                                                  Process Control 103
defect 99                           Kinetic energy 20                    Process Monitoring 103
Design for Additive Manufacturing                                        Profilometry 76
(DfAM) 77                           L                                    Pugh Matrix 79
Digital 4
diluents 45                         Laser 19                             Q
Direct Energy Deposition 18         Lattice structures 82
Direct ink writing 29                                                    Qualification 93
170 Index                        software interoperability 87  V
                                 Solution Anneal 50
Qualification Volume 111         sonotrode 34                  Vat Photopolymerization 7
                                 Spheriodization 52            VAT Photopolymerization 18
R                                staircasing 73                viscosities 42
                                 Stereolithography (SLA) 21    Voice of the Customer 79
Roller 24                        Stress-Relief 50              voxels 49

S                                T                             W

satellites 52                    tap density 54                weldability 50
screw head 32                    tessellation 70               Welding 20
Sheet lamination 7, 18, 33       Thermoplastics 42             Wire 19
Sheets 19                        Thermosets 42
Sintering 27                     Topology optimization 71      Y
SLA 22
SLA, DLP and LCD 23              U                             Yb-fiber laser 24
SLD 33
slurry-based AM 28               ultrasonic consolidation 33
small scale polymer material     Ultrasonic energy 20
extrusion 31
Soft gasket wiper blade 24

Access for free at openstax.org
Index 171
