Action Research
       Action Research

J. SPENCER CLARK, SUZANNE PORATH,
   JULIE THIELE, AND MORGAN JOBE
Copyright  2020 J. Spencer Clark, Suzanne Porath, Julie Thiele, and Morgan Jobe

                                       New Prairie Press,
                              Kansas State University Libraries

                                      Manhattan, Kansas

     Electronic edition available online at: http://newprairiepress.org/ebooks
                    This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
                                            CC-BY-NC
                                 Attribution NonCommercial
                                   4.0 International License
                   https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/

                                  ISBN: 978-1-944548-29-2
Action Research Copyright  by J. Spencer Clark, Suzanne Porath, Julie Thiele, and
Morgan Jobe. All Rights Reserved.
Contents

Introduction                                         1

About the Authors                                    4

1. What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?   7

2. Action Research as a Process for Professional     26

Learning and Leadership

3. Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature  41

and Developing Questions

4. Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom:   54

Practical Issues

5. Collecting Data in Your Classroom                 70

6. Analyzing Data from Your Classroom                92

7. Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results             107

8. The Action Research Process from a High School    116

ELA Teacher's Perspective

References                                           127
Action research is a common journey for graduate students in
education and other human science fields. This book attempts to
meet the needs of graduate students, in-service teachers, and any
other educators interested in action research and/or self-study.
The chapters of this book draw on our collective experiences as
educators in a variety of educational contexts, and our roles guiding
educator/researchers in various settings. All of our experiences
have enabled us to question and refine our own understanding
of action research as a process and means for pedagogical
improvement.

   The primary purpose of this book is to offer clear steps and
practical guidance to those who intend to carry out action research
for the first time. As educators begin their action research journey,
we feel it is vital to pose four questions:

               What is action research, and how is it distinct from
                  other educational research?

               When is it appropriate for an educator to conduct an
                  action research project in their context?

               How does an educator conduct an action research
                  project?

               What does an educator do with the data once the
                  action research project has been conducted?

We have attempted to address all four questions in the chapters of
this book. However, to preempt these four questions, it might be
appropriate to consider why an educator would undertake an action
research project.

   We approach the purpose of action research from a critical and
reflective practitioner standpoint. Engaging in action research
sparks evaluation and reflection to address and implement
necessary changes in practice, for both an individual educator and
collaboratively within an institution. Conducting action research
helps educators makes changes in practice with increased

                                                                                    Introduction | 1
knowledge and confidence. Conducting action research can be
especially important for educators as they face new initiatives from
state departments, district offices, or their own administrators as
they have to make decisions among considering their personal
viewpoints, doubts, and dilemmas. Action research helps educators
explore new initiatives, or even strategies, with an openness to
learning, evaluating, and reflecting. Frequent self-evaluating and
reflecting are vital acts in an applied field like education because it
helps educators achieve professional agency and accountability.

   Our book addresses the needs of two distinct groups of educator/
researchers, who are at different points in their careers:

             Current, in-service, educators who want to conduct small-
          scale research into an aspect of their current or future
          practice. Our book would provide these educators guidance
          regarding the processes involved in conducting an action
          research project. Our book will also help educators approach
          the issues in depth by demonstrating how to collect and
          analyze the data to implement new ideas or change their
          practices.

             Students - both undergraduate and graduate who want
          to conduct research as part of their program courses. Most
          graduate programs - especially masters degrees - in
          education require action research as part of their program
          of study, which often means the students are also in-service
          educators from the first category.
   We are hopeful that all educators will find the guidance provided
in our book useful in improving and fine-tuning their practice. We
believe that conducting action research is rooted in ones' sincere
interest to develop their own knowledge by asking questions,
engaging in inquiry, observing, listening, and analyzing for the
purpose of constructing new knowledge. Therefore, we want to
aid educators in the creation of new knowledge and experiences
to inform their future professional learning and agency. Working
alongside educators who engaged in action research in various
educational contexts has provided us with a great deal of

2 | Introduction
encouragement and insights. We hope you will benefit from what
we have experienced by utilizing this book.

                                                                                   Introduction | 3
About the Authors

J. Spencer Clark
   J. Spencer Clark is an Associate Professor of Curriculum Studies at

Kansas State University. He has used action research methodology
for the past 17 years, in K-12 schools and higher education. More
recently, for the past 10 years he has taught action research
methods to teachers in graduate and licensure degree programs. He
also has led secondary student action research projects in Indiana,
Utah, and Kansas. Clark also utilizes action research methodology
in his own research. Much of his research has focused on
understanding and developing teacher agency through clinical and
professional learning experiences that utilize aspects of digital
communication, inquiry, collaboration, and personalized learning.
He has published in a variety of journals and edited books on
teacher education, technology, inquiry-based learning, and
curriculum development.

   Suzanne Porath
   Suzanne Porath has been an English Language Arts, history, and
humanities classroom teacher and reading teacher for 13 years
before becoming a teacher educator. She has taught in Wisconsin
and American international schools in Brazil, Lithuania, and Aruba
when she conducted her own action research projects. Before
accepting her current position as an assistant professor at Kansas
State University in Curriculum and Instruction, she taught at
Concordia University and Edgewood College in Wisconsin. She has
taught action research methods at the graduate level and facilitated
professional development through action research in school
districts. She is the lead editor of Networks: An Online Journal for
Teacher Research https://newprairiepress.org/networks/.
   Julie Thiele
   Julie Thiele, PhD. is an Assistant Professor at Kansas State
University. She teaches math education courses, math and science

4 | About the Authors
education courses and graduate research courses. Prior to teaching
at KSU, she taught elementary and middle school, and led her
district level professional learning community, focusing on
implementing effective, research-based teaching practices.
Morgan M. Jobe

   Morgan M. Jobe is a program coordinator in the College of
Education at Kansas State University, where she also earned a
bachelor's degree in secondary education and a master's degree
in curriculum and instruction. Morgan taught high school English-
Language Arts for ten years in two different Kansas school districts
before returning to Kansas State University as a staff member. Her
research interests include diversity and equity issues in public
education, as well as action research in teacher education
programs.

                                                                           About the Authors | 5
1. What is Action Research
for Classroom Teachers?

                                   ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What is the nature of action research?
          How does action research develop in the

             classroom?
          What models of action research work best for your

             classroom?
          What are the epistemological, ontological,

             theoretical underpinnings of action research?

Educational research provides a vast landscape of knowledge on
topics related to teaching and learning, curriculum and assessment,
students' cognitive and affective needs, cultural and socio-
economic factors of schools, and many other factors considered
viable to improving schools. Educational stakeholders rely on
research to make informed decisions that ultimately affect the
quality of schooling for their students. Accordingly, the purpose of
educational research is to engage in disciplined inquiry to generate
knowledge on topics significant to the students, teachers,
administrators, schools, and other educational stakeholders. Just as
the topics of educational research vary, so do the approaches to
conducting educational research in the classroom. Your approach
to research will be shaped by your context, your professional
identity, and paradigm (set of beliefs and assumptions that guide

                                                                   What is Action Research for
                                                                       Classroom Teachers? | 7
your inquiry). These will all be key factors in how you generate
knowledge related to your work as an educator.

   Action research is an approach to educational research that is
commonly used by educational practitioners and professionals to
examine, and ultimately improve, their pedagogy and practice. In
this way, action research represents an extension of the reflection
and critical self-reflection that an educator employs on a daily basis
in their classroom. When students are actively engaged in learning,
the classroom can be dynamic and uncertain, demanding the
constant attention of the educator. Considering these demands,
educators are often only able to engage in reflection that is fleeting,
and for the purpose of accommodation, modification, or formative
assessment. Action research offers one path to more deliberate,
substantial, and critical reflection that can be documented and
analyzed to improve an educator's practice.

   Purpose of Action Research
   As one of many approaches to educational research, it is
important to distinguish the potential purposes of action research
in the classroom. This book focuses on action research as a method
to enable and support educators in pursuing effective pedagogical
practices by transforming the quality of teaching decisions and
actions, to subsequently enhance student engagement and learning.
Being mindful of this purpose, the following aspects of action
research are important to consider as you contemplate and engage
with action research methodology in your classroom:

             Action research is a process for improving
                educational practice. Its methods involve action,
                evaluation, and reflection. It is a process to gather
                evidence to implement change in practices.

             Action research is participative and

8 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
                collaborative. It is undertaken by individuals with
                a common purpose.
             Action research is situation and context-based.
             Action research develops reflection practices
                based on the interpretations made by participants.
             Knowledge is created through action and
                application.
             Action research can be based in problem-
                solving, if the solution to the problem results in
                the improvement of practice.
             Action research is iterative; plans are created,
                implemented, revised, then implemented, lending
                itself to an ongoing process of reflection and
                revision.
             In action research, findings emerge as action
                develops and takes place; however, they are not
                conclusive or absolute, but ongoing (Koshy, 2010,
                pgs. 1-2).

In thinking about the purpose of action research, it is helpful to
situate action research as a distinct paradigm of educational
research. I like to think about action research as part of the larger
concept of living knowledge. Living knowledge has been
characterized as "a quest for life, to understand life and to create...
knowledge which is valid for the people with whom I work and for
myself" (Swantz, in Reason & Bradbury, 2001, pg. 1). Why should
educators care about living knowledge as part of educational
research? As mentioned above, action research is meant "to
produce practical knowledge that is useful to people in the everyday
conduct of their lives and to see that action research is about

                               What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 9
working towards practical outcomes" (Koshy, 2010, pg. 2). However,
it is also about:

             creating new forms of understanding, since action without
          reflection and understanding is blind, just as theory without
          action is meaningless. The participatory nature of action
          research makes it only possible with, for and by persons and
          communities, ideally involving all stakeholders both in the
          questioning and sense making that informs the research, and
          in the action, which is its focus. (Reason & Bradbury, 2001,
          pg. 2)
   In an effort to further situate action research as living knowledge,
Jean McNiff reminds us that "there is no such `thing' as `action
research'" (2013, pg. 24). In other words, action research is not static
or finished, it defines itself as it proceeds. McNiff's reminder
characterizes action research as action-oriented, and a process that
individuals go through to make their learning public to explain how
it informs their practice. Action research does not derive its
meaning from an abstract idea, or a self-contained discovery -
action research's meaning stems from the way educators negotiate
the problems and successes of living and working in the classroom,
school, and community.
   While we can debate the idea of action research, there are people
who are action researchers, and they use the idea of action research
to develop principles and theories to guide their practice. Action
research, then, refers to an organization of principles that guide
action researchers as they act on shared beliefs, commitments, and
expectations in their inquiry.

   Reflection and the Process of Action Research
   When an individual engages in reflection on their actions or
experiences, it is typically for the purpose of better understanding
those experiences, or the consequences of those actions to improve
related action and experiences in the future. Reflection in this way
develops knowledge around these actions and experiences to help
us better regulate those actions in the future. The reflective process

10 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
generates new knowledge regularly for classroom teachers and
informs their classroom actions.

   Unfortunately, the knowledge generated by educators through
the reflective process is not always prioritized among the other
sources of knowledge educators are expected to utilize in the
classroom. Educators are expected to draw upon formal types of
knowledge, such as textbooks, content standards, teaching
standards, district curriculum and behavioral programs, etc., to gain
new knowledge and make decisions in the classroom. While these
forms of knowledge are important, the reflective knowledge that
educators generate through their pedagogy is the amalgamation
of these types of knowledge enacted in the classroom. Therefore,
reflective knowledge is uniquely developed based on the action and
implementation of an educator's pedagogy in the classroom. Action
research offers a way to formalize the knowledge generated by
educators so that it can be utilized and disseminated throughout
the teaching profession.

   Research is concerned with the generation of knowledge, and
typically creating knowledge related to a concept, idea,
phenomenon, or topic. Action research generates knowledge
around inquiry in practical educational contexts. Action research
allows educators to learn through their actions with the purpose
of developing personally or professionally. Due to its participatory
nature, the process of action research is also distinct in educational
research. There are many models for how the action research
process takes shape. I will share a few of those here. Each model
utilizes the following processes to some extent:

   Plan a change;
   Take action to enact the change;
   Observe the process and consequences of the change;
   Reflect on the process and consequences;
   Act, observe, & reflect again and so on.

                               What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 11
             Figure 1.1 Basic action research cycle
There are many other models that supplement the basic process
of action research with other aspects of the research process to
consider. For example, figure 1.2 illustrates a spiral model of action
research proposed by Kemmis and McTaggart (2004). The spiral
model emphasizes the cyclical process that moves beyond the initial
plan for change. The spiral model also emphasizes revisiting the
initial plan and revising based on the initial cycle of research:

          Figure 1.2 Interpretation of action research spiral, Kemmis
          and McTaggart (2004, p. 595)
12 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
   Other models of action research reorganize the process to
emphasize the distinct ways knowledge takes shape in the
reflection process. O'Leary's (2004, p. 141) model, for example,
recognizes that the research may take shape in the classroom as
knowledge emerges from the teacher's observations. O'Leary
highlights the need for action research to be focused on situational
understanding and implementation of action, initiated organically
from real-time issues:

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 13
Figure 1.3 Interpretation of O'Leary's cycles of research, O'Leary
(2000, p. 141)

   Lastly, Macintyre's (2000, p. 1) model, offers a different
characterization of the action research process. Macintyre
emphasizes a messier process of research with the initial reflections
and conclusions as the benchmarks for guiding the research
process. Macintyre emphasizes the flexibility in planning, acting,
and observing stages to allow the process to be naturalistic. Our
interpretation of Macintyre process is below:

          Figure 1.4 Interpretation of the action research cycle,
          Macintyre (2000, p. 1)
   We believe it is important to prioritize the flexibility of the
process, and encourage you to only use these models as basic
guides for your process. Your process may look similar, or you may
14 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
diverge from these models as you better understand your students,
context, and data.

   Definitions of Action Research and Examples
   At this point, it may be helpful for readers to have a working
definition of action research and some examples to illustrate the
methodology in the classroom. Bassey (1998, p. 93) offers a very
practical definition and describes "action research as an inquiry
which is carried out in order to understand, to evaluate and then
to change, in order to improve educational practice." Cohen and
Manion (1994, p. 192) situate action research differently, and
describe action research as emergent, writing:

             essentially an on-the-spot procedure designed to deal
          with a concrete problem located in an immediate situation.
          This means that ideally, the step-by-step process is
          constantly monitored over varying periods of time and by
          a variety of mechanisms (questionnaires, diaries, interviews
          and case studies, for example) so that the ensuing feedback
          may be translated into modifications, adjustment, directional
          changes, redefinitions, as necessary, so as to bring about
          lasting benefit to the ongoing process itself rather than to
          some future occasion.
   Lastly, Koshy (2010, p. 9) describes action research as:

             a constructive inquiry, during which the researcher
          constructs his or her knowledge of specific issues through
          planning, acting, evaluating, refining and learning from the
          experience. It is a continuous learning process in which the
          researcher learns and also shares the newly generated
          knowledge with those who may benefit from it.
   These definitions highlight the distinct features of action
research and emphasize the purposeful intent of action researchers
to improve, refine, reform, and problem-solve issues in their
educational context. To better understand the distinctness of action
research, these are some examples of action research topics:

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 15
     Examples of Action Research Topics

          Flexible seating in 4th grade classroom to increase
             effective collaborative learning.

          Structured homework protocols for increasing
             student achievement.

          Developing a system of formative feedback for 8th
             grade writing.

          Using music to stimulate creative writing.
          Weekly brown bag lunch sessions to improve

             responses to PD from staff.
          Using exercise balls as chairs for better classroom

             management.

Action Research in Theory
   Action research-based inquiry in educational contexts and

classrooms involves distinct participants - students, teachers, and
other educational stakeholders within the system. All of these
participants are engaged in activities to benefit the students, and
subsequently society as a whole. Action research contributes to
these activities and potentially enhances the participants' roles in
the education system. Participants' roles are enhanced based on two
underlying principles:

   communities, schools, and classrooms are sites of socially
      mediated actions, and action research provides a greater
      understanding of self and new knowledge of how to negotiate
      these socially mediated environments;

   communities, schools, and classrooms are part of social
      systems in which humans interact with many cultural tools,

16 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
      and action research provides a basis to construct and analyze
      these interactions.

In our quest for knowledge and understanding, we have consistently
analyzed human experience over time and have distinguished
between types of reality. Humans have constantly sought "facts"
and "truth" about reality that can be empirically demonstrated or
observed.

   Social systems are based on beliefs, and generally, beliefs about
what will benefit the greatest amount of people in that society.
Beliefs, and more specifically the rationale or support for beliefs, are
not always easy to demonstrate or observe as part of our reality.
Take the example of an English Language Arts teacher who
prioritizes argumentative writing in her class. She believes that
argumentative writing demonstrates the mechanics of writing best
among types of writing, while also providing students a skill they
will need as citizens and professionals. While we can observe the
students writing, and we can assess their ability to develop a written
argument, it is difficult to observe the students' understanding of
argumentative writing and its purpose in their future. This relates
to the teacher's beliefs about argumentative writing; we cannot
observe the real value of the teaching of argumentative writing. The
teacher's rationale and beliefs about teaching argumentative writing
are bound to the social system and the skills their students will need
to be active parts of that system. Therefore, our goal through action
research is to demonstrate the best ways to teach argumentative
writing to help all participants understand its value as part of a
social system.

   The knowledge that is conveyed in a classroom is bound to, and
justified by, a social system. A postmodernist approach to
understanding our world seeks knowledge within a social system,
which is directly opposed to the empirical or positivist approach
which demands evidence based on logic or science as rationale for
beliefs. Action research does not rely on a positivist viewpoint to
develop evidence and conclusions as part of the research process.

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 17
Action research offers a postmodernist stance to epistemology
(theory of knowledge) and supports developing questions and new
inquiries during the research process. In this way action research
is an emergent process that allows beliefs and decisions to be
negotiated as reality and meaning are being constructed in the
socially mediated space of the classroom.

   Theorizing Action Research for the Classroom
   All research, at its core, is for the purpose of generating new
knowledge and contributing to the knowledge base of educational
research. Action researchers in the classroom want to explore
methods of improving their pedagogy and practice. The starting
place of their inquiry stems from their pedagogy and practice, so
by nature the knowledge created from their inquiry is often
contextually specific to their classroom, school, or community.
Therefore, we should examine the theoretical underpinnings of
action research for the classroom. It is important to connect action
research conceptually to experience; for example, Levin and
Greenwood (2001, p. 105) make these connections:

   Action research is context bound and addresses real life
      problems.

   Action research is inquiry where participants and researchers
      cogenerate knowledge through collaborative communicative
      processes in which all participants' contributions are taken
      seriously.

   The meanings constructed in the inquiry process lead to social
      action or these reflections and action lead to the construction
      of new meanings.

   The credibility/validity of action research knowledge is
      measured according to whether the actions that arise from it
      solve problems (workability) and increase participants' control
      over their own situation.

Educators who engage in action research will generate new
knowledge and beliefs based on their experiences in the classroom.

18 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
Let us emphasize that these are all important to you and your
work, as both an educator and researcher. It is these experiences,
beliefs, and theories that are often discounted when more official
forms of knowledge (e.g., textbooks, curriculum standards, districts
standards) are prioritized. These beliefs and theories based on
experiences should be valued and explored further, and this is one
of the primary purposes of action research in the classroom. These
beliefs and theories should be valued because they were meaningful
aspects of knowledge constructed from teachers' experiences.
Developing meaning and knowledge in this way forms the basis
of constructivist ideology, just as teachers often try to get their
students to construct their own meanings and understandings
when experiencing new ideas.

   Classroom Teachers Constructing their Own Knowledge
   Most of you are probably at least minimally familiar with
constructivism, or the process of constructing knowledge. However,
what is constructivism precisely, for the purposes of action
research? Many scholars have theorized constructivism and have
identified two key attributes (Koshy, 2010; von Glasersfeld, 1987):

   Knowledge is not passively received, but actively developed
      through an individual's cognition;

   Human cognition is adaptive and finds purpose in organizing
      the new experiences of the world, instead of settling for
      absolute or objective truth.

Considering these two attributes, constructivism is distinct from
conventional knowledge formation because people can develop a
theory of knowledge that orders and organizes the world based on
their experiences, instead of an objective or neutral reality. When
individuals construct knowledge, there are interactions between
an individual and their environment where communication,
negotiation and meaning-making are collectively developing
knowledge. For most educators, constructivism may be a natural
inclination of their pedagogy. Action researchers have a similar

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 19
relationship to constructivism because they are actively engaged in
a process of constructing knowledge. However, their constructions
may be more formal and based on the data they collect in the
research process. Action researchers also are engaged in the
meaning making process, making interpretations from their data.
These aspects of the action research process situate them in the
constructivist ideology. Just like constructivist educators, action
researchers' constructions of knowledge will be affected by their
individual and professional ideas and values, as well as the
ecological context in which they work (Biesta & Tedder, 2006). The
relations between constructivist inquiry and action research is
important, as Lincoln (2001, p. 130) states:

             much of the epistemological, ontological, and axiological
          belief systems are the same or similar, and methodologically,
          constructivists and action researchers work in similar ways,
          relying on qualitative methods in face-to-face work, while
          buttressing information, data and background with
          quantitative method work when necessary or useful.
   While there are many links between action research and
educators in the classroom, constructivism offers the most familiar
and practical threads to bind the beliefs of educators and action
researchers.

   Epistemology, Ontology, and Action Research
   It is also important for educators to consider the philosophical
stances related to action research to better situate it with their
beliefs and reality. When researchers make decisions about the
methodology they intend to use, they will consider their ontological
and epistemological stances. It is vital that researchers clearly
distinguish their philosophical stances and understand the
implications of their stance in the research process, especially when
collecting and analyzing their data. In what follows, we will discuss
ontological and epistemological stances in relation to action
research methodology.
   Ontology, or the theory of being, is concerned with the claims or
assumptions we make about ourselves within our social reality -

20 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
what do we think exists, what does it look like, what entities are
involved and how do these entities interact with each other (Blaikie,
2007). In relation to the discussion of constructivism, generally
action researchers would consider their educational reality as
socially constructed. Social construction of reality happens when
individuals interact in a social system. Meaningful construction of
concepts and representations of reality develop through an
individual's interpretations of others' actions. These interpretations
become agreed upon by members of a social system and become
part of social fabric, reproduced as knowledge and beliefs to
develop assumptions about reality. Researchers develop meaningful
constructions based on their experiences and through
communication. Educators as action researchers will be examining
the socially constructed reality of schools. In the United States,
many of our concepts, knowledge, and beliefs about schooling have
been socially constructed over the last hundred years. For example,
a group of teachers may look at why fewer female students enroll
in upper-level science courses at their school. This question deals
directly with the social construction of gender and specifically what
careers females have been conditioned to pursue. We know this is a
social construction in some school social systems because in other
parts of the world, or even the United States, there are schools
that have more females enrolled in upper level science courses than
male students. Therefore, the educators conducting the research
have to recognize the socially constructed reality of their school
and consider this reality throughout the research process. Action
researchers will use methods of data collection that support their
ontological stance and clarify their theoretical stance throughout
the research process.

   Koshy (2010, p. 23-24) offers another example of addressing the
ontological challenges in the classroom:

             A teacher who was concerned with increasing her pupils'
          motivation and enthusiasm for learning decided to introduce
          learning diaries which the children could take home. They
          were invited to record their reactions to the day's lessons

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 21
          and what they had learnt. The teacher reported in her field
          diary that the learning diaries stimulated the children's
          interest in her lessons, increased their capacity to learn, and
          generally improved their level of participation in lessons.
          The challenge for the teacher here is in the analysis and
          interpretation of the multiplicity of factors accompanying
          the use of diaries. The diaries were taken home so the entries
          may have been influenced by discussions with parents.
          Another possibility is that children felt the need to please
          their teacher. Another possible influence was that their
          increased motivation was as a result of the difference in
          style of teaching which included more discussions in the
          classroom based on the entries in the dairies.
   Here you can see the challenge for the action researcher is
working in a social context with multiple factors, values, and
experiences that were outside of the teacher's control. The teacher
was only responsible for introducing the diaries as a new style of
learning. The students' engagement and interactions with this new
style of learning were all based upon their socially constructed
notions of learning inside and outside of the classroom. A
researcher with a positivist ontological stance would not consider
these factors, and instead might simply conclude that the dairies
increased motivation and interest in the topic, as a result of
introducing the diaries as a learning strategy.
   Epistemology, or the theory of knowledge, signifies a philosophical
view of what counts as knowledge - it justifies what is possible to
be known and what criteria distinguishes knowledge from beliefs
(Blaikie, 1993). Positivist researchers, for example, consider
knowledge to be certain and discovered through scientific
processes. Action researchers collect data that is more subjective
and examine personal experience, insights, and beliefs.
   Action researchers utilize interpretation as a means for
knowledge creation. Action researchers have many epistemologies
to choose from as means of situating the types of knowledge they
will generate by interpreting the data from their research. For

22 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
example, Koro-Ljungberg et al., (2009) identified several common
epistemologies in their article that examined epistemological
awareness in qualitative educational research, such as: objectivism,
subjectivism, constructionism, contextualism, social epistemology,
feminist epistemology, idealism, naturalized epistemology,
externalism, relativism, skepticism, and pluralism. All of these
epistemological stances have implications for the research process,
especially data collection and analysis. Please see the table on pages
689-90, linked below for a sketch of these potential implications:

          Koro-Ljungberg, M, Yendol-Hoppey, D, Smith JJ, &
       Hayes, S. (2009) (E)pistemological awareness,
       instantiation of methods, and uninformed
       methodological ambiguity in qualitative research
       projects. Educational Researcher 38: 687-699.

Again, Koshy (2010, p. 24) provides an excellent example to illustrate
the epistemological challenges within action research:

   A teacher of 11-year-old children decided to carry out an action
research project which involved a change in style in teaching
mathematics. Instead of giving children mathematical tasks
displaying the subject as abstract principles, she made links with
other subjects which she believed would encourage children to see
mathematics as a discipline that could improve their understanding
of the environment and historic events. At the conclusion of the
project, the teacher reported that applicable mathematics
generated greater enthusiasm and understanding of the subject.

   The educator/researcher engaged in action research-based
inquiry to improve an aspect of her pedagogy. She generated
knowledge that indicated she had improved her students'
understanding of mathematics by integrating it with other subjects
- specifically in the social and ecological context of her classroom,

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 23
school, and community. She valued constructivism and students
generating their own understanding of mathematics based on
related topics in other subjects. Action researchers working in a
social context do not generate certain knowledge, but knowledge
that emerges and can be observed and researched again, building
upon their knowledge each time.

   Researcher Positionality in Action Research
   In this first chapter, we have discussed a lot about the role of
experiences in sparking the research process in the classroom. Your
experiences as an educator will shape how you approach action
research in your classroom. Your experiences as a person in general
will also shape how you create knowledge from your research
process. In particular, your experiences will shape how you make
meaning from your findings. It is important to be clear about your
experiences when developing your methodology too. This is
referred to as researcher positionality. Maher and Tetreault (1993, p.
118) define positionality as:

             Gender, race, class, and other aspects of our identities
          are markers of relational positions rather than essential
          qualities. Knowledge is valid when it includes an
          acknowledgment of the knower's specific position in any
          context, because changing contextual and relational factors
          are crucial for defining identities and our knowledge in any
          given situation.
   By presenting your positionality in the research process, you are
signifying the type of socially constructed, and other types of,
knowledge you will be using to make sense of the data. As Maher
and Tetreault explain, this increases the trustworthiness of your
conclusions about the data. This would not be possible with a
positivist ontology. We will discuss positionality more in chapter 6,
but we wanted to connect it to the overall theoretical underpinnings
of action research.

   Advantages of Engaging in Action Research in the Classroom
   In the following chapters, we will discuss how action research
takes shape in your classroom, and we wanted to briefly summarize

24 | What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers?
the key advantages to action research methodology over other
types of research methodology. As Koshy (2010, p. 25) notes, action
research provides useful methodology for school and classroom
research because:

     Advantages of Action Research for the Classroom

          research can be set within a specific context or
             situation;

          researchers can be participants - they don't have to
             be distant and detached from the situation;

          it involves continuous evaluation and modifications
             can be made easily as the project progresses;

          there are opportunities for theory to emerge from
             the research rather than always follow a previously
             formulated theory;

          the study can lead to open-ended outcomes;
          through action research, a researcher can bring a

             story to life.

                              What is Action Research for Classroom Teachers? | 25
2. Action Research as a
Process for Professional
Learning and Leadership

     ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What is the role of action research in professional
             learning and leadership?

          What are the educational contexts that action
             research takes place?

          What are the critiques of action research as a
             methodology?

          What are the basic stages of an action research
             project?

In the previous chapter, we were able to explore the idea of action
research, the purpose of action research, and the theoretical
underpinnings of action research. Hopefully, you now have a good
understanding of the landscape of action research and the contours
in which it can take shape in educational contexts. It is important to
emphasize that the primary aim of conducting action research in an
educational context is to study and improve upon an educator's, or
group of educators', practice. This chapter will explore some of the
practical aspects of action research, in particular, the forethought
and planning required to engage in a successful action research
experience.

26 | Action Research as a Process for
Professional Learning and Leadership
   As we begin to transition from the theoretical to the more
practical aspects of action research, we want to provide a few
questions to consider:

             How does the epistemological, ontological, and
                theoretical basis of action research fit with your
                pedagogical philosophy in the classroom? Will
                using action research require any paradigmatic
                shifts in how you approach your pedagogy?

             What are the pedagogical benefits of using
                action research in your educational context?

             What are the most significant affordances and
                challenges of using action research in your
                educational context?

After considering the questions above, we think it is important from
a practical standpoint to consider and situate action research as
part of an educator's responsibility to professional learning and
leadership.

   Action Research as Professional Learning and Leadership
   Thus far, we have made the case that action research is a useful
methodology for educators because it formalizes a process you
already use to improve your pedagogy; but how does it benefit
you as a professional and your professional identity? In Becoming
Critical Carr and Kemmis (2003) list characteristics of action
research that make it integral to critical professional learning for
educators. We have summarized their five characteristics of action
research as a methodology for educators:

Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 27
     Five Characteristics of Action Research as a Methodology for
     Educators

          action research rejects positivist notions of
             rationality, objectivity, and truth and instead has an
             openness to competing possibilities for effective
             pedagogical practice in educational contexts;

          action research employs educators' reflective and
             interpretive categories, and uses the language of
             educators as a basis for educators to explore and
             develop their own pedagogical theorizing;

          action research allows educators' unrealized self-
             understandings to be discerned by analyzing their
             own practices and understandings;

          action research connects reflection to action,
             enabling educators to overcome barriers to
             pedagogical change through awareness of social and
             systemic factors influencing their educational
             context;

          action research involves deep consideration of
             theory and practice and to demonstrate this critically
             self-reflective action, researchers develop and
             organize knowledge in which truth is evidenced
             through its relation to practice.

To synthesize these five characteristics in terms of practical
knowledge, we think it is important to now consider a "so what?"
type of question. After learning these characteristics, why would an
educator engage in action research for the purpose of professional

28 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
learning or leadership? The following five principles correspond to
the five characteristics above:

     Why an Educator would Engage in Action Research

          the development of an educator's pedagogy is not
             about developing a set of "surefire" technical
             competencies; it is concerned with finding the most
             effective practices for the students in their
             educational context;

          one way for educators to be consistently informed
             on pedagogy and increase their skills is through
             actively being involved in a culture of inquiry that
             dually relies on the latest educational research and
             their own classroom to spark new inquiry;

          by doing action research, educators are engaged in
             the process of hypothesizing, theorizing, and
             developing self-knowledge related specifically to
             their practice;

          when educators engage in action research, they
             develop agency and gain control of knowledge, and
             address questions for themselves, instead of being
             subservient to the knowledge enacted on their
             educational context;

          when educators are engaged in research, educators
             are naturally engaged in educational theorizing
             because they are reflecting on practice systematically
             and critically, to close the distance between
             educational theory practice, which many educators
             feel (Hopkins, 2003).

Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 29
Professional learning in education takes many forms. Action
research is unique in the realm of professional learning because it
is tailored to the educator's real time pedagogical foci, issues, or
needs. Professional learning opportunities often fail to meet the
expectations of educators because they are meant for large groups
of teachers, either based on a school, topic, subject, or course. Even
at the course level of professional learning, while the content may
be the same for each teacher, the students and educational context
are different for each teacher - which creates unique challenges
that educators want to address through their professional learning.
One advantage of traditional professional learning sessions is the
group aspect, or collaborative thinking that takes place. Action
research is flexible enough that collaborative inquiry could be part
of the process, and educators could include colleagues as part of
their research. In many ways, action research not only contributes
to professional learning, but also provides professional leadership to
colleagues.

   Professional leadership in education, or teacher leadership, also
takes many forms. Danielson (2007) lists teacher leadership in her
framework for teaching, as one of several professional
responsibilities for educators. Educators who engage in action
research and share their findings, are working to impact
professional learning, and subsequently student learning, beyond
their classrooms. Engaged educators who attain and continue to
receive recognition in the teaching profession invest a lot of time
and energy to stay informed and further develop their skills.
Danielson (2007) notes that these educators are in a prime position
to exercise leadership among their colleagues. Often times
educators view conferences and professional learning sessions as
the only opportunities to further develop their skills and become
leaders among their colleagues. However, Danielson (2007) goes
on to describe a distinguished educator as someone who engages
in a combination of seeking "out opportunities for professional
development and makes a systematic effort to conduct action
research" (105). In this way, professional learning is a part of the

30 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
action research process that engages educators in reflection and
conversations outside of their educational context, while also
potentially providing an alternative lens to analyze their data.

   Data-driven decision making by administrators, teachers, and
teams of educators, often facilitated by teacher leaders, is a
prevalent practice in schools that impacts educator performance
and student learning. This sort of professional learning through
collaborative inquiry provides vital contextual data to improve
pedagogy in classrooms and throughout the school. Sagor (2010)
defines collaborative action research as "the team inquiry process,
when a group of individuals who are a part of a specific PLC, grade-
level, or teacher learning team engage in inquiry and research."
These teams can become a means for collaboratively engaging in
action research and developing data that is relative to the school.
Data is most valuable to an educational context when it is deeply
relatable and relevant to the specific educational context. Data
specifically related to the educational context can increase a
school's capacity to focus on curricular and instructional strategies
with the greatest potential to support student learning. In an effort
to spark professional leadership, and as we discuss the process of
action research in future chapters, please discuss with colleagues
the potential action research projects in your own classroom and
think about how to leverage those toward your school's PLC,
professional learning, or school-wide improvement plans. Thinking
about your action research in this way adds another layer of
purpose and makes action research a truly valuable process for
improvement throughout your educational context.

   What Will Action Look Like in My Classroom?
   Now that we have discussed the relevance of action research for
professional learning and leadership, it may be a little easier to
conceptualize an action research project, or perhaps you already
have an idea ready to start. O'Leary (2004) provides a useful list of
processes related to action research that could help you think about
your initial plans. Here are some questions to think about related to
the processes of an action research project:

 Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 31
             Does it address a practical problems(s)?
                Educators typically identify a practical problem in
                their educational context that has multiple
                possible ways to be addressed. The impetus to
                improve professional practice prioritizes change.

             Does it generate knowledge? Generating
                knowledge promotes change. By addressing this
                practical problem, you will generate knowledge.

             Does it enact changes in your pedagogy/
                classroom/school? The changes generated by the
                knowledge will be useful to enact change
                relatively close to the conclusion of the research
                project.

             Is it participatory? Action research is
                participatory, and the primary researcher is
                involved in the action, potentially along with other
                researchers and stakeholders.

             Could it be a cyclical process? Action research is
                a cyclical process that results from emerging
                knowledge. Once better situational understanding
                is gained through research, a change can be
                implemented and researched again, resulting in an
                evaluative practice that reciprocates between
                informed action and critical reflection.

I want to emphasize that this is one of interpretations of the
processes involved in the action research process, and you should
adapt these basic processes to fit your needs as an educator and
researcher. These processes will also become clearer in purpose as
we discuss the contexts for action research.

   The Contexts for Considering Action Research

32 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
   Action research can take place in many professional settings and
contexts. As we think about some of those contexts we will focus on
the most common in educational settings. I have also provided some
examples for research in each context.

             Improving Classroom Practice
             These projects are conducted by educators in their
          classroom context and focus on pedagogical, curricular, or
          instructional aspects of their practice. Examples could
          include:

               How can Socratic questioning improve engagement in
                  class discussions?

               Who participates more in my class?
               How can integrated social studies and ELA lessons

                  improve students' reading scores?
               Will learning diaries in mathematics lessons enhance

                  students' conceptual understanding?
               How can Flipgrid help connect student interests to

                  content standards?

          Examining an Educational Theme
             These projects allow educators to examine new ideas or

          themes that they have encountered in professional learning
          opportunities. Examples could include:

               How can I implement personalized learning in my
                  classroom?

               Can I integrate all subjects into a problem-based
                  inquiry project?

               In what ways do Breakout Box activities prepare
                  students for content-based learning?

               Do exercise balls help students focus longer while
                  sitting at their seats?

          Educational Context Focus

Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 33
             These projects focus on interaction between humans and
          the ecological space of the context. Examples could include:

               How can using non-letter grades improve
                  communication with parents?

               How can we increase engagement at parent meetings?
               Does going outside and doing yoga improve student

                  focus in the afternoon?
               What is the effect of eliminating homework?
               Does presenting to community members, outside the

                  school community, improve engagement or
                  motivation for group projects?
               What anti-bullying strategies reduce verbal teasing?

          Implementing a New Initiative Based on Policy or Research
             These projects are sparked by new policy or research data

          or are related to district or state-wide initiatives. These are
          often group or collaborative projects. Examples could
          include:

               What are the best methods to prepare teachers for a
                  school-wide one-to-one device launch?

               Do weekly meetings help support first-year teachers?
               Adopting the new formative assessment framework

                  for inquiry-based learning.

Critiques of Action Research
   Action research is a fairly new form of acceptable educational

research; therefore, educators should be aware of some of the
common critiques you may hear when presenting or sharing your
research. These critiques can also be easily dealt with in the
planning and development of your action research project. The
following are three of the most common critiques of action
research.

34 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
            Critique #1: Action research lacks rigor and
         trustworthiness in comparison to other methodologies...

                      The rigor of a research project is shaped by the
                   manner in which data collection and analysis are
                   conducted in the research process. For example,
                   rigor can develop in data collection by using a variety
                   of research methods to collect data (discussed
                   further in Chapter 6). Sharing data with critical
                   friends and colleagues, or triangulating the data,
                   would demonstrate rigor in the data analysis process.
                   Issues of trustworthiness are raised around the
                   question: Can you be/maintain objectivity when you
                   are conducting research on your own practice?
                   Trustworthiness can be viewed as the strength of the
                   inference made possible by the given research study.
                   Trustworthiness can be achieved primarily through
                   triangulation of data (multiple sources of data) and a
                   clear description of context, participants, processes,
                   and analysis which allows for transferability as a
                   reader. Maintaining a rigorous data collection and
                   analysis process will help with trustworthiness, but
                   also being clear in your epistemological stance and
                   positionality from the beginning of the project also
                   contributes to trustworthiness. Rigor and
                   trustworthiness can easily be addressed through
                   developing a research plan and sticking to it.
                   Adherence to ethical research (IRB) will also add to
                   trustworthiness, we will discuss this in a later
                   chapter.
            Critique #2: Action research findings are not generalizable
         to other educational contexts...

                      Generalizability is often a concern for quantitative
                   researchers who are trying to solve problems across
                   large portions of the population. Simply put, the
                   action researcher is not concerned with

Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 35
                    generalizable data that can provide answers to other
                    educators in different contexts (However, it is great
                    if this happens!). The action researcher is primarily
                    concerned with generating knowledge based on the
                    actions within their own situated context. Action
                    research findings are generalizable only within
                    specific situations and within that specific
                    educational context, which is described and
                    considered as part of the research process. Sharing
                    findings could be applicable to educators who are
                    interested or who are in similar circumstances, either
                    locally, nationally, or globally.
             Critique #3: Action research is based on a deficit model...

                       The problem-solving nature of action research may
                    give an appearance that it is based on a deficit model.
                    This is not necessarily the case; however, if
                    researchers are not conscious of deficit thinking or
                    deficit models of thinking, it is possible to engage in
                    action research based on perceived student deficits.
                    From my perspective, developing strategies for
                    solving a problem within a situation with the sole
                    purpose of improving practice is not rooted in deficit
                    thinking, especially if they really generate knowledge.
                    Regardless, researchers need to be aware of deficit
                    thinking and make sure their research questions do
                    not rely on assumptions about students' weaknesses
                    based on demographic groupings.

   What's Ahead? Thinking about the Stages of Action Research
   The models of action research presented in Chapter 1 all
described action research as a cyclical process. It is exciting to think
about a cyclical process of professional learning to improve your
practice; however, it can also be overwhelming to think about the
process. We think it is helpful to have some awareness of what
may happen during the project, represented in distinct stages, to
provide an overview of the whole process. This will help you plan

36 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
more efficiently, but we think it is also important to be flexible and
understand that your project does not always need to follow that
order. Here is what to expect:

   Identifying a topic in the educational context
   Reviewing related literature
   Revising the topic
   Developing a research question
   Plan research activities
   Collect data
   Analyze data
   Action implementation
   Reflection on action
   Report, share, or document.

Each of these steps has some brief considerations, yet I would like to
discuss these steps in three broad areas of focus due to the overlap
of these considerations.

   Topic Development
   Researching in Action
   Action Implications

Topic Development
   Identifying and developing a topic that is important and relevant

to your practice is vitally essential. Your topic not only shapes the
area of educational knowledge you will contribute to, but it will also
shape your research question. It is usually helpful to identify and
write down three to five potential topics. In addition to writing the
topic down, describe why each topic is important or relevant to
you, your practice, your students, and/or your educational context.
Then, if you are still having a hard time deciding on a topic, write
down the intended benefits for you, your practice, your students,
and/or your educational context. It may also be helpful to discuss
your ideas with others, to help focus your thoughts and provide

Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 37
another perspective on the feasibility of completing a study on a
particular topic, its relevance and implications for practice.

   Once you have identified a topic, it is important to conduct a
literature review (discussed fully in Chapter 3) to find out what the
field of education has researched in regards to your topic. This will
help you understand what we know and don't know about your
topic. Once you have conducted a thorough literature review you
will feel capable of potentially revising your topic to reflect the
knowledge base, and possibly narrow the scope of your project for
your own purposes.

   Lastly, you will be able to develop a research question (discussed
fully in Chapter 4) based on your topic, the reviewed literature, and
your intended outcomes.

   Researching Action
   After you have thoroughly vetted a topic and developed a
research question, you will be ready to begin the process of
researching your topic in your educational context. In consideration
of your research question, you can begin to plan your research
activities--when and how you will conduct the research in your
educational context (Chapter 4). This will include a timeline of
activities. You will then begin planning your data collection (Chapter
5) methods and fit those into your timeline. You will also need
to think about a proposed process, or order for analyzing your
data. This may seem strange; however, it helps contribute to the
rigor and validity of your study to have a plan that fits within your
epistemological stance.
   Once your plan is set, you can begin the data collection process.
After data collection, you can begin the analysis of the data (Chapter
6).

   Action Implications
   After you have analyzed your data, you should have some
indication as to implications for your research question. You will
have the opportunity to reflect on the research, take action, and
eventually share or report your findings. Many of you will have
reason to change an action in your educational context, whether it

38 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
is the following week, the next semester, or next school year. This is
where the cyclical process of action research can take shape.

     Action Research in Action: A Vignette

        As a classroom teacher, I was often engaged in action
     research without realizing it, and typically this process
     began from reflection. As a graduate student, weekly
     reflections on the required readings in my Teachers as
     Researchers course prompted me to identify issues in my
     classroom to address, either through pedagogical changes
     or adjustments to my curriculum. In a less formal way,
     action research naturally emerged as part of my yearly
     evaluations with administration. In one particular year,
     after reflecting on my own practice, I realized (rather,
     admitted) that my junior-level English students did not
     enjoy our classroom novel studies, resulting in a lack of
     engagement and poor performance for many of them. The
     `start and stop' method--where students read a chapter,
     then stop to either discuss the chapter or take a quiz--did
     not replicate how people read books, and it is no wonder
     that it destroyed my students' desire to engage with the
     novels they were assigned. This is where action research
     emerged--I established a driving question for my own
     classroom problem: How can I adapt whole novel studies to
     reflect the natural reading process, take into account each
     students' reading level, and improve overall reading
     performance and engagement?

        The next step in this process was to find research that
     already existed on whole novel studies in the classroom and

Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership | 39
     use that information as a catalyst for my own research. I
     read several examples of alternative methods to whole
     novel studies, but most of what I could find was based on a
     middle school classroom. This was good news! It meant, on
     a large scale, my action research would have a place in the
     broad educational context by filling an existing void in the
     information available to classroom teachers. On a small
     scale, this meant other teachers in my own department
     could benefit from what I design since a lack of resources
     exists in this area.

        After reading several examples of alternative methods, I
     adapted the practices that seemed to fit best with my own
     students and created my own version of how to work with
     whole novels in the high school English classroom. I
     implemented this method in two different courses, one of
     which was considered an `advanced' course, with students
     at all different reading levels. I tracked their progress in
     multiple ways and recorded the information on
     spreadsheets for future use. After a successful first attempt
     at changing my practice, I presented the findings to my
     colleagues at a department meeting, and many adapted my
     method to use in their own classrooms.

        Though this example of action research does not reflect a
     formalized project, it speaks to how teachers naturally
     engage in the process of questioning and problem-solving
     to create change for their students. It also demonstrates
     the value in what teachers discover in their own
     classrooms. Researchers are often criticized for being too
     far removed from classroom practice to really understand
     what teachers need; but teacher researchers have the
     opportunity to be their own guide and to potentially
     influence teacher praxis in positive and practical ways.

40 | Action Research as a Process for Professional Learning and Leadership
3. Planning Your Research:
Reviewing the Literature and
Developing Questions

     ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What is relevant literature? What are the best ways
             to find it?

          What are the best ways to organize your relevant
             literature?

          What are the intended outcomes of reviewing your
             relevant literature?

Nearly all research begins with a review of literature that is relevant
to the topic of research, even if it is only a casual review. Reviewing
the available literature on your topic is a vital step in the research
process. The literature review process provides an anchor for your
inquiry. O'Leary (2004, p. 66) states, the "production of new
knowledge is fundamentally dependent on past knowledge" because
"it is virtually impossible for researchers to add to a body of
literature if they are not conversant with it." By reviewing the
literature in the initial stages of the inquiry process, researchers are
better able to:

   Understand their topic;
   Develop and focus a topic;

                                                         Planning Your Research: Reviewing
                                                                the Literature and Developing
      Provide a clear rationale for, or better situate, their topic;
      Fine-tune their research questions.

   In terms of thinking about methodology and the actual research
   process, reviewing the literature can help researchers:

      Identify well-vetted data collection and analysis methods on
         their topic;

      Determine whether to replicate a previous study, or develop a
         completely new study;

      Add rigor and validity to the research by validating the topic,
         methods, and significance.

   Lastly, reviewing the literature also helps the researcher make sense
   of their findings, in both their field of study and in their educational
   context, by:

      Assessing whether the findings correlate with findings from
         another study;

      Determining which of the findings are different than previous
         studies;

      Determining which of the findings are unique to the
         researcher's educational context.1

   As you may see, the literature review is the backbone, anchor, or
   foundation of your research study. Overall the review of literature
   helps you answer three important questions that are the result of
   the bullet points outlined above. The literature review helps you
   answer the following:

1. We will talk about this aspect of literature reviews
  further in Chapters 6 and 7.

   42 | Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
   Questions
             What do we know about your topic?
             What do we not know about your topic?
             How does your research address the gap

                between what we know and what we don't about
                your topic?

After reviewing the literature, if you are able to answer those three
questions, you will have a very clear and well-rationalized
justification for your inquiry. If you cannot answer those questions,
then you should probably keep reviewing the literature by looking
for related topics or synonyms of major concepts.

   While an extensive review of the literature about your topic of
study is expected, you should also be realistic as to what you are
able to manage. For topics that have a lot of research literature
available, make sure you establish parameters for your research,
such as:

             Temporal (e.g., only articles in the last 5 or 10
                years)

             Content Area (e.g., only in science and math
                classrooms)

             Age or grade (e.g., only middle school
                classrooms)

             Research Subject (e.g., girls only, teachers,
                struggling readers)

These categories provide only a few examples, but parameters like

              Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
                                                                                     Questions | 43
these can make your review of literature much more manageable
and your study much more focused.

   What Types of Literature Should You Consider in Your Review?
   It is helpful to consider the characteristics, purposes, and
outcomes of different types of literature. Below are four broad
categories I identify within educational research literature. I want
to emphasize that my categories are in no way definitive, and only
represent my own understanding.

   Policy-Based Literature
             Policy-based literature includes official documents that

          outline education policy with which the practitioner needs
          to be familiar. For example, the Common Core Standards or
          Content Standards are often refenced in articles to situate
          the need for research in relation to the standards; if my topic
          was on place-based education with middle school social
          studies students, I might have to look at national social
          studies standards. There also may be initiatives launched by
          organizations or researchers that become accepted practice.
          The documents that launch these initiatives (e.g., reports,
          articles, speeches) would also be useful to review. An
          example would be the Report of the National Reading Panel:
          Teaching Children to Read report from the National Reading
          Panel. These documents may provide rationale, based on the
          theories and concepts they utilize, and they may provide
          new ways of thinking about your topic. Similarly, if your
          topic is based on the local context, recent newspaper articles
          could also provide policy-type insights. All of these policy-
          based insights will be useful in providing the landscape or
          background for your work.

   Theoretical Literature
             Once you have identified your theoretical perspective, it

          is also important to locate your research within the
          appropriate theoretical literature. Many of you may be
          engaged in highly practice-based or small-scale research
          and wonder if you need a theoretical basis in your literature

44 | Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
Questions
       review. Regardless of the extent of your project, theoretical
       literature will help with the rigor and validity of your study
       and will help identify any theoretical views that underlie your
       topic. For example, if your study focuses on the place-based
       education in enhancing social studies students' learning, it
       is highly probable that you would cite Kolb's (1984/2014)
       work on Experiential Learning. By using Kolb's work, you
       situate your research theoretically in the area of experiential
       learning.

Applicable Literature
          Applicable literature will account for the bulk of your

       literature review. The previous two types of literature
       provide indication as to where your research is rationalized
       professionally and situated theoretically. Applicable
       literature will mainly come from journals related to your
       specific field of study. If I was doing a study in a social studies
       classroom, I would look at the journals The Social Studies,
       Social Education, and Social Studies Research and Practice.
       Use Google Scholar or your university library databases to
       examine literature in your specific area. When using these
       search engines and databases, start as specific as possible
       with your topic and related concepts. Using the example of
       place-based learning from above, I would search for "place-
       based learning" and "social studies" and "middle school" and
       "historic sites". If I did not find many articles with this first
       search, then I would remove "historic sites" and search again.
       Books or handbooks on research may also have some useful
       studies to support your literature review section.

Methodological Literature
          When sharing or reporting your work, you will want to

       review and cite research methodology literature to justify
       the methods you chose. When reading other research
       articles, pay attention to the research methods used by
       researchers. It is especially important to find articles that
       use and cite action research methodology. This type of

           Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
                                                                                  Questions | 45
          literature will provide further support of your data gathering
          and analysis methods. Again, your methods should fit within
          your theoretical and epistemological stances. In addition,
          you'll want to review data collection methods and potentially
          borrow or adapt rubrics or surveys from other studies.
   Sources of Relevant Literature
   When searching for these four types of literature, there are two
ways to think about possible sources:

             primary sources include government
                publications, policy documents, research papers,
                dissertations, conference presentations and
                institutional occasional papers with accounts of
                research;

             secondary sources use primary sources as
                references, such as papers written for
                professional conferences and journals, books
                written for practicing professionals and book
                reviews. This is often called "reference mining" as
                you look through the reference lists of other
                studies and then return to the primary source that
                was cited.

Secondary sources are often just as valuable as primary sources, or
potentially more valuable. When beginning your search, secondary
sources can provide links to a wealth of primary sources that the
secondary source author has already vetted for you, and likely with
similar intentions. This is especially true of research handbooks. You
will come across both types of literature wherever you search, and
they both provide a landscape for your topic and add value to your
literature review.

46 | Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
Questions
   Regardless of being a primary or secondary source, you want
to make sure the literature you review is peer-reviewed. Peer-
reviewed simply means that the article was reviewed by two to three
scholars in the field before it was published. Books, or edited books,
would have also gone through a peer-review process. We often
recommend teachers to look at professional books from reputable
publishing companies and professional organizations, such as ASCD,
NCTE, NCTM, or NCSS. This is a way for scholars to objectively
review each other's work to maintain a high level of quality and
ethics in the publication of research. Most databases have mostly
peer-reviewed journals, and often provide a filter to sort out the
non-peer-reviewed journals.

   Using the Internet
   The internet is a valuable research tool and is becoming
increasingly efficient and reliable in providing peer-reviewed
literature. Sites like Google Scholar are especially useful. Often, and
depending on the topic, the downside of internet-based searches is
that it will generate thousands or millions of sources. This can be
overwhelming, especially for new researchers, and you will have to
develop ways to narrow down the results.
   Professional organization websites will also have resources or
links to sources that have typically been vetted. With all internet
sources, you should evaluate the information for credibility and
authority.

             Evaluating sources from the Internet
             Evaluating internet sources is a whole field of study and
          research within itself, and an in-depth discussion would take
          away from the focus of this book. However, O' Dochartaigh
          (2007) provides a chapter to help guide the internet source
          evaluation process. Here is a brief summary, based on O'
          Dochartaigh's book, to give you a general idea of the task of
          evaluating sources:

               Examine if the material belongs to an advocacy group.
                  Many times, these sources are fine, however, they

              Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
                                                                                     Questions | 47
                  require extra examination for bias or funding
                  interests.
               As mentioned above, many academic papers are
                  published in refereed journals which are subject to
                  peer-review. Papers found on academic or university
                  websites are typically refereed in some manner;
                  however, some papers are posted by academics on
                  their personal sites and have not been reviewed by
                  other academics. Papers published solely by
                  academics or other experts require further scrutiny
                  before citing.
               When you are reviewing newspaper and magazine
                  articles from the internet be weary of potential
                  conflicts of interest based on the political stance of
                  that periodical.

Therefore, it is wise to consider the objectivity of any source you
find on the internet before you accept the literature.

   We always recommend that students consider a few questions
in their evaluation of sources, which are similar to the formal
questions outlined by O' Dochartaigh (2007):

               Is it clear who is responsible for the document?
               Is there any information about the person or

                  organization responsible for the page?
               Is there a copyright statement?
               Does it have other publications that reinforce its

                  authority?
               Are the sources clearly listed so they can be verified?
               Is there an editorial involvement?
               Are the spelling and grammar correct?
               Are biases and affiliations clearly stated?
               Are there dates for when the document was last

                  updated or revised?

48 | Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
Questions
Organizing your Literature
   When you begin, here are some things to think about as your read

the literature. Again, these are not definitive, but merely provided
for guidance. These questions are especially focused on other action
research literature:

     Questions to Think about as You Examine the Literature

          What was the context of their research?
          Who was involved? Was it a collaborative project?
          Was the choice of using action research as a

             method justified? Are any models discussed?
          What `actions' actually took place?
          How was data gathered?
          How was data analyzed?
          Were ethical considerations addressed? How?
          What were the conclusions? Were they justified

             using appropriate evidence?
          Was the report accessible? Useful?
          Is it possible to replicate the study?

Regardless of the amount of literature you review, your challenge
will be to organize the literature in way that is manageable and easy
to reference. It is important to keep a record of what you read and
how it relates conceptually to your topic. Some researchers even
use the questions above to organize their literature. It is easy to
read and think about the content of an article by making brief notes,
however, this is often not enough to initially begin to develop your
study or write about your findings. I will state the obvious here:
organizing your literature search efficiently from the start is vital!

              Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
                                                                                     Questions | 49
   No matter how you choose to record or document the articles you
read (e.g., paper, computer, photo), I would suggest thinking about
the format in terms of index cards. Index cards are a very practical
and simple model because the space limits you to be precise in
recording vital information about each article. I typically create a
document on my computer, allow each article the space of an index
card, and focus on recording the following information:

   Author
   Title
   Date
   Journal/Book Chapter Title
   Main Arguments/Key findings
   Pertinent Quote(s)
   Implications
   Connective Points (how does it relate to my work and/or

      other articles)

I find that these aspects provide the information I need to be
refreshed on the article and to be able to use it upon review.

   There are also a lot of computer applications that are very useful
and efficient in managing your literature. For example, Mendeley
provides comprehensive support for reviewing literature, even
allowing you to store the article itself and make comments or
highlights in text. There are also many citation apps that are helpful
if you continue this research agenda and use roughly the same
literature for each project.

   Using the Literature
   Think ahead to when you have collected and read a good amount
of literature on your topic. You are now ready to use the literature
to think about your topic, your research question, and the methods
you plan to use. It might be helpful to peek ahead to Chapter 7
where I discuss writing the literature review for a report to give
you an idea of the end goal. The primary purpose of engaging in a
literature review is to provide knowledge to construct a framework

50 | Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
Questions
for understanding the landscape of your topic. I often suggest for
students to think of it as constructing an argument for your
research decisions, or as if you are telling a story of how we got
to this point in researching your topic. Either way you are situating
your research in what we know and don't know about your topic.

   Naturally we tend to think about, and potentially write about, the
literature in relation to the article's author (e.g. Clark and Porath
(2016) found that...). However, more commonly today in educational
research you will find that literature reviews are organized by
themes. It can be a little more organic to think about literature in
terms of themes because they emerge or become more defined as
you read. Also thinking thematically allows the articles to naturally
connect and build on each other, whereas thinking in terms of
authors can fragment thinking about the topic. In terms of thinking
thematically, here are some guidelines:

             Identify the significant themes that have
                emerged organically from the literature review.
                These themes would be concepts or ideas that you
                typed or wrote down in your note-taking or
                management system.

             Introduce the common concepts or ideas by
                themes, instead of by authors' disjointed
                viewpoints. Paragraphs in a thematic literature
                review begin like: The research on teacher self-
                efficacy has identified several key factors that
                contribute to strong self-efficacy....

             Lastly, once you have introduced each theme
                and explained it, then present evidence from your
                readings to demonstrate the parameters of the
                knowledge on the theme, including areas of

              Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
                                                                                      Questions | 51
                agreement and disagreement among researchers.
                Using the evidence, explain what the evidence for
                the theme means to your topic and any of your
                own relational or critical commentary.

Another way to think about structuring a literature review is a
funnel model. A funnel model goes from broad topic, to sub-topics,
to link to the study being undertaken. You can think of a literature
review as a broad argument using mini-arguments. To use the
funnel model, list your topic and the related subtopics, then design
questions to answer with the literature. For example if our topic
was discussion-based online learning, we might ask the following
questions before reading the literature:

   Why is discussion important in learning?
   How does discussion support the development of social,

      cognitive, and teacher presence in an online course?
   What does research say about the use of traditional

      discussion boards?
   What does the research say about asynchronous, video-based

      discussion?
   How have other researchers compared written and video

      responses?
   How does this literature review link to my study?

O'Leary (2004) provides an interesting representation and model of
the purpose for the literature review in the research process, in
Figure 3.1. We will leave this for you to think about before moving on
to Chapter 4.

52 | Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
Questions
Figure 3.1 Reviewing the Literature
O'Leary (2004).

              Planning Your Research: Reviewing the Literature and Developing
                                                                                     Questions | 53
4. Preparing for Action
Research in the Classroom:
Practical Issues

     ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What sort of considerations are necessary to take
             action in your educational context?

          How do you facilitate an action plan without
             disrupting your teaching?

          How do you respond when the unplanned happens
             during data collection?

An action research project is a practical endeavor that will
ultimately be shaped by your educational context and practice. Now
that you have developed a literature review, you are ready to revise
your initial plans and begin to plan your project. This chapter will
provide some advice about your considerations when undertaking
an action research project in your classroom.

   Maintain Focus
   Hopefully, you found a lot a research on your topic. If so, you will
now have a better understanding of how it fits into your area and
field of educational research. Even though the topic and area you
are researching may not be small, your study itself should clearly
focus on one aspect of the topic in your classroom. It is important
to maintain clarity about what you are investigating because a lot

54 | Preparing for Action Research in
the Classroom: Practical Issues
will be going on simultaneously during the research process and you
do not want to spend precious time on erroneous aspects that are
irrelevant to your research.

   Even though you may view your practice as research, and vice
versa, you might want to consider your research project as a
projection or megaphone for your work that will bring attention
to the small decisions that make a difference in your educational
context. From experience, our concern is that you will find that
researching one aspect of your practice will reveal other
interconnected aspects that you may find interesting, and you will
disorient yourself researching in a confluence of interests,
commitments, and purposes. We simply want to emphasize - don't
try to research everything at once. Stay focused on your topic, and
focus on exploring it in depth, instead of its many related aspects.
Once you feel you have made progress in one aspect, you can then
progress to other related areas, as new research projects that
continue the research cycle.

   Identify a Clear Research Question
   Your literature review should have exposed you to an array of
research questions related to your topic. More importantly, your
review should have helped identify which research questions we have
addressed as a field, and which ones still need to be addressed. More
than likely your research questions will resemble ones from your
literature review, while also being distinguishable based upon your
own educational context and the unexplored areas of research on
your topic.
   Regardless of how your research question took shape, it is
important to be clear about what you are researching in your
educational context. Action research questions typically begin in
ways related to "How does ... ?" or "How do I/we ... ?", for example:

     Research Question Examples

         Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 55
          How does a semi-structured morning meeting
             improve my classroom community?

          How does historical fiction help students think
             about people's agency in the past?

          How do I improve student punctuation use through
             acting out sentences?

          How do we increase student responsibility for their
             own learning as a team of teachers?

I particularly favor questions with I or we, because they emphasize
that you, the actor and researcher, will be clearly taking action to
improve your practice. While this may seem rather easy, you need
to be aware of asking the right kind of question. One issue is asking
a too pointed and closed question that limits the possibility for
analysis. These questions tend to rely on quantitative answers, or
yes/no answers. For example, "How many students got a 90% or
higher on the exam, after reviewing the material three times?

   Another issue is asking a question that is too broad, or that
considers too many variables. For example, "How does room
temperature affect students' time-on-task?" These are obviously
researchable questions, but the aim is a cause-and-effect
relationship between variables that has little or no value to your
daily practice.

   I also want to point out that your research question will
potentially change as the research develops. If you consider the
question:

               How do I improve student punctuation use through
                  acting out sentences?

          As you do an activity, you may find that students are more
          comfortable and engaged by acting sentences out in small

56 | Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues
          groups, instead of the whole class. Therefore, your question
          may shift to:

               How do I improve student punctuation use through
                  acting out sentences, in small groups?

By simply engaging in the research process and asking questions,
you will open your thinking to new possibilities and you will develop
new understandings about yourself and the problematic aspects of
your educational context.

   Understand Your Capabilities and Know that Change Happens
Slowly

   Similar to your research question, it is important to have a clear
and realistic understanding of what is possible to research in your
specific educational context. For example, would you be able to
address unsatisfactory structures (policies and systems) within your
educational context? Probably not immediately, but over time you
potentially could. It is much more feasible to think of change
happening in smaller increments, from within your own classroom
or context, with you as one change agent. For example, you might
find it particularly problematic that your school or district places
a heavy emphasis on traditional grades, believing that these grades
are often not reflective of the skills students have or have not
mastered. Instead of attempting to research grading practices
across your school or district, your research might instead focus on
determining how to provide more meaningful feedback to students
and parents about progress in your course. While this project
identifies and addresses a structural issue that is part of your school
and district context, to keep things manageable, your research
project would focus the outcomes on your classroom. The more
research you do related to the structure of your educational context
the more likely modifications will emerge. The more you understand
these modifications in relation to the structural issues you identify
within your own context, the more you can influence others by
sharing your work and enabling others to understand the

         Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 57
modification and address structural issues within their contexts.
Throughout your project, you might determine that modifying your
grades to be standards-based is more effective than traditional
grades, and in turn, that sharing your research outcomes with
colleagues at an in-service presentation prompts many to adopt a
similar model in their own classrooms. It can be defeating to expect
the world to change immediately, but you can provide the spark
that ignites coordinated changes. In this way, action research is a
powerful methodology for enacting social change. Action research
enables individuals to change their own lives, while linking
communities of like-minded practitioners who work towards action.

   Plan Thoughtfully
   Planning thoughtfully involves having a path in mind, but not
necessarily having specific objectives. Due to your experience with
students and your educational context, the research process will
often develop in ways as you expected, but at times it may develop
a little differently, which may require you to shift the research focus
and change your research question. I will suggest a couple methods
to help facilitate this potential shift. First, you may want to develop
criteria for gauging the effectiveness of your research process. You
may need to refine and modify your criteria and your thinking as
you go. For example, we often ask ourselves if action research is
encouraging depth of analysis beyond my typical daily pedagogical
reflection. You can think about this as you are developing data
collection methods and even when you are collecting data. The key
distinction is whether the data you will be collecting allows for
nuance among the participants or variables. This does not mean
that you will have nuance, but it should allow for the possibility.
Second, criteria are shaped by our values and develop into
standards of judgement. If we identify criteria such as teacher
empowerment, then we will use that standard to think about the
action contained in our research process. Our values inform our
work; therefore, our work should be judged in relation to the
relevance of our values in our pedagogy and practice.

   Does Your Timeline Work?

58 | Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues
   While action research is situated in the temporal span that is
your life, your research project is short-term, bounded, and related
to the socially mediated practices within your educational context.
The timeline is important for bounding, or setting limits to your
research project, while also making sure you provide the right
amount of time for the data to emerge from the process.

   For example, if you are thinking about examining the use of math
diaries in your classroom, you probably do not want to look at a
whole semester of entries because that would be a lot of data, with
entries related to a wide range of topics. This would create a huge
data analysis endeavor. Therefore, you may want to look at entries
from one chapter or unit of study. Also, in terms of timelines, you
want to make sure participants have enough time to develop the
data you collect. Using the same math example, you would probably
want students to have plenty of time to write in the journals, and
also space out the entries over the span of the chapter or unit.

   In relation to the examples, we think it is an important mind
shift to not think of research timelines in terms of deadlines. It is
vitally important to provide time and space for the data to emerge
from the participants. Therefore, it would be potentially
counterproductive to rush a 50-minute data collection into 20
minutes - like all good educators, be flexible in the research
process.

   Involve Others
   It is important to not isolate yourself when doing research. Many
educators are already isolated when it comes to practice in their
classroom. The research process should be an opportunity to
engage with colleagues and open up your classroom to discuss
issues that are potentially impacting your entire educational
context. Think about the following relationships:

   Research participants
             You may invite a variety of individuals in your educational

          context, many with whom you are in a shared situation (e.g.
          colleagues, administrators). These participants may be part
          of a collaborative study, they may simply help you develop

         Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 59
          data collection instruments or intervention items, or they
          may help to analyze and make sense of the data. While the
          primary research focus will be you and your learning, you
          will also appreciate how your learning is potentially
          influencing the quality of others' learning.

   Observers
             We always tell educators to be public about your research,

          or anything exciting that is happening in your educational
          context, for that matter. In terms of research, you do not
          want it to seem mysterious to any stakeholder in the
          educational context. Invite others to visit your setting and
          observe your research process, and then ask for their formal
          feedback. Inviting others to your classroom will engage and
          connect you with other stakeholders, while also showing
          that your research was established in an ethic of respect for
          multiple perspectives.

   Critical friends or validators
             Using critical friends is one way to involve colleagues and

          also validate your findings and conclusions. While your
          positionality will shape the research process and
          subsequently your interpretations of the data, it is important
          to make sure that others see similar logic in your process
          and conclusions. Critical friends or validators provide some
          level of certification that the frameworks you use to develop
          your research project and make sense of your data are
          appropriate for your educational context. Your critical
          friends and validators' suggestions will be useful if you
          develop a report or share your findings, but most
          importantly will provide you confidence moving forward.

   Potential researchers
             As an educational researcher, you are involved in ongoing

          improvement plans and district or systemic change. The
          flexibility of action research allows it to be used in a variety
          of ways, and your initial research can spark others in your
          context to engage in research either individually for their

60 | Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues
          own purposes, or collaboratively as a grade level, team, or
          school. Collaborative inquiry with other educators is an
          emerging form of professional learning and development for
          schools with school improvement plans. While they call it
          collaborative inquiry, these schools are often using an action
          research model. It is good to think of all of your colleagues as
          potential research collaborators in the future.

   Prioritize Ethical Practice
   Try to always be cognizant of your own positionality during the
action research process, its relation to your educational context,
and any associated power relation to your positionality.
Furthermore, you want to make sure that you are not coercing or
engaging participants into harmful practices. While this may seem
obvious, you may not even realize you are harming your participants
because you believe the action is necessary for the research
process.
   For example, commonly teachers want to try out an intervention
that will potentially positively impact their students. When the
teacher sets up the action research study, they may have a control
group and an experimental group. There is potential to impair the
learning of one of these groups if the intervention is either highly
impactful or exceedingly worse than the typical instruction.
Therefore, teachers can sometimes overlook the potential harm
to students in pursuing an experimental method of exploring an
intervention.
   If you are working with a university researcher, ethical concerns
will be covered by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). If not, your
school or district may have a process or form that you would need
to complete, so it would beneficial to check your district policies
before starting. Other widely accepted aspects of doing ethically
informed research, include:

          Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 61
          Confirm Awareness of Study and Negotiate Access -
       with authorities, participants and parents, guardians,
       caregivers and supervisors (with IRB this is done with
       Informed Consent).

             Promise to Uphold Confidentiality - Uphold
                confidentiality, to your fullest ability, to protect
                information, identity and data. You can identify
                people if they indicate they want to be recognized
                for their contributions.

             Ensure participants' rights to withdraw from the
                study at any point.

             Make sure data is secured, either on password
                protected computer or lock drawer.

Prepare to Problematize your Thinking
   Educational researchers who are more philosophically-natured

emphasize that research is not about finding solutions, but instead
is about creating and asking new and more precise questions. This
is represented in the action research process shown in the diagrams
in Chapter 1, as Collingwood (1939) notes the aim in human
interaction is always to keep the conversation open, while Edward
Said (1997) emphasized that there is no end because whatever we
consider an end is actually the beginning of something entirely
new. These reflections have perspective in evaluating the quality in
research and signifying what is "good" in "good pedagogy" and "good
research". If we consider that action research is about studying
and reflecting on one's learning and how that learning influences
practice to improve it, there is nothing to stop your line of inquiry as
long as you relate it to improving practice. This is why it is necessary
to problematize and scrutinize our practices.

62 | Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues
   Ethical Dilemmas for Educator-Researchers
   Classroom teachers are increasingly expected to demonstrate a
disposition of reflection and inquiry into their own practice. Many
advocate for schools to become research centers, and to produce
their own research studies, which is an important advancement in
acknowledging and addressing the complexity in today's schools.
When schools conduct their own research studies without outside
involvement, they bypass outside controls over their studies.
Schools shift power away from the oversight of outside experts
and ethical research responsibilities are shifted to those conducting
the formal research within their educational context. Ethics firmly
grounded and established in school policies and procedures for
teaching, becomes multifaceted when teaching practice and
research occur simultaneously. When educators conduct research
in their classrooms, are they doing so as teachers or as researchers,
and if they are researchers, at what point does the teaching role
change to research? Although the notion of objectivity is a key
element in traditional research paradigms, educator-based research
acknowledges a subjective perspective as the educator-researcher
is not viewed separately from the research. In action research,
unlike traditional research, the educator as researcher gains access
to the research site by the nature of the work they are paid and
expected to perform. The educator is never detached from the
research and remains at the research site both before and after
the study. Because studying one's practice comprises working with
other people, ethical deliberations are inevitable. Educator-
researchers confront role conflict and ambiguity regarding ethical
issues such as informed consent from participants, protecting
subjects (students) from harm, and ensuring confidentiality. They
must demonstrate a commitment toward fully understanding
ethical dilemmas that present themselves within the unique set of
circumstances of the educational context. Questions about research
ethics can feel exceedingly complex and in specific situations,
educator- researchers require guidance from others.
   Think about it this way. As a part-time historian and former

         Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 63
history teacher I often problematized who we regard as good and
bad people in history. I (Clark) grew up minutes from Jesse James'
childhood farm. Jesse James is a well-documented thief, and
possibly by today's standards, a terrorist. He is famous for daylight
bank robberies, as well as the sheer number of successful robberies.
When Jesse James was assassinated, by a trusted associate none-
the-less, his body travelled the country for people to see, while his
assailant and assailant's brother reenacted the assassination over
1,200 times in theaters across the country. Still today in my
hometown, they reenact Jesse James' daylight bank robbery each
year at the Fall Festival, immortalizing this thief and terrorist from
our past. This demonstrates how some people saw him as somewhat
of hero, or champion of some sort of resistance, both historically
and in the present. I find this curious and ripe for further inquiry,
but primarily it is problematic for how we think about people as
good or bad in the past. Whatever we may individually or
collectively think about Jesse James as a "good" or "bad" person in
history, it is vitally important to problematize our thinking about
him. Talking about Jesse James may seem strange, but it is relevant
to the field of action research. If we tell people that we are engaging
in important and "good" actions, we should be prepared to justify
why it is "good" and provide a theoretical, epistemological, or
ontological rationale if possible. Experience is never enough, you
need to justify why you act in certain ways and not others, and this
includes thinking critically about your own thinking.

   Educators who view inquiry and research as a facet of their
professional identity must think critically about how to design and
conduct research in educational settings to address respect, justice,
and beneficence to minimize harm to participants. This chapter
emphasized the due diligence involved in ethically planning the
collection of data, and in considering the challenges faced by
educator-researchers in educational contexts.

   Planning Action
   After the thinking about the considerations above, you are now
at the stage of having selected a topic and reflected on different

64 | Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues
aspects of that topic. You have undertaken a literature review and
have done some reading which has enriched your understanding of
your topic. As a result of your reading and further thinking, you may
have changed or fine-tuned the topic you are exploring. Now it is
time for action. In the last section of this chapter, we will address
some practical issues of carrying out action research, drawing on
both personal experiences of supervising educator-researchers in
different settings and from reading and hearing about action
research projects carried out by other researchers.

   Engaging in an action research can be a rewarding experience,
but a beneficial action research project does not happen by accident
- it requires careful planning, a flexible approach, and continuous
educator-researcher reflection. Although action research does not
have to go through a pre-determined set of steps, it is useful here
for you to be aware of the progression which we presented in
Chapter 2. The sequence of activities we suggested then could be
looked on as a checklist for you to consider before planning the
practical aspects of your project.

   We also want to provide some questions for you to think about as
you are about to begin.

             Have you identified a topic for study?
             What is the specific context for the study? (It

                may be a personal project for you or for a group of
                researchers of which you are a member.)
             Have you read a sufficient amount of the
                relevant literature?
             Have you developed your research question(s)?
             Have you assessed the resource needed to
                complete the research?

         Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 65
As you start your project, it is worth writing down:

   a working title for your project, which you may need to refine
      later;

   the background of the study, both in terms of your professional
      context and personal motivation;

   the aims of the project;
   the specific outcomes you are hoping for.

Although most of the models of action research presented in
Chapter 1 suggest action taking place in some pre-defined order,
they also allow us the possibility of refining our ideas and action
in the light of our experiences and reflections. Changes may need
to be made in response to your evaluation and your reflections
on how the project is progressing. For example, you might have
to make adjustments, taking into account the students' responses,
your observations and any observations of your colleagues. All this
is very useful and, in fact, it is one of the features that makes action
research suitable for educational research.

   Action research planning sheet
   In the past, we have provided action researchers with the
following planning list that incorporates all of these considerations.
Again, like we have said many times, this is in no way definitive,
or lock-in-step procedure you need to follow, but instead guidance
based on our perspective to help you engage in the action research
process. The left column is the simplified version, and the right
column offers more specific advice if need.
   Figure 4.1 Planning Sheet for Action Research

66 | Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues
My topic of research is about ...    At this stage, you may only have a general idea about the area of study. Writing it down will
                                     help.
Why do you wish to research this     There could be different reasons for this. Perhaps you read or heard something about the topic?
topic                                Professional reasons may be important here, such as a new responsibility within your
                                     institution or attending a professional development course, or it may be that your institution
Are your plans realistic, doable,    has applied for funding to undertake an action research project. It could also be that you
and/or supported?                    realized you need to improve/change something in your practice.
Write down a working title. What     What possible challenges might you face? A lack of time? Colleagues may not hold the same
is your research question or         views as you and could perhaps block the progress of your project. Make a list.
aspect you are intending to          This may take several attempts. From all your ideas, select the most elegant and focused title
study? What do you know and not      which conveys your intentions clearly. Your initial knowledge about the topic can be recorded
know about your topic of study?      here. What readings and literature are available that you know of? A conceptual map may be
Who will be involved in the          helpful.
research? What is the timeline?
What ethical procedures do you       List everyone who will be involved: colleagues, children, parents, external evaluators. Construct
need?                                a realistic timeline. State briefly what arrangements will need to be made for ethical clearance.
Where will I search for literature?
What data do you need to collect?    Think about which databases will be most useful for your search. Think about the field of study
Why do you need each of them?        your research falls into and look for publications related to those fields. Are there any primary
                                     sources that will be useful for your research, or will it all be secondary sources?
                                     Make a list of the kind of data you need and next to it justify why you need to collect them and
                                     what methods you intend to use.
What are the possible outcomes   List the possible benefits and outcomes for you, personally and professionally, for the people you
of my research?                  teach or work with, and for your institution. You may also think about what knowledge may be
What is your research question?  generated that could be shared with others.
                                 You may have changed it after completing the previous sections of this grid and if not, you still
                                 need to write down what the research question is. Good luck with your project!
Preparing for Action Research in the Classroom: Practical Issues | 69
5. Collecting Data in Your
Classroom

     ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What sort of methodological considerations are
             necessary to collect data in your educational context?

          What methods of data collection will be most
             effective for your study?

          What are the affordances and limitations
             associated with your data collection methods?

          What does it mean to triangulate data, and why is it
             necessary?

As you develop an action plan for your action research project, you
will be thinking about the primary task of conducting research, and
probably contemplating the data you will collect. It is likely you have
asked yourself questions related to the methods you will be using,
how you will organize the data collection, and how each piece of
data is related within the larger project. This chapter will help you
think through these questions.

   Data Collection
   The data collection methods used in educational research have
originated from a variety of disciplines (anthropology, history,
psychology, sociology), which has resulted in a variety of research
frameworks to draw upon. As discussed in the previous chapter, the
challenge for educator-researchers is to develop a research plan

70 | Collecting Data in Your
Classroom
and related activities that are focused and manageable to study.
While human beings like structure and definitions, especially when
we encounter new experiences, educators-as-researchers
frequently disregard the accepted frameworks related to research
and rely on their own subjective knowledge from their own
pedagogical experiences when taking on the role of educator-
researcher in educational settings. Relying on subjective knowledge
enables teachers to engage more effectively as researchers in their
educational context. Educator-researchers especially rely on this
subjective knowledge in educational contexts to modify their data
collection methodologies. Subjective knowledge negotiates the
traditional research frameworks with the data collection
possibilities of their practice, while also considering their unique
educational context. This empowers educators as researchers,
utilizing action research, to be powerful agents for change in
educational contexts.

   Thinking about Types of Data
   Whether the research design is qualitative, quantitative or mixed-
methods, it will determine the methods or ways you use to collect
data. Qualitative research designs focus on collecting data that is
relational, interpretive, subjective, and inductive; whereas a typical
quantitative study, collects data that are deductive, statistical, and
objective.

                                                    Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 71
Typical          Qualitative   Quantitative
Characteristics

Knowledge        Relational, Interpretive, Subjective Scientific, Statistical, Objec

Reasoning        Inductive     Deductive

Data Format      Language      Numbers

Sample Size      Small (1-15)  Large

In contrast, qualitative data is often in the form of language, while
quantitative data typically involves numbers. Quantitative
researchers require large numbers of participants for validity, while
qualitative researchers use a smaller number of participants, and
can even use one (Hatch, 2002). In the past, quantitative and
qualitative educational researchers rarely interacted, sometimes
holding contempt for each other's work; and even published articles
in separate journals based on having distinct theoretical
orientations in terms of data collection. Overall, there is a greater

72 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
appreciation for both quantitative and qualitative approaches, with
scholars finding distinct value in each approach, yet in many circles
the debate continues over which approach is more beneficial for
educational research and in educational contexts.

   The goal of qualitative data collection is to build a complex and
nuanced description of social or human problems from multiple
perspectives. The flexibility and ability to use a variety of data
collection techniques encompasses a distinct stance on research.
Qualitative researchers are able to capture conversations and
everyday language, as well as situational attitudes and beliefs.
Qualitative data collection is able to be fitted to the study, with the
goal of collecting the most authentic data, not necessarily the most
objective. To researchers who strictly use quantitative methods,
qualitative methods may seem wholly unstructured, eclectic, and
idiosyncratic; however, for qualitative researchers these
characteristics are advantageous to their purpose. Quantitative
research depends upon structure and is bounded to find
relationship among variables and units of measurement.
Quantitative research helps make sense of large amounts of data.
Both quantitative and qualitative research help us address
education challenges by better identifying what is happening, with
the goal of identifying why it is happening, and how we can address
it.

   Most educator-researchers who engage in research projects in
schools and classrooms utilize qualitative methodologies for their
data collection. Educator-researchers also use mixed methods that
focus on qualitative methods, but also use quantitative methods,
such as surveys, to provide a multidimensional approach to
inquiring about their topic. While qualitative methods may feel
more comfortable, there is a methodological rationale for using
quantitative research.

   Research methodologists use two distinct forms of logic to
describe research: induction and deduction. Inductive approaches
are focused on developing new or emerging theories, by explaining
the accumulation of evidence that provides meaning to similar

                                                   Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 73
circumstances. Deductive approaches move in the opposite
direction, and create meaning about a particular situation by
reasoning from a general idea or theory about the particular
circumstances. While qualitative approaches are inductive -
observe and then generate theories, for example - qualitative
researchers will typically initiate studies with some preconceived
notions of potential theories to support their work.

   Flexible Research Design
   A researcher's decisions about data collection and activities
involve a personal choice, yet the choice of data sources must be
responsive to the proposed project and topic. Logically, researchers
will use whatever validated methods help them to address the issue
they are researching and will develop a research plan around
activities to implement those methods. While a research plan is
important to conducting valid research in schools and classrooms,
a research plan should also be flexible in design to allow data to
emerge and find the best data to address research questions. In this
way, a research plan is recommended, but data collection methods
are not always known in advance. As you, the educator-researcher,
interacts with participants, you may find it necessary to continue
the research with additional data sources to better address the
question at the center of your research. When educators are
researchers and a participant in their study, it is especially
important to keep an open mind to the wide range of research
methodologies. All-in-all educator-researchers should understand
that there are varied and multiple paths to move from research
questions to addressing those questions.

   Mixed Methods
   As mentioned above, mixed methods is the use of both qualitative
and quantitative methods. Researchers generally use mixed
methods to clarify findings from the initial method of data
collection. In mixed-methods research, the educator-researcher
has increased flexibility in data collection. Mixed methods studies
often result in a combination of precise measurements (e.g., grades,
test scores, survey, etc.) along with in-depth qualitative data that

74 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
provide meaningful detail to those measurements. The key
advantage of using mixed methods is that quantitative details
enhance qualitative data sources that involve conclusions and use
terms such as usually, some, or most which can be substituted
with a number or quantity, such as percentages or averages, or the
mean, the median, and/or the mode. One challenge to educator-
researchers is that mixed methods require more time and resources
to complete the study, and more familiarity about both qualitative
and quantitative data collection methods.

   Mixed methods in educator research, even if quantitative
methods are only used minimally, provide an opportunity to clarify
findings, fill gaps in understanding, and cross-check data. For
example, if you are looking at the use of math journals to better
engage students and improve their math scores, it would be helpful
to understand their abilities in math and reading before analyzing
the math journals. Therefore, looking at their test scores might give
you some nuanced understanding of why some students improved
more than others after using the math journals. Pre- and post-
surveys would also provide valuable information in terms of
students' attitudes and beliefs about math and writing. In line with
thinking about pre- and post-surveys, some researchers suggest
using either qualitative or quantitative approaches in different
phases of the research process. In the previous example, pre- and
post test scores may quantitatively demonstrate growth or
improvement after implementing the math journal; however, the
qualitative data would provide detailed evidence as to why the math
journals contributed to growth or improvement in math.
Quantitative methods can establish relationships among variables,
while qualitative methods can explain factors underlying those same
relationships.

   I caution the reader at this point to not simply think of qualitative
methodologies as anecdotal details to quantitative reports. I only
highlight mixed methods to introduce the strength of such studies,
and to aid in moving educational research methodology away from
the binary thinking of quantitative vs. qualitative. In thinking about

                                                   Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 75
data collection, possible data sources include questionnaires or
surveys, observations (video or written notes), collaboration
(meetings, peer coaching), interviews, tests and records, pictures,
diaries, transcripts of video and audio recordings, personal journals,
student work samples, e-mail and online communication, and any
other pertinent documents and reports. As you begin to think about
data collection you will consider the available materials and think
about aspects discussed in the previous chapter: who, what, where,
when, and how. Specifically:

             Who are the subjects or participants for the
                study?

             What data is vital evidence for this study?
             Where will the data be collected?
             When will the data be collected?
             How will the data be collected?

If you find you are having trouble identifying data sources that
support your initial question, you may need to revise your research
question - and make sure what you are asking is researchable or
measurable. The research question can always change throughout
the study, but it should only be in relation the data being collected.

   Participant Data
   As an educator, your possible participants selection pool is
narrower than most researchers encounter - however, it is
important to be clear about their role in the data design and
collection. A study can involve one participant or multiple
participants, and participants often serve as the primary source of
data in the research process. Most studies by educator-researchers
utilize purposeful sampling, or in other words, they select

76 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
participants who will be able to provide the most relevant
information to the study. Therefore, the study design relies upon
the participants and the information they can provide. The following
is a description of some data collection methods, which include:
surveys or questionnaires, individual or group interviews,
observations, field notes or diaries, narratives, documents, and
elicitation.

   Surveys
             Surveys, or questionnaires, are a research instrument

          frequently used to receive data about participants' feelings,
          beliefs, and attitudes in regard to the research topic or
          activities. Surveys are often used for large sample sizes with
          the intent of generalizing from a sample population to a
          larger population. Surveys are used with any number of
          participants and can be administered at different times
          during the study, such as pre-activity and post-activity, with
          the same participants to determine if changes have occurred
          over the course of the activity time, or simply change over
          time. Researchers like surveys and questionnaires as an
          instrument because they can be distributed and collected
          easily - especially with all of the recent online application
          possibilities (e.g., Google, Facebook, etc.). Surveys come in
          several forms, closed-ended, open-ended, or a mix of the
          two. Closed-ended surveys are typically multiple-choice
          questions or scales (e.g. 1-5, most likely-least likely) that
          allow participants to rate or select a response for each
          question. These responses can easily be tabulated into
          meaningful number representations, like percentages. For
          example, Likert scales are often used with a five-point range,
          with options such as strongly agree, agree, neutral, disagree,
          and strongly disagree. Open-ended surveys consist of
          prompts for participants to add their own perspectives in
          short answer or limited word responses. Open-ended
          surveys are not always as easy to tabulate, but can provide
          more detail and description.

                                                    Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 77
   Interviews and Focus Groups
             Interviews are frequently used by researchers because

          they often produce some of the most worthwhile data.
          Interviews allow researchers to obtain candid verbal
          perspectives through structured or semi-structured
          questioning. Interview questions, either structured or semi-
          structured, are related to the research question or research
          activities to gauge the participants' thoughts, feelings,
          motivations, and reflections. Some research relies on
          interviewing as the primary data source, but most often
          interviews are used to strengthen and support other data
          sources. Interviews can be time consuming, but interviews
          are worthwhile in that you can gather richer and more
          revealing information than other methods that could be
          utilized (Koshy, 2010). Lincoln and Guba (1985) identified five
          outcomes of interviewing:

     Outcomes of Interviewing

          Here and now explanations;
          Reconstructions of past events and experiences;
          Projections of anticipated experiences;
          Verification of information from other sources;
          Verification of information (p. 268).

          As mentioned above, interviews typically take two forms:
          structured and semi-structured. In terms of interviews,
          structured means that the researcher identifies a certain
          number of questions, in a prescribed sequence, and the

78 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
researcher asks each participant these questions in the same
order. Structured interviews qualitatively resemble surveys
and questionnaires because they are consistent, easy to
administer, provide direct responses, and make tabulation
and analysis more consistent. Structured interviews use an
interview protocol to organize questions, and maintain
consistency.

   Semi-structured interviews have a prescribed set of
questions and protocol, just like structured interviews, but
the researcher does not have to follow those questions or
order explicitly. The researcher should ask the same
questions to each participant for comparison reasons, but
semi-structured interviews allow the researcher to ask
follow-up questions that stray from the protocol. The semi-
structured interview is intended to allow for new, emerging
topics to be obtained from participants. Semi-structured
questions can be included in more structured protocols,
which allows for the participant to add additional
information beyond the formal questions and for the
researcher to return to preplanned formal questions after
the participant responds. Participants can be interviewed
individually or collectively, and while individual interviews
are time-consuming, they can provide more in-depth
information.

   When considering more than two participants for an
interview, researchers will often use a focus group interview
format. Focus group interviews typically involve three to ten
participants and seek to gain socially dependent
perspectives or organizational viewpoints. When using focus
group interviews with students, researchers often find them
beneficial because they allow student reflection and ideas
to build off of each other. This is important because often
times students feel shy or hesitant to share their ideas with
adults, but once another student sparks or confirms their
idea, belief, or opinion they are more willing to share. Focus

                                        Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 79
          group interviews are very effective as pre- and post-activity
          data sources. Researchers can use either a structured or
          semi-structured interview protocol for focus group
          interviews; however, with multiple participants it may be
          difficult to maintain the integrity of a structured protocol.
   Observations

             One of the simplest, and most natural, forms of data
          collection is to engage in formal observation. Observing
          humans in a setting provides us contextual understanding
          of the complexity of human behavior and interrelationships
          among groups in that setting. If a researcher wants to
          examine the ways teachers approach a particular area of
          pedagogical practice, then observation would be a viable
          data collection tool. Formal observations are truly unique
          and allow the researcher to collect data that cannot be
          obtained through other data sources. Ethnography is a
          qualitative research design that provides a descriptive
          account based on researchers' observations and explorations
          to examine the social dynamics present in cultures and
          social systems - which includes classrooms and schools.
          Taken from anthropology, the ethnographer uses
          observations and detailed note taking, along with other
          forms of mapping or making sense of the context and
          relationships within. For Creswell (2007), several guidelines
          provide structure to an observation:

     Structuring Observations

          Identify what to observe
          Determine the role you will assume -- observer or

80 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
          participant
       Design observational protocol for recording notes
       Record information such as physical situation,

          particular events and activities
       Thank participants and inform them of the use of

          and their accessibility to the data (pp. 132- 134)

       As an educator-researcher, you may take on a role that
       exceeds that of an observer and participate as a member of
       the research setting. In this case, the data sources would be
       called participant observation to clearly identify the degree
       of involvement you have in the study. In participant
       observation, the researcher embeds themselves in the
       actions of the participants. It is important to understand that
       participant observation will provide completely different
       data, in comparison to simply observing someone else.
       Ethnographies, or studies focused completely on
       observation as a data source, often extend longer than other
       data sources, ranging from several months to even years.
       Extended time provides the researcher the ability to obtain
       more detailed and accurate information, because it takes
       time to observe patterns and other details that are
       significant to the study. Self-study is another consideration
       for educators, if they want to use observation and be a
       participant observer. They can use video and audio
       recordings of their activities to use as data sources and use
       those as the source of observation.
Field Diaries and Notes

          Utilizing a field dairy, or keeping field notes, can be a very
       effective and practical data collection method. In purpose, a

                                                Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 81
          field diary or notes keep a record of what happens during
          the research activities. It can be useful in tracking how and
          why your ideas and the research process evolved. Many
          educators keep daily notes about their classes, and in many
          ways, this is a more focused and narrower version of
          documenting the daily happenings of a class. A field diary
          or notes can also serve as an account of your reflections
          and commentary on your study, and can be a starting place
          for your data analysis and interpretations. A field diary or
          notes are typically valuable when researchers begin to write
          about their project because it allows them to draw upon
          their authentic voice. The reflective process that represents
          a diary can also serve as an additional layer of professional
          learning for researchers. The format and length of a field
          diary or notes will vary depending on the researching and
          the topic; however, the ultimate goal should be to facilitate
          data collection and analysis.

   Narratives
             Data narratives and stories are a fairly new form of

          formalized data. While researchers have collected bits and
          pieces of narratives in other forms of data, asking
          participants to compose a narrative (either written, spoken,
          or performed) as a whole allows researchers to examine how
          participants embrace the complexities of the context and
          social interactions. Humans are programmed to engage with
          and share narratives to develop meaningful and experiential
          knowledge. Educator autobiographies bring to life personal
          stories shaped by knowledge, values, and feelings that
          developed from their classroom experiences. Narrative data
          includes three primary areas: temporality, sociality, and
          place (Clandinin & Conolley, 2000). In terms of temporality,
          narratives have a past, present, and future because stories
          are time-based and transitional. Sociality highlights the
          social relationships in narratives as well as the personal and
          moral dispositions. Place includes the spaces where the

82 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
       narratives happen. Furthermore, bell hooks (1991) notes that
       narratives, or storytelling, as inquiry can be a powerful way
       to study how contexts are influenced by power structures,
       often linking and intersecting the structural dynamics of
       social class, race, and gender to highlight the struggle.

Documents
          Documents provide a way to collect data that is

       unobtrusive to the participant. Documents are unobtrusive
       data because it is collected without modifying or distracting
       the research context when gathered. Educational settings
       maintain records on all sorts of activities in schools: content
       standards, state mandates, student discipline records,
       student attendance, student assessments, performance
       records, parental engagement, records of how teachers
       spend PTO money, etc. Documents often provide
       background and contextual material providing a snapshot of
       school policies, demographic information, ongoing records
       over a period of time, and contextual details from the site
       of the research study. Documents can be characterized
       similarly to historical research, as primary and secondary.
       Examples of primary materials are first-hand sources from
       someone in the educational context, such as minutes from
       a school board or faculty meeting, photographs, video
       recordings, and letters. Examples of secondary sources
       typically include analysis or interpretations of a primary
       source by others, such as texts, critiques, and reviews. Both
       types of sources are especially valuable in action research.

Elicitation Methods
          We have talked about several methods of data collection

       that each have useful ways of documenting, inquiring, and
       thinking about the research question. However, how does a
       researcher engage participants in ways that allow them to
       demonstrate what they know, feel, think, or believe? Asking
       participants directly about their thinking, feeling, or beliefs
       will only take you so far depending on the comfort and

                                                Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 83
          rapport the participant has with the researcher. There are
          always a variety of hurdles in extracting participants'
          knowledge. Even the manner in which questions are framed
          and the way researchers use materials in the research
          process are equally important in getting participants to
          provide reliable, comparable, and valid responses.
          Furthermore, all individuals who participate in research
          studies vary in their ability to recall and report what they
          know, and this affects the value of traditional data collection,
          especially structured and semi-structured interviewing. In
          particular, participants' knowledge or other thinking of
          interest may be implicit and difficult for them to explicate in
          simple discussion.

             Elicitation methods help researchers uncover
          unarticulated participant knowledge through a potential
          variety of activities. Researchers will employ elicitation
          methods and document the participants' actions and
          typically the description of why they took those particular
          actions. Educators may be able to relate the process of
          elicitation methods to a "think aloud" activity in which the
          researcher wants to record or document the activity.
          Elicitation methods can take many forms. What follows are
          some basic ideas and formats for elicitation methods.

             Brainstorming/Concept Map
                       Most educators are probably familiar with the

                    process of brainstorming or creating a concept map.
                    These can be very effective elicitation methods when
                    the researcher asks the participant to create a
                    concept map or representation of brainstorming, and
                    then asks the participant to explain the connections
                    between concepts or ideas on the brainstorming or
                    concept map.

             Sorting
                       Sorting provides an engaging way to gather data

                    from your participants. Sorting, as you can imagine,

84 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
       involves participants sorting, grouping, or
       categorizing objects or photographs in meaningful
       ways. Once participants have sorted the objects or
       photographs, the researcher records or documents
       the participant explaining why they sorted or
       grouped the objects or photographs in the way that
       they did. As a former history teacher, I would often
       use sorting to assess my students' understanding of
       related concepts and events in a world history class.
       I would use pictures too as the means for students to
       sort and demonstrate what they understood from the
       unit. For broader discussion of elicitation techniques
       in history education see Barton (2015).
Listing/ Ranking

          Listing can be an effective way to examine
       participants' thinking about a topic. Researchers can
       have participants construct a list in many different
       ways to fit the focus of the study and then have the
       participants explain their list. For example, if an
       educator was studying middle school student
       perceptions of careers, they could ask them to
       complete three lists: Careers in Most Demand;
       Careers with Most Education/Training; Careers of
       most Interest.

                                    Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 85
Careers in Most Demand  Careers with Most Education/  Careers of Most Interest
                        Training
1.                                                    1.
2.                      1.                            2.
3.                      2.                            3.
4.                      3.                            4.
5.                      4.                            5.
                        5.
          Then, once participants have filled out the lists, the
       most important part is documenting them explaining
       their thinking, and why they filled out the lists the
       way they did. As you may imagine, in this example,
       every participant would have a list that is different
       based on their personal interests.

Recall
          Researchers can also elicit responses by simply

       giving participants a prompt, and then asking them
       to recall whatever they know about that prompt.
       Researchers will have the participants do this in some
       sort of demonstrative activity. For example, at the
       end of a world history course, I might ask students to
       explain what "culture" means to them and to explain
       their thinking.

Re-articulation (writing or drawing)
          A unique way to engage participants in elicitation

       methods is to have them write about, rewrite, or draw
       visual representations of either life experiences or
       literature that they have read. For example, you could
       ask them to rewrite a part of the literature they did
       not like, add a part they thought should be there,
       or simply extend the ending. Participants can either
       write or draw these re-articulations. I find that
       drawing works just as well because, again, the goal is
       to have participant describe their thinking based on
       the activity.

Scenario Decision-Making
          Elicitation methods can also examine skills.

                                     Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 87
                    Researchers can provide participants scenarios and
                    ask them to make decisions. The researchers can
                    document those decisions and analyze the extent to
                    which the participant understands the skill.

             Document, Photograph, or Video Analysis
                       This is the most basic elicitation in which the

                    researcher provides a document, photograph, or
                    video for the participant to examine. Then, the
                    researcher asks questions about the participants
                    interpretations of the document, photograph, or
                    video. One method that would support this sort of
                    elicitation is to ask the participants to provide images
                    from their everyday words. For example, asking
                    students to document the literacy examples in their
                    homes (i.e., pictures of calendars, bookshelves etc.).
                    With the availability of one-to-one tech, and iPads,
                    participant documentation is easier.
   There are many more methods of data collection also, as well as
many variations of the methods described above. The goal for you
is to find the data collection methods that are going to give you the
best data to answer your research question. If you are unsure, there
is nothing wrong with collecting more data than you need to make
sure you use effective methods - the only thing you have to lose is
time!

   Use of Case Studies
   Case studies are a popular way for studying phenomena in
settings using qualitative methodology. Case studies typically
encompass qualitative studies which look closely at what happens
when researchers collect data, analyze the data, and present the
results. Case studies can focus on a single case or examine a
phenomenon across multiple cases. Case studies frame research in
a way that allows for rich description of data and depth of analysis.
   An advantage of using case study design is that the reader often
identifies with the case or phenomena, as well as the participants in
the study. Yin (2003) describes case study methodology as inquiry

88 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within its authentic
context. Case studies are particularly appropriate when the
boundaries and relationship between the phenomenon and the
context are not clear. Case studies relate well with the processes
involved in action research. Critics of action research case studies
sometimes criticize the inevitable subjectivity, just like general
criticisms of action research. Case studies provide researchers
opportunities to explore both the how and the why of phenomena
in context, while being both exploratory and descriptive.

   We want to clarify the differences between methodologies and
methods of research. There are methodologies of research, like
case study and action research, and methods of data collection.
Methodologies like ethnography, narrative inquiry, and case study
draw from some similar methods of data collecting that include
interviews, collection of artifacts (writings, drawings, images), and
observations. The differences between the methodologies include
the time-frame for research; the boundaries of the research; and
the epistemology.

   Triangulation of Data
   Triangulation is a method used by qualitative researchers to
check and establish trustworthiness in their studies by using and
analyzing multiple (three or more) data collection methods to
address a research question and develop a consistency of evidence
from data sources or approaches. Thus, triangulation facilitates
trustworthiness of data through cross verification of evidence, to
support claims, from more than two data collection sources.
Triangulation also tests the consistency of findings obtained
through different data sources and instruments, while minimizing
bias in the researcher's interpretations of the data.
   If we think about the example of studying the use of math journals
in an elementary classroom, the researcher would want to collect
at least three sources of data - the journal prompts, assessment
scores, and interviews. When the researcher is analyzing the data,
they will want to find themes or evidence across all three data
sources to address their research question. In a very basic analysis,

                                                   Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 89
if the students demonstrated a deeper level of reflection about
math in the journals, their assessment scores improved, and their
interviews demonstrated they had more confidence in their number
sense and math abilities - then, the researcher could conclude, on
a very general level, that math journals improved their students'
math skills, confidence, or abilities. Ideally, the study would examine
specific aspects of math to enable deeper analysis of math journals,
but this example demonstrates the basic idea of triangulation. In
this example, all of the data provided evidence that the intervention
of a math journal improved students' understanding of math, and
the three data sources provided trustworthiness for this claim.

     Data Collection Checklist

         1. Based on your research question, what data might
             you need?

        2. What are the multiple ways you could collect that
             data?

        3. How might you document this data, or organize it
             so that it can be analyzed?

        4. What methods are most appropriate for your
             context and timeframe?

        5. How much time will your data collection require?
             How much time can you allow for?

        6. Will you need to create any data sources (e.g.,
             interview protocol, elicitation materials)?

         7. Do your data sources all logically support the
             research question, and each other?

        8. Does your data collection provide for multiple
             perspectives?

90 | Collecting Data in Your Classroom
 9. How will your data achieve triangulation in
      addressing the research question?

10. Will you need more than three data sources to
      ensure triangulation of data?

                                           Collecting Data in Your Classroom | 91
6. Analyzing Data from Your
Classroom

     ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What are the best ways to organize and analyze
             your data?

          What methods of data analysis will be most
             effective for your study?

          What claims can you make after analyzing your
             data?

          How do your claims contribute to the knowledge
             base?

You've determined the methods for data collection and then
collected that data for your action research project. It is now time
to conduct the analysis of your data, which precedes drawing
conclusions and sharing your findings. During your action research
project, you have been informally analyzing your data and now you
can formally analyze to develop findings and reflect on their
implications for practice. This will also provide an opportunity to
identify unanswered questions and possible new directions. As an
action researcher, you will create a coherent and reliable story
from all the data collected. This is a key part of the professional
development or professional learning aspect of action research. As
an action researcher, you are looking to create meaning from your
practice by utilizing rich descriptions and narratives, and you are

92 | Analyzing Data from Your
Classroom
developing expertise by examining situations closely and analyzing
them.

   Beginning the Meaning Making Process
   Before you begin your data analysis, you should revisit the
intended goals of the project. Equally, you should think about your
research question and reacquaint yourself with your literature
review to clearly envision what you have been investigating and
why. The goal of data analysis is to identify themes and patterns to
provide robust evidence for any claims you are able to make from
your findings. You will need to look at the data you have collected
from several sources and relate these to your original, expected,
outcomes. Of course, you will also be mindful of unexpected
outcomes which may be of significance to your study too. Your
conclusions should relate to the original intended objectives of the
study. Again, your literature review will also help with the analysis,
and it will provide distinctions in terms of what we know and don't
know as a field of study. Your findings should either confirm
previous literature or provide new knowledge in relation to previous
literature.
   During this stage of the project, it is also important for you to
reflect on the research process itself. Did your project go as
planned? What would you do differently? What were the biggest
challenges? For those interested in your study, they will be
interested in knowing about your challenges, as well as your
successes.

   Organizing your Data
   You will want to make a note of everything you possibly can
when you collect data. As you organize your data, take a look at the
notes or personal journal you have kept during your data collection
period. Your notes may reveal that you have initiated important
data analysis in the time and space of collecting the data. This sort
of analysis could be personal notes on the themes which related
to your original research aims and questions. You may have even
made determinations about whether to gather additional data. More
importantly, you may have noted some unanticipated themes or

                                                Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 93
ideas that emerged during data collection. I think it is valuable to
put these things to the front of your mind as you organize your data
and begin the analysis stage.

   Analysis and Presentation of your Data
   I would like to address some general issues related to analyzing
and presenting your data. Here are links to specific examples of data
analysis in four action research articles, in the journal Networks: An
Online Journal for Teacher Research. These are not necessarily ideal
examples, but they provide a variety to spark thinking about your
own study and discussion among your classmates.

          1. The Impact of Math Vocabulary on Conceptual
       Understanding for ELLs. V. Valley. (2019)

          2. Effects of Game-Based Learning on Attitude and
       Achievement in Elementary Mathematics. K. White & L.
       McCoy. (2019)

          3. Shuffle Lit!: Using iPod Shuffles to Encourage
       Literacy Experiences at Home. A. Hover. (2018)

          4. Close Reading in the Urban Classroom: A Teacher's
       Introspection. S. Nelson. (2019)

94 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
          5. The Effect of Flexible Small Groups on Math
       Achievement in First Grade. D. Bender & T. Craft. (2016)

          6. A Teacher's Inquiry into Bringing in Biliteracy in a
       Fifth-Grade English-Only Classroom. S. Abraham. (2016)

Using quantitative data
             You may have collected some quantitative data to provide

          demographic, contextual, or academic background for your
          study. Quantitative data helps support, supplement, and
          complement the qualitative data you have collected. While
          it is likely that you have not collected a massive amount
          of quantitative data, any amount will support a stronger
          argument. You should be able to analyze and represent the
          quantitative data using tables or charts. Computer software,
          such as Microsoft Excel, is suitable for this purpose, and
          can even handle basic correlations between multiple sets
          of data (e.g., gender and test scores). If an action research
          project involves several sites and the data are extensive, you
          may consider using a statistical package, such as IBM's SPSS.
          Your quantitative data can be presented in charts and graphs
          developed by these programs. Including charts and graphs is
          worthwhile for two reasons. First, a visual representation is
          often easier for many readers to understand when digesting
          data-based information. Second, visual representations
          break up continuous narratives which can useful when
          conveying a considerable amount of numerical data and the
          subsequent correlations. Visual representations can also be
          an effective way to present qualitative data, or to at least

                                                Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 95
          give the reader a glimpse or preview of the data as a whole
          representation before reading the narrative.

   Using qualitative data
             Since your action research project was probably located

          within your professional context and focused on your
          practice, you likely explored attitudes, behaviors, and
          feelings that required collecting qualitative data. Most of this
          data will be in the form of descriptive text or short answer
          text, which you will need to analyze and interpret. For
          qualitative data, analysis of the text will require you to
          develop an analytical framework to use as the basis of
          analysis. This framework can also be subjective, so being
          clear and upfront about your framework is important for
          validity and reliability. If your data collection resulted in a
          large amount of descriptive text, it may seem overwhelming
          to analyze. This is quite normal for a qualitative study and
          having a lot of data means that you will have plenty to work
          from. If you have a considerable amount of descriptive data,
          you could use computer software (as outlined later in this
          chapter) which is relatively simple to use.

             Transcription of your data is something that is often
          overlooked, or avoided, for several reasons. For some types
          of data collection (e.g., interviews, focus groups, discussions,
          etc.) it is useful to have the recording transcribed so that
          you can analyze the text more easily than listening to the
          recording. Transcribing is often avoided because of time
          constraints (or because the researcher cannot afford to have
          someone transcribe for them). However, if you are going
          to analyze the data, you should not think of it as purely
          transcription - it is your first opportunity to engage with the
          data. This will facilitate a more efficient process of analysis
          as it will more than likely be the second time you have
          engaged with the data. If you have previewed or already
          experienced the data, to save time you might transcribe only
          the parts that are pertinent to the study or your interest.

96 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
Analyzing qualitative data
          For better, or worse, there is no universally correct way

       to analyze qualitative data; however, it is important to be
       systematic in your method of analysis. As I mentioned earlier,
       your data analysis probably started initially during your data
       collection. The questions you asked, the frameworks that
       you used, and the types of documents you collected would
       have provided some themes and categories that naturally
       developed as part of this process. I have suggested to new
       researchers a step-by-step approach to help them get
       started:

    1. Organize your data. Begin by listing the different sets of
         data you have collected, show how they are related, and
         how they will support each other (triangulation).

    2. Read the content. You need to read the data, probably
         several times, to develop a sense of what the data are
         indicating. All your data - observation notes, field diaries,
         policy documents and so on - need to be looked at.
         Common words and themes should start to emerge.

   3. Highlight relevant sections and aspects of the data.
    4. Develop categories to sort evidence. As you examine the

         data you will need to use actual evidence (numbers, actual
         quotes, artifacts, etc.) from your data to support your
         claims. You want these pieces of evidence to be the most
         vivid or clear representation for the categories you
         develop. For example, if you interviewed fifteen students
         and twelve of the interview transcripts provided evidence
         that the students' understanding had grown due to your
         instructional intervention, you would want to note that
         twelve of fifteen students interviewed demonstrated
         growth in understanding, and possibly provide a quote or
         sample of how this was demonstrated from one of those
         twelve students. This sort of evidence enhances the
         trustworthiness of your findings.

                                             Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 97
       5. Code your data. Codes will develop from the categories
            you use to sort the evidence you find in the range of data.
            Codes also help you when you do a second or third
            analysis of the data as it guides your examination of the
            data. (Coding is discussed later in this chapter.)

      6. Review and narrow the codes. You may begin with a lot of
            initial codes, but you will want to narrow these to the most
            significant, well-evidenced, or best triangulated data. Most
            likely, these narrow codes will become the significant
            themes to report on your study.

       7. Interpret your findings. Once you have narrowed your
            codes, and have evidence in place to support those codes,
            it is time to interpret the data and develop meaning within
            the context of your study, and field. This is where your
            literature review will be useful again.

      8. Validate the findings. Validation, in addition to this process
            (see figure 6.1 below), can take many forms. In previous
            chapters, I had discussed using critical friends to confirm
            the validity of your interpretations.

      9. Create report and plan dissemination.

A framework for qualitative data analysis and interpretation
             If you are feeling a bit overwhelmed by the amount of

          qualitative data you collected, you may find Creswell's (2009)
          framework to analyze and interpret qualitative data useful
          (See figure 6.1).

Figure 6.1 Qualitative Data Analysis, interpreted from Creswell
(Creswell, 2009, p. 185)

98 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
   Similarly to above, Creswell also proposes a step-by-step
approach to provide practitioners with a guide to undertake action
research. I have summarized this in the following section.

                    Step 1. Organize the data for analysis. You will
                 need to transcribe interviews, scan material, type
                 up your notes, and sort or arrange the different
                 types of data.

                    Step 2. Read all the data thoroughly. Get a
                 general sense of the data and reflect on their
                 overall meaning. You may have received an initial
                 impression from the data collection, but make
                 notes in the margins or spaces and record any
                 other initial thoughts at this stage.

                    Step 3. Begin detailed coding and analysis.
                 Coding organizes the material into meaningful
                 chunks of text. When coding, think about:

                             code based on previous literature
                                and common sense;

                             code what is surprising and
                                unanticipated;

                             code for the unusual which may be
                                of conceptual interest to readers.

                    You may want to hand-code the data, use
                 highlighting colors, or cut and paste text
                 segments onto cards. You may also use a
                 computer software package to help to code,
                 organize and sort the information (e.g., NVivo)

                    Step 4. Codes should be representative of the

                                                Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 99
                 categories, topic, setting, or people that are part
                 of the analysis. Creswell suggests generating 5-7
                 categories. These will be supported with
                 quotations and specific evidence form the data
                 and may represent headings in your report.

                    Step 5. Decide how you will represent the
                 codes, themes, and descriptions in the narrative.
                 The narrative will summarize the findings from
                 the analysis. This could be a discussion that
                 outlines the project chronologically, a detailed
                 discussion of several themes (including sub-
                 themes, specific illustrations, multiple
                 perspectives from individuals, and quotations), or
                 a discussion with interconnecting themes.
                 Visuals, graphs, figures, or tables are also useful
                 to support the discussion.

                    Step 6. This final step involves making an
                 interpretation or deriving meaning from the
                 data. Meaning might come from, but is not
                 limited to, lessons learned from the data.
                 Meaning can also be derived when comparing
                 findings to the literature or theories from the
                 literature review.

Positionality and qualitative data
   When analyzing qualitative data, the issue of your own

positionality will need to be addressed. Positionality was mentioned
in a previous chapter; however, addressing your positionality
involves how your own social identity and experiences may impact
your interpretation of the data. For example, an educator-
researcher may have complex identities that they need to be aware

100 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
of when they are analyzing the data. As a privileged white male with
a terminal degree of education, I have to realize I may not fully relate
to the experiences of many of my students, and this is important
if I am analyzing the attitudes and beliefs of my students. I need
to keep that under consideration throughout the research process,
but especially as a I deriving meaning from the perspectives of my
students. Therefore, positionality is very important for an educator-
researcher who is planning and implementing action in a classroom,
while they are also a teacher. It is also important to consider the
possible impact of being an educator-researcher and acknowledge
the possible influence this may have on the interpretations they
make and any bias which may influence the research process.
Qualitative research is interpretive research with the researcher
typically involved in a sustained and intensive experience with the
participants, which opens up a range of potential ethical and
personal issues into the qualitative research process.

   Many action research reports include a section on positionality,
in which the researchers write a narrative describing their
positionality and keep that visible as they analyze data. Below are
some questions regarding what would constitute a positionality
statement:

     Positionality Statements

          Who am I? (Including demographics,
             epistemologies and philosophies, journey in
             education, etc.)

          What do I believe about teaching/learning?
          What do I believe about this topic?
          What are my expectations of this study?

                                               Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 101
          What are my connections or dis-connections with
             the participants?

          What are my experiences with the context of this
             study?

Analysis with computer software
   It is now common for data to be analyzed using computer

software. However, as Mertler (2008) notes, it is a misconception
to think that the software will do the analysis, as data analysis
still requires the use of inductive logic, and therefore, advanced
technologies cannot take the place of the human brain. Computer
software primarily helps researchers organize and store data.
Software such as NVivo can also provide very efficient systems for
coding a lot data, as well as many different types of data, including
social media and video. Software like NVivo can be expensive for
an educator-researcher. There are several free and/or cheaper
applications and software that provide many of the same features.

   Coding
   Coding your data is such an important part of the analysis
process, I want to devote a bit more discussion to the process.
Simply put, coding entails identifying the main themes and patterns
within your data. Coding is meant to help you conceptualize and
condense your data into meaningful and manageable chunks from
which to make conclusions. Coding data can take many shapes
and forms. Regardless of how you choose to code your data, it
is important to keep your research goals and research questions
in the forefront of your mind. After immersing yourself in your
data sources, it is possible to feel somewhat overcome by thinking
and possibilities sparked by the data. This feeling may be caused
by one of two issues you will have to deal with in your analysis.
First, it is possible you may think that nearly everything you have
collected is relevant and significant to the study, which could lead

102 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
to some stress in how to determine what to focus on, or what is
most significant. Coding should help reduce this stress by bringing
patterns and themes to the forefront to help you prioritize some
aspects of the data, and make it feel much more manageable. Once
you begin to realize you are coding only those things which are
relevant, you will ease the stress and begin to enjoy the analysis
and coding process. Second, coding can be taxing work because of
the constant processing, categorizing, and depth of thinking. Like it
is suggested when revising writing, take regular breaks to maintain
your full concentration, and in the case of research, to also review
your coding criteria.

   Using Evidence and Generating Knowledge
   The main purpose of gathering data, through a research process,
is to provide evidence. In order to provide evidence, you need to
analyze the data you have collected. Again, it is important to
remember the starting place of your inquiry, and what you are
looking for in the study. You began with goals at the start of your
research and mapped out your data collection strategically, now
you have the data which will provide evidence for articulating your
claims and developing pedagogical theories.
   Regardless of the type of data you have collected, quantitative
data or qualitative data or a combination of the two, ultimately
the significance and impact of your research will depend on the
quality of data you have collected, the interpretations you make,
and your reflections and conclusions. Therefore, the significance
of your study will depend upon the quality of the data you have
collected and depth of your data analysis.
   While you are engaged in data analysis, it might be useful to
highlight the data that could be used as evidence to support your
claims when you share your research. In the past, I have color coded
different types of evidence.
   So, what do we mean when we say provide evidence? When
researchers provide evidence, they are providing pieces of data
that support their claims about what their study did or did not
demonstrate. In the next chapter, we will discuss how to share or

                                              Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 103
report your findings. When you share or report you can think of
it as an argument that you are making about your findings and
subsequent claims. The data is used as evidence to support your
claims and strengthen your argument. It is important to remember
that to develop valid claims to knowledge, you will need to support
your claims with evidence using relevant parts of your data.
Therefore, evidence may take the form of survey results, quotes or
extracts from interview transcripts, selections from your classroom
observation notes, artifacts, photographs, and examples of students'
work.

   Generating Knowledge
   The purpose of research is to generate new knowledge. As an
educator and researcher, the knowledge you produce will be based
on your practice. Once you have findings and claims, this will most
likely affect your practice. You will articulate knowledge that is
generated from how your research has affected your practice and
contemplate what significance it may have for other practitioners.
This process amounts to you building personal theories about what
you have done and demonstrated in your study. Therefore, your
theories will emerge from your practice and this will contribute new
knowledge to the existing knowledge base. Your data will provide
illustrative examples of what happened in your classroom and you
will cite relevant evidence. When you develop knowledge from your
study, the claims you make and the theories you formulate are
original, as you have employed your own critical thinking skills and
informed judgement. Your critical thinking and informed judgement
are demonstrated in the evidence you provide to validate your
claims to knowledge.

   Creating Trustworthy Claims to Knowledge
   Your research findings and claims to knowledge are much more
impactful if demonstrated as trustworthy. Action research is often
conducted in collaborative teams, involving communities of
educator researchers. Collaborative teams have built in
opportunities to increase trustworthiness of studies. Having
multiple people make interpretations of the same data creates

104 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
trustworthiness through common understandings, making the
findings more representative. The trustworthiness of research is
also based on readers or consumers of your research accept your
claims to knowledge. It is scary for many to think they need to
validate claims to knowledge, and readers or consumers will
critically evaluate their claims. As mentioned in previous chapters,
trustworthiness can be accomplished methodologically, and when
you report or share your findings you need to simply articulate your
methods for trustworthiness. For example:

     Achieving Trustworthiness

         1. Articulate your procedures clearly;
        2. Explain how you conducted your research

             thoroughly;
        3. Describe the robustness of your data collection

             methods;
        4. Make clear how triangulation was achieved.

Expect to be challenged on any aspect of your research claims.
This is where validation meetings with different groups of people
are useful, to have them consider their research processes and
findings from different perspectives both during their research and
at the conclusion of the project. When you report or share your
research, you should include details of your validation meetings and
any developments that resulted from these meetings.

   Critical Friends can also be useful in regard to trustworthiness.
When you establish the project recruit, Critical Friends. Explain that
their role is to evaluate all aspects of the research by challenging
your assumptions and considering ways to reduce subjectivity and

                                              Analyzing Data from Your Classroom | 105
ethical issues. Critical Friends can be helpful in thinking about all
aspects of your research, even the implications, usefulness, and
replicability of your research. You can utilize Critical Friends either
individually or as a group to provide formative feedback at different
points of the research.

     Data Analysis Checklist

         1. What is your positionality in regard to the data?
             How will it affect your analysis?

        2. How will you organize and prepare your raw data
             for analysis?

        3. Read and engage with all of your data.
        4. Code. What themes or categories are emerging

             across the data?
        5. What descriptions will you use to define and

             characterize your codes?
        6. Are the codes and/or themes interrelated? Are

             there sub-codes?
         7. How will you represent codes in the final report?
        8. What theories can you use to interpret the codes?
        9. What do your themes, codes, and descriptions

             mean in relation to your research question(s)?
       10. Would a Critical Friend or colleague's review of

             your analysis add to the trustworthiness of the study?

106 | Analyzing Data from Your Classroom
7. Let it Be Known! Sharing
your Results

     ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS

          What are the best ways to share my findings?
          Why should I share my work at a conference?
          What are the key components of a report detailing

             your findings?

Many action researchers are not expected to share their findings or
produce written reports, yet it is a useful endeavor for not only the
educator-researcher, but also for colleagues in their related fields.
For those who are compelled or required to share their findings,
Hopkins (2003, 140) provides some guidance, asserting that all
action researchers need to share their data and share it in a way
that:

             the study could be replicated in another
                context;

             the evidence used to generate claims or action
                is clearly documented;

             the action taken as a result of the research is

                                                                 Let it Be Known! Sharing your
                                                                                        Results | 107
                tracked;
             the findings are accessible to the consumer and

                relatable to their practice.

I personally believe it is important to formally share your work one
way or another, or at least prepare it to be shared. This process
helps you think deeply and concisely about what you have
researched, what your findings were, and what the significance is
for you and your colleagues. When you prepare your work for public
consumption, you add another layer of scrutiny and validity to your
thinking and editing process.

   Action researchers can share their findings in several ways that
colleagues and other consumers of research will be able to engage
with their work. The three following ways are the most common
paths for educator-researchers to share their work:

       1. Written Report or Article

               Develop a report for personal documentation or to be
                  shared with colleagues.

               Write an article summarizing your research and its
                  significance to the field.

       2. Presentation

               Local, State, Regional, National, or International
                  Conference

               District or School-Wide Professional Learning Session
                  or Workshop

               Research Symposium

108 | Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results
      3. Web-based Contribution

               Webinar
               Blog
               Personal Website

Writing a Report or Article
   Regardless of the purposes for writing your report or article,

there are a few factors to consider as you begin to write. Remember,
the purpose of action research is to improve your practice and/
or implement change, based on the findings of your research, as
part of professional learning and development as an educator. As
mentioned in previous chapters, your goal as an action researcher
is not to make generalizable claims, but to share your research with
other educators who want to learn from it, develop a similar study,
or use your findings to improve their own teaching in a similar
context. Whether it is a report that you share on your own, or an
article accepted, edited, and published by a journal or magazine,
the important part is to share your findings and contribute to the
knowledge base.

   Before you begin, the primary task is to consider the audience you
are addressing and the requirements and the purpose of your report
or article. An article usually has a specific audience and purpose.
For example, if I submit an article to the Elementary Social Studies
Journal, then I am trying to inform elementary teachers about my
findings in social studies and I am providing pedagogical insights
to them. However, reports can have several purposes depending on
the intent and audience. Reports can be for the purpose of:

               Reporting to Grant or External Funding Agency;
               Completing a thesis or dissertation;
               Contributing to a Pedagogical or Educational

                  Database;
               Documenting for Personal, Administrative, or District-

                  Level Record.

                                             Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results | 109
Regardless of the purpose, it is important to demonstrate a clear
and consistent understanding of the issues you have researched.
With the exception of reports to some grant or external funding
agencies (as they may require formal writing or templates), when
reporting on your action research, the quality of your writing can
be enhanced by writing in an authentic and personal style. I have
always felt that reporting action research is often powerful for one's
own professional learning and development because of the personal
nature of the writing. It may be useful to think about it as you
are reporting your own story, based on your experiences and
collaborations with other people.

   When writing a report or article you will want to have
representations of the following sections:

             Problematization of your Topic (Why is your
                topic important to you or the field?)

             Literature Review and Underlying Theories
                (What do we know and not know?)

             Methodology (How was your study structured,
                what data was collected, and how was data
                analyzed?)

             Summary of Findings (What were the
                predominant themes, codes, patterns, or
                meaningful consequences of the study?)

             Discussion of Findings' Significance (How do
                your findings compare to the literature?)

             Implications of Findings for Practice (How will
                your findings impact your practice?)

These sections will help you think about the important aspects of

110 | Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results
your study, as well as the aspects that will be of interest to potential
readers.

   Imagine the Reader
   As an educator-researcher you can imagine many of your
colleagues as potential readers of your work. Imagining potential
readers is a useful strategy to utilize as you write your report. In
this vein, and as you think about the aforementioned sections, the
following considerations provide further guidance in the writing
process:

   Always provide the background to your study, your context,
      and your positionality as an educator-researcher. Readers will
      potentially relate to your study and more easily apply the
      findings to their own context.

   Clearly present your aims, intentions, and purposes to situate
      your study and present your findings within the context of
      what you have set out to achieve.

   Do not be afraid to describe the process, success and
      challenges, as readers appreciate realism and honesty.

   Write clearly and concisely so others may be able to replicate
      the study.

   Write in first person if it feels more natural and accurate to the
      study.

   Readers may not be knowledgeable about your topic. Be
      concise and explain all aspects of your study in clear, simple
      language, and explain any educational jargon to be clear about
      its meaning.

   It is easier to read text with subheadings. Use subheadings
      when possible.

Since your study will likely be an inquiry into your own practice,
remember our discussions from other chapters related to
subjectivity:

   Acknowledge your own beliefs, prior assumptions, and values

                                              Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results | 111
      as part of your positionality or bias statement.
   Acknowledge any experiences that will relate directly to the

      study and your interpretations of the data.
   Discuss any ethical issues and how you addressed them.

Presentations of Action Research
   There are many ways for educator researchers to present their

findings. Some educator researchers present their research findings
to colleagues and others at discipline-specific conferences before
writing their final reports, as they believed that the preparation
for the presentation helped to bring their thoughts together. Many
others present their research findings after they have written out
their reports, and still, many other researchers do not write a formal
report, but instead disseminate their research through various
presentations in other ways. These different methods of
presentations all serve the purpose of bringing their ideas together
and reflecting on them before sharing their work with colleagues
and others. Here are some examples of presentations.

   Conference presentations
             A primary way for academic researchers to disseminate

          their research is through conference presentations at either
          the local, state, regional, national, or international level. I
          encourage educator-researchers to do the same, as these
          are some of the best ways to share your research with
          engaged and captivated audiences who attended the
          conference specifically to find out about new research.
          Similar to writing an article for a specific journal, many
          conferences will have a disciplinary or developmental level
          focus that will allow you to present your work to the most
          interested audience.
   District or school-wide professional learning session or
workshop

             As an educator in a school context, your districts and
          schools will undoubtedly offer professional learning
          opportunities or workshops. Educators in the district or

112 | Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results
       school are often encouraged to present at these events,
       especially if you are researching a new initiative
       implemented by the district or school.
Research symposium

          If you and some other colleagues have all done action
       research studies, or maybe a group of colleagues researched
       the same topic, it would be appropriate to create a research
       symposium to share your work. These can be formal or
       informal, but they are a way to have a conference-like setting
       focused on a specific topic and for specific audience.
Web-Based Contributions

          Many educator researchers are simply and effectively
       sharing their research online. There are many ways to share
       your research online, including some ways that would be in
       combination with writing an article, report, or sharing at a
       conference on an organization's website. However, the most
       common ways for individual educator researchers to share
       their work is through providing a webinar, contributing to
       a blog, or uploading to a personal website. These online
       formats all provide a way for educator researchers to present
       their work and reflect on it with the potential to receive
       feedback from others. Below are some journals specifically
       focused on publishing education-based action research:
Action Research Publications

            Action Research - a print-based, international,
               interdisciplinary, peer reviewed, quarterly published
               refereed journal which is a forum for the development
               of the theory and practice of action research
               https://journals.sagepub.com/home/arj

            Educational Action Research - Supported by
               Collaborative Action Research Network (CARN) a
               print-based peer reviewed journal.
               https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/reac20/current

            Journal of Teacher Action Research - an open-access,

                                          Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results | 113
                  online, international journal that publishes peer-
                  reviewed articles and lesson plans written by teachers
                  and researchers to inform classroom practice.
                  http://www.practicalteacherresearch.com/
               Inquiry in Education - a online, peer reviewed
                  international journal of action research in education
                  and related fields. https://digitalcommons.nl.edu/ie/
               Networks: An Online Journal for Teacher Research -
                  offers a place for sharing reports of action research, in
                  which teachers at all levels, kindergarten to
                  postgraduate, are reflecting on classroom practice
                  through research ventures.
                  https://newprairiepress.org/networks/

Concluding Thoughts
   As we discussed in Chapter 1 of this book, Action Research is

a cycle--the process is ongoing, and for many teachers, once you
engage in Action Research, it becomes difficult to stop pursuing
new and interesting questions in your classroom. As you answer
one question, new ideas and issues emerge, prompting a new
modification, and so on. Action Research, as such, is not finite.
For teacher action researchers, disseminating your work is an
important step in this cycle, as it offers you an opportunity to
contribute your new knowledge to the field at-large, and it can
open the door to new learning opportunities for both you and your
colleagues. Please do not get stressed out about the dissemination
portion of this cycle. Simply find the best way for you to share your
hard work and accomplish your intended goals. The important part
is to share your work and share in a way that allows you to deeply
reflect, celebrate your progress, get feedback, and contemplate
your next steps or project. The best teachers are lifelong learners,
and Action Research allows you the space to continue the deep
learning that is necessary in education. Hopefully, this book has
provided a vehicle to engage in a cycle of research in your
classroom.

114 | Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results
   The following supplemental chapter contains a full-length
vignette from a high school English teacher. The vignette details
the steps to an action research project using a real-life example
from her classroom. While every project will look different, the
vignette serves as an outline for how action research can develop
from your classroom wonderings, and it includes the detailed steps
the teacher took to fulfill all the parts of action research as outlined
in this book.

                                              Let it Be Known! Sharing your Results | 115
8. The Action Research
Process from a High School
ELA Teacher's Perspective

     Things to Think About

        This chapter will provide a vignette of a one teachers use
     of action research in her (Jobe) classroom. Her vignette will
     also illustrate important aspects of the action research
     process and link back to those aspects in the chapters. We
     hope this will provide some coherence across the
     preceding chapters!

Many teachers think of research as a cumbersome and meticulous
process involving piles of data and hours of analysis. Further,
teachers' attitudes toward research can be complicated: while
many teachers find value in research-supported systems and
strategies, they often view researchers as being too far removed
from classroom practice to really understand what teachers need.
This is where teacher-driven Action Research comes in--teachers
who act as researchers have the opportunity to be their own guide,
potentially influencing teacher praxis in positive and practical ways.

   If you find yourself feeling intimidated about conducting your
own research, think of the process as very similar to what you
already do every day as a teacher. When you consider the steps
to Action Research (plan a change, take action, observe, reflect,

116 | The Action Research Process
from a High School ELA Teacher's
repeat), it is easy to see correlations to the teaching cycle. First,
teachers must consider their students and develop objectives for
the growth they want to see over the course a unit (plan a change).
Then, teachers must create a series of strategies to help students
make progress (take action); during the learning process, teachers
collect data on their students to understand what is working and
what is not (observe). Finally, once a unit is over, teachers assess
which students made progress and consider how they can help
those students who are stuck (reflect). This cycle continues from
one unit to the next with teachers modifying their actions to reflect
their assessment of the students. Action Research follows in much
the same way.

   How Does Action Research Begin?
   My first formal experience with Action Research emerged in the
Teachers as Researchers course that I took during my master's
program. I used the weekly reflections on the required readings
to identify issues to address in my classroom, either through
pedagogical changes or adjustments to my curriculum, and I
followed the outlined steps to action research to implement a plan,
collect data, and develop a report. Yet, what this experience taught
me was I was engaging in action research fairly regularly without
realizing it. Similar to my experience in graduate school, the action
research process in my own classroom often began from
reflection--action steps naturally emerged as part of my own
teaching cycle, or from yearly evaluations with administration,
during which I identified challenges I was experiencing and
problem-solved--usually through research--ways to overcome.
   In one particular year, after reflecting on my own practice, I
realized (rather, admitted) that my junior-level English students did
not enjoy our classroom novel studies, resulting in a lack of
engagement and poor performance for many of them. The `start and
stop' method--where students read a chapter, then stop to either
discuss the chapter or take a quiz--did not replicate how people
read books, and it seemed to be destroying my students' desire to
engage with the novels they were assigned. This is where action

                  The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
                                                                                   Perspective | 117
research emerged, though if you had asked me at the time, I would
not have identified this experience that way.

   While the research I conducted in my classroom was not part
of formalized project and did not emerge in a linear fashion, I will
describe it to you using the outlined steps provided in subsequent
chapters to make it clear how your own previous questioning and
problem-solving experiences might fit into the action research
model.

   Topic Development
   The first important step in any action plan is choosing a topic and
understanding what you are hoping to accomplish. If I consider the
questions posed in Chapter 2 related to the processes of an action
research project, here is what I understood about my chosen topic:

   Does it address a practical problem? I wanted to address
      students' lack of engagement with classroom novels (research
      topic). This was a practical problem in an ELA classroom
      because the curriculum is often built around novel studies, and
      if students were not engaged with these units, they risked poor
      performance in the class.

   Does it generate knowledge? The goal was to research different
      whole novel study strategies and implement changes in my
      own classroom to see which strategies improve engagement.

   Does it enact change in your pedagogy/classroom/school? Yes.
      By addressing this problem in my own classroom first, I could
      test strategies that worked and develop a plan to share those
      strategies with colleagues in my ELA department.

   Is it participatory? Yes. As the classroom teacher
      implementing the strategies, I would be actively involved in the
      research process.

   Could it be a cyclical process? Yes. The strategies I
      implemented could work to improve engagement, but they
      may not improve overall performance, which would raise new
      questions for me as I refined the process. Each outcome could
      generate a new and interesting question to address in the

118 | The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
Perspective
      future. Further, the strategies I develop could have a
      significant impact on one group of students while showing
      little effect on a different group, which would also prompt
      further investigation.

This particular research topic fit in the `Improving Classroom
Practice' context because my focus was on changing pedagogical
strategies to improve student outcomes. From this point, I had to
develop a research question to guide my thinking, knowing this
question may change as the research process evolved. For this topic,
my research question had three parts: How can I adapt whole novel
studies to more closely reflect the natural reading process, take into
account each student's reading level, and improve overall reading
performance and engagement? This question was complex, and
multi-faceted, which meant it would likely change as the project
developed, but it gave me a good place to start because it focused
on the three challenges within my chosen topic.

   Understanding the Research
   In a formalized project, the literature review would be a
compilation of several pieces of research from different sources
that help you understand the research that already exists over your
chosen topic. In this example, my next step in this process was
to find research on whole novel studies in the classroom and use
that information as a catalyst for my own research. I read several
articles and one full-length book on alternative methods to whole
novel studies, but most of what I could find was based on a middle
school classroom. This was good news! It meant, on a large scale,
my research would have a place in the broad educational context
by filling an existing void in the information available to classroom
teachers. On a small scale, this meant other teachers in my own
department could benefit from what I design since a lack of
resources existed in this area.

   Researching Action
   The action part of the research comes from the literature review
and understanding your topic: what are you going to do in your

                  The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
                                                                                  Perspective | 119
classroom to address your question? In this example, after reading
several examples of alternative methods, I settled on three new
strategies I was interested in testing in my classroom:

   Allow students to read at their own pace-I held them
      accountable by asking them to do three things: read 25-30
      pages per day, complete 4 sticky note annotations per chapter,
      and adhere to checkpoints throughout the unit. To support the
      goal pace, students were given in-class time dedicated to
      reading, and the only homework assigned during the unit was
      to read; however, students could read ahead if they wanted,
      and they were not necessarily punished if they got behind. This
      addressed part one of my research question: how can I adapt
      whole novel studies to more closely reflect the natural reading
      process?

   Sticky Note Annotations with the Three Levels of Thinking
      (literal, inferential, critical)-Students had to complete four
      sticky note annotations per chapter with an attempt to
      demonstrate thinking at all three levels, and I offered
      extension activities for students who decided to read ahead.
      This addressed part two of my research question: how can I
      adapt whole novel studies to take into account each student's
      reading level?

   Personalized Writing Prompts-- I allowed students to create
      their own writing prompts at the end of the unit to
      demonstrate their knowledge of the novel. This addressed the
      third part of my research question: how can I adapt whole novel
      studies to improve overall reading performance and
      engagement?

I implemented these strategies in two different courses, one of
which was considered an `advanced' course, with students at all
different reading levels. The three strategies allowed for
differentiation while also keeping the class on pace to finish the unit
at the same time.

120 | The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
Perspective
   Data Collection and Analysis
   The data I collected naturally aligned with the three new
strategies I adopted for the unit. Since these strategies were all
new to the classes, I could isolate my observations on those
interventions and compare the outcomes to previous novel studies
that did not incorporate these strategies.

   Data Collection Methods
             I collected data using four different sources throughout

          the unit: sticky note annotations, reading progress checks,
          student reflections, and final essays. First, to track progress
          toward part one of my research question, I monitored
          student reading engagement by observing their reading in
          class. Using a scale of 1-4, I recorded student progress
          toward the daily 30-page reading goal on a spreadsheet.
          Second, to track students' understanding of the text, I read
          their sticky notes for each chapter, noting their level of
          thinking based on their commentary (literal, inferential, or
          critical). The goal would be to see students move toward
          more consistent critical thinking as the novel progressed.
          Finally, to gauge student engagement and performance, I
          used a formative assessment in the form of their final essays,
          and I used a reflection to understand their own feelings
          about the new method and their progress. These four data
          sources reflect a combination of qualitative and quantitative
          data.

   Data Triangulation & Analysis
             To better understand the efficacy of the new strategies

          I implemented, I looked at all four sources of data and I
          discovered that the qualitative data supported what I saw in
          the quantitative data. When I read student reflections, many
          mentioned feeling a greater sense of enjoyment throughout
          the novel study-some of these students admitted to getting
          behind on the reading at a few points, but concluded that
          having the final deadline as the only looming one eased their
          anxiety and allowed them to engage more completely with

                  The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
                                                                                  Perspective | 121
          the novel as they worked to get caught up. Other students
          mentioned that they usually disliked annotating texts, but
          the sticky note process was less intrusive, and actually
          helpful as they went to plan their own essays. Finally,
          students enjoyed choosing their own writing prompts
          because it made them feel more ownership of the unit.

             When I looked at my spreadsheets tracking student
          progress, I could see that students improved on the 1-4 scale
          over the course of the unit--the few students who were
          sometimes behind on meeting the daily reading goal had
          gotten back on track by the end of the unit, and the majority
          of students had stayed on pace the whole time. Annotations
          on sticky notes showed an increase in students at the critical
          thinking level, and their essays were largely more
          comprehensive and thoughtful than essays for previous
          novel studies.

             Still, like with most things in teaching, not every student
          showed progress because of these strategies. While the vast
          majority did improve, there were still students in each class
          who showed no improvement in meeting the goals of the
          unit, despite the change in strategies. If I was going to
          continue this research, my next question in the cycle would
          begin here.

   Action Implications
   The final step in the process is to consider what the data implies
about your research question. What I learned from implementing
these new strategies is that adapting the whole novel study process
to be more reflective of the natural reading process allowed me the
room to take into account students' different reading levels, which
kept them on pace and engaged. By giving students more ownership
in the unit, they performed better on assigned tasks, like reading on
pace, taking notes regularly, and analyzing the novel at the critical
level.
   The successful first attempt at changing my practice was exciting
because it meant I could (and should) continue to adapt these

122 | The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
Perspective
strategies each year, refining the process until it meets the needs
of all students and generates positive outcomes in all classes. When
I set out to change these classroom practices, I did so to benefit
my own students, without any plans for taking the research and its
outcomes beyond my two walls. However, I have always found the
most meaningful professional development for me as a teacher is
when I get the opportunity to learn from my peers. It was important
to share what was happening in my classroom to give my colleagues
that same opportunity.

   Dissemination
             To share my research, I developed a small presentation for

          my ELA department. I drafted an outline of the strategies,
          including examples of student work, to provide each teacher,
          and I spoke at a department meeting about the positive
          outcomes I had achieved from making these changes. I had
          several teachers request more information about this
          process following the presentation.

             Dissemination plans do not have to be extensive to be
          effective. In Chapter 4, we discussed the need to understand
          your capabilities and realize that change often happens
          slowly. My research addressed an issue that many teachers
          in my department were dealing with but it focused just on
          my classroom, making data collection and analysis
          manageable. The opportunity for my research to impact
          more classrooms in my school came from my dissemination
          plan. I could continue to develop my reach by presenting at a
          school-wide or district-wide in-service, or I could even plan
          to present at a local, state, or national conference.

   Conclusions
   Action research is a powerful professional learning tool because it
asks you, the teacher, to take a critical look at your own classroom
and theorize about your pedagogy, with the understanding that
this process is both reflective and fluid. Because action research is
unique to your own educational context, it does not look the same
for everyone, and each educator's learning will be distinctive.

                  The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
                                                                                  Perspective | 123
   Though the example of action research provided here does not
reflect a formalized project, it speaks to how teachers naturally
engage in the process of questioning and problem-solving to create
change for their students. It also demonstrates the value in what
teachers discover in their own classrooms. By thinking of the action
research process as similar to the teaching cycle, you can more
easily step into the role of Teacher Researcher and begin developing
a plan to positively impact your classroom.

   Recap :
   To review, the steps to action research and the corresponding
examples presented here are as follows:

 1. Plan a change: develop the research question and conduct a
      literature review.

               How can I adapt whole novel studies to more closely
                  reflect the natural reading process, take into account
                  each student's reading level, and improve overall
                  reading performance and engagement?

2. Take action: decide what steps you will take to conduct your
      research.

               Implement three new strategies: allow students to read
                  at their own pace, utilize sticky note annotations,
                  incorporate personalized writing prompts.

3. Observe: collect data on the changes you have implemented.

               Use spreadsheet data on reading goal and levels of
                  thinking, student essays, and student reflections.

4. Reflect: consider the results of your study and plan for
      dissemination.

               Develop a presentation for a school department
124 | The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
Perspective
                 meeting.
5. Repeat: consider how your research could continue.

              Revise the strategies to address students who did not
                 show progress in the unit. Ask more questions.

                The Action Research Process from a High School ELA Teacher's
                                                                                 Perspective | 125
References

Barton, K. C. (2015). Elicitation techniques: getting people to talk
about ideas they don't usually talk about. Theory & Research in Social
Education, 43(2), 179-205.

   Bassey, M. (1998). Action research for improving educational
practice. Teacher research and school improvement: Opening doors
from the inside, 93-108.

   Biesta, G., & Tedder, M. (2006). How is agency possible? Towards
an ecological understanding of agency-as-achievement. Learning
lives: Learning, identity, and agency in the life course.

   Blaikie, N. (2007). Approaches to social enquiry: Advancing
knowledge. Polity.

   Carr, W., & Kemmis, S. (2003). Becoming critical: education
knowledge and action research. Routledge.

   Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (2000). Narrative inquiry:
Experience and story in qualitative research. San Francisco, CA:
Jossy-Boss.

   Collingwood, R. G. (1939). An Autobiography. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

   Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design:
Choosing among five designs. Thousand Oaks , CA: Sage.

   Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative,
and mixed methods approaches (Vol. 4). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

   Danielson, C. 2007. Enhancing professional practice: A framework
for teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development.

   Glasersfeld, E. V. (1987). The Construction of Knowledge,
Contributions to Conceptual Semantics. Salinas, CA; Intersystems
Publications.

   Hooks, B. (1991). Theory as liberatory practice. Yale JL &
Feminism, 4, 1.

                                                                                   References | 127
   Hopkins, D. (2003). School improvement for real. London:
Routledge.

   Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (2000). Participatory action research.
In N. Denzin & Y. Lincoln, (eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research.
London: Sage.

   Kolb, D. A. (2014). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of
learning and development. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.

   Koro-Ljungberg, M., Yendol-Hoppey, D., Smith, J. J., & Hayes, S.
B. (2009). (E) pistemological awareness, instantiation of methods,
and uninformed methodological ambiguity in qualitative research
projects. Educational Researcher, 38(9), 687-699.

   Koshy, V. (2010). Action research for improving educational
practice: A step-by-step guide. Sage.

   Levin, M., & Greenwood, D. (2001). Pragmatic action research and
the struggle to transform universities into learning
communities. Handbook of action research: Participative inquiry and
practice, 103-113.

   Lincoln, Y. S. (2001). Engaging sympathies: Relationships between
action research and social constructivism. In P. Reason & H.
Bradbury (eds.), Handbook of action research: Participative inquiry
and practice, 124-132. London: Sage.

   Macintyre, C. (2012). The art of action research in the classroom.
David Fulton Publishers.

   Maher, F. A., & Tetreault, M. K. (1993). Frames of positionality:
Constructing meaningful dialogues about gender and race.
Anthropological Quarterly, 118-126.

   McNiff, J. (2013). Action research: Principles and practice.
Routledge

   Mertler, C. A. (2008). Action research: Teachers as researchers in
the classroom. Sage.

   O'Dochartaigh, N. (2007). Internet research skills: how to do your
literature search and find research information online. London; Sage.

   O'Leary, Z. (2004). The essential guide to doing research. London;
Sage.

128 | References
   Reason, P., & Bradbury, H. (Eds.). (2001). Handbook of action
research: Participative inquiry and practice. Sage.

   Sagor, R. (2010). The action research guidebook: A four-stage
process for educators and school teams. Corwin Press.

   Said, E. W. (1997). Beginnings: Intention and method. Granta books.
   Swantz, M. L. (1996). A personal position paper on participatory
research: Personal quest for living knowledge. Qualitative
Inquiry, 2(1), 120-136.

                                                                                   References | 129
