BEYOND DICHOTOMY

      SYNERGIZING WRITING
  CENTER AND CLASSROOM

                        PEDAGOGIES

                                      Steven J. Corbett
       BEYOND DICHOTOMY:
SYNERGIZING WRITING CENTER
 AND CLASSROOM PEDAGOGIES
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print edi-
tions. The publishers and the Series editor are teachers and researchers of writing,
committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate. We see the
opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing knowledge.
And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means for all to
articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment of literacy.

Recent Books in the Series

Tara Roeder and Roseanne Gatto (Eds.), Critical Expressivism: Theory and Prac-
    tice in the Composition Classroom (2014)

Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox (Eds), WAC and Second-Language Writ-
    ers: Research Towards Linguistically and Culturally Inclusive Programs and
    Practices, (2014)

Charles Bazerman, A Rhetoric of Literate Action: Literate Action Volume 1 (2013)
Charles Bazerman, A Theory of Literate Action: Literate Action Volume 2 (2013)
Katherine V. Wills and Rich Rice (Eds.), ePortfolio Performance Support Systems:

    Constructing, Presenting, and Assessing Portfolios (2013)
Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri (Eds.), The Centrality of Style (2013)
Chris Thaiss, Gerd Bräuer, Paula Carlino, Lisa Ganobcsik-Williams, and Aparna

    Sinha (Eds.), Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles of Academic Writing in
    Many Places (2012)
Andy Kirkpatrick and Zhichang Xu, Chinese Rhetoric and Writing: An Introduc-
    tion for Language Teachers (2012)
Doreen Starke-Meyerring, Anthony Paré, Natasha Artemeva, Miriam Horne,
    and Larissa Yousoubova (Eds.), Writing in Knowledge Societies (2011)
       BEYOND DICHOTOMY:
SYNERGIZING WRITING CENTER
 AND CLASSROOM PEDAGOGIES

                                   Steven J. Corbett

                              The WAC Clearinghouse
                                   wac.colostate.edu

                                Fort Collins, Colorado
                                      Parlor Press

                                www.parlorpress.com
                              Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523

Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621

© 2015 by Steven J. Corbett. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International license.

ISBN 978-1-64215-059-9) (pdf ) | 978-1-64215-060-5 (epub) | 978-1-60235-631-3
(pbk.)

DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2015.0599

Produced in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Corbett, Steven J., 1970- author.
Beyond dichotomy : synergizing writing center and class-room pedagogies / Steven J.

 Corbett. 1 online resource. -- (Perspectives on Writing)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Description based on print version record and CIP data provided by publisher; re-

 source not viewed.
ISBN 978-1-64215-059-9) (pdf ) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-060-5 (epub) -- ISBN 978-1-

 60235-634-4 ( mobi) -- ISBN 978-1-60235-631-3 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. English language--Rhetoric--Study and teaching (Higher)--Case studies. 2. Report

 writing--Study and teaching (Higher)--Case studies. 3. Writing centers--Case stud-
 ies. 4. Interdisciplinary approach in education--Case studies. I. Title.
PE1404
808'.0420711--dc23
2015017731

Copyeditor: Don Donahue
Designer: Mike Palmquist
Series Editor: Susan H. McLeod
Cover Image: Roman Republic coin showing Janus, c. 225-212 BCE; Kunsthis-
torisches Museum, Vienna; Photo by Jona Lendering (livius.org)

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted
by Colorado State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as
well as resources for teachers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in
digital format for free download at wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and
multimedia formats. This book is available in print and digital formats from Parlor
Press at www.parlorpress.com. For submission information or to find out about Parlor
Press publications, write to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South
Carolina 29621, or email editor@parlorpress.com.
For Michelle, my favorite
CONTENTS

Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Introduction. Sharing Pedagogical Authority: Practice Complicates
Theory when Synergizing Classroom, Small-Group, and One-to-One
Writing Instruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Chapter One. Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy: Course-Based Tutoring
and the History, Rhetoric, and Reality of the Directive/Nondirective
Instructional Continuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Chapter Two. Methods and Methodology: Locating Places, People, and
Analytical Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Chapter Three. Macro- and Micro-Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials:
Case Studies at the University of Washington. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter Four. Conflict and Care while Tutoring in the Classroom:
Case Studies at the University of Washington and Southern Connecticut
State University . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Chapter Five. Conclusion: Toward Teacher/Student, Classroom/Center
Hybrid Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Works Cited. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
About the Author . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149

                                                                                                   vii
       BEYOND DICHOTOMY:
SYNERGIZING WRITING CENTER
 AND CLASSROOM PEDAGOGIES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

    This book would not have been possible without the support and kindness
of many people. I'd like to thank David Blakesley for entertaining the original
proposal and encouraging me to submit it to the Perspectives on Writing Series.
Huge thank you to Sue McLeod and Mike Palmquist for believing in this proj-
ect from the start and for their patient and thoughtful guidance throughout the
publication process. Thank you to the anonymous reviewers for their detailed
and constructive feedback, which helped tremendously in reining in a wild-
horse of an early draft. And special thanks to Paul Rogers, my west-coast brother
in spirit. Many energizing conversations with Paul helped me to perform essen-
tial fine-tunings for clarity, precision, and purposefulness throughout the book.

    Finally, thank you will never be enough Pat Marks, Teagan Decker, Anis
Bawarshi, Juan Guerra, George Dillon, Gail Stygall, and Will Hochman for
opening the gates and allowing me in.

                                                                                                    3
INTRODUCTION

SHARING PEDAGOGICAL
AUTHORITY: PRACTICE
COMPLICATES THEORY WHEN
SYNERGIZING CLASSROOM,
SMALL-GROUP, AND ONE-TO-ONE
WRITING INSTRUCTION

         In short, we are not here to serve, supplement, back up, com-
         plement, reinforce, or otherwise be defined by any external
         curriculum.

                                                              - Stephen North

         Our field can no longer afford, if it ever could, to have forged
         a separate peace between classroom and nonclassroom teach-
         ing. There is no separate but equal.

                                    - Elizabeth H. Boquet and Neal Lerner

          The intersecting contexts of on-location tutoring not only
         serve ...

                                                               - Holly Bruland

    Increasingly, the literature on writing centers and peer tutoring programs
reports on what we've learned about teaching one-to-one and peer-to-peer from
historical, theoretical, and empirical points of view. We've re-defined and re-in-
terpreted just how far back the "desire for intimacy" in writing instruction really
goes (Lerner "Teacher-Student," The Idea). We've questioned what counts as
credible and useful research methods and methodologies (Babcock and Thonus;
Liggett, Jordan, and Price; Corbett "Using," "Negotiating") and meaningful as-
sessment (Schendel and Macauley). We've explored what the implications of
peer tutoring are, for not just tutees, but also for tutors themselves (Hughes,
Gillespie, and Kail). And we've made connections to broader implications for

                                                                                                    5
Introduction

the teaching and learning of writing (for example see Harris "Assignments," and
Soliday Everyday Genres on assignment design and implementation; Greenfield
and Rowan, Corbett, Lewis, and Clifford, and Denny on race and identity;
Mann, and Corbett "Disability" on learning-disabled students; Lerner The Idea
and Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker on the connections between writing center
theory and practice and peer-to-peer learning in the writing classroom). Since
the first publication of North's often-cited essay "The Idea of a Writing Center,"
quoted above, writing center practitioners and scholars have continued to ask
a pivotal question: How closely can or should writing centers, writing class-
rooms--and the people involved in either or both--collaborate (North "Re-
visting"; Smith; Hemmeter; Healy; Raines; Soliday "Shifting Roles"; Decker;
Sherwood; Boquet and Lerner)?

    Yet with all our good intentions, unresolved tensions and dichotomies per-
vade all our actions as teachers or tutors of writing. At the heart of everything we
do reside choices. Foremost among these choices includes just how directive (or
interventionist or controlling) versus how nondirective (or noninterventionist
or facilitative) we wish to be in the learning of any given student or group of
students at any given time. The intricate balancing act between giving a student
a fish and teaching him or her how to fish can be a very slippery art to grasp. But
it is one we need to think about carefully, and often. It affects how we design
and enact writing assignments, how much cognitive scaffolding we build into
every lesson plan, or how much we tell students what to do with their papers
versus letting them do some of the crucial cognitive heavy-lifting. The nuances
of this pedagogical balancing act are brought especially to light when students
and teachers in writing classrooms and tutors from the writing center or other
tutoring programs are brought together under what Neal Lerner characterizes
as the "big cross-disciplinary tent" of peer-to-peer teaching and learning (qtd.
in Fitzgerald 73). Like many teachers of writing, I started my career under this
expansive tent learning to negotiate directive and nondirective instruction with
students from across cultures and across the disciplines.

    I started out as a tutor at Edmonds Community College (near Seattle, Wash-
ington) in 1997. When I made my way as a GTA teaching my own section of
first-year composition at the University of Washington, in 2002, I took my writ-
ing-centered attitudes and methods right along with me. My initial problem was
how to make the classroom more like the center I felt so strongly served students
in more individualized and interpersonal ways. I began to ask the question:
Can I make every writing classroom (as much as possible) a "writing center"?
Luckily, I soon found out I was not alone in this quest for pedagogical synergy.
Curriculum- and classroom-based tutoring offer exciting, dramatic instructional
arenas from which to continue asking questions and provoking conversations

6
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

involving closer classroom and writing center/tutoring connections (Spigelman
and Grobman; Moss, Highberg, and Nicolas; Soven; Lutes; Zawacki; Hall and
Hughes; Cairns and Anderson; Corbett "Bringing," "Using," "Negotiating"). In
the Introduction to On Location: Theory and Practice in Classroom-Based Writ-
ing Tutoring Candace Spigelman and Laurie Grobman differentiate between the
more familiar curriculum-based tutoring, usually associated with writing fellows
programs, and classroom-based tutoring, where tutorial support is offered during
class (often in developmental writing courses). But just as all writing centers
are not alike, both curriculum- and classroom-based tutoring programs differ
from institution to institution. There is much variation involved in curricu-
lum- and classroom-based tutoring due to the context-specific needs and desires
of students, tutors, instructors, and program administrators: Some programs
ask tutors to comment on student papers; some programs make visits to tutors
optional, while others make them mandatory; some have tutors attend class as
often as possible, while others do not; and some programs offer various hybrid
approaches. Due to the considerable overlap in theory and practice between cur-
riculum- and classroom-based tutoring, I have opted for the term course-based
tutoring (still CBT) when referring to pedagogical elements shared by both.

    The following quotes, from three of the case-study participants this book
reports on, begin to suggest the types of teaching and learning choices afforded
by CBT, especially for developmental teachers and learners:

         I feel like when I'm in the writing center just doing individual
         sign up appointments it's much more transient. People come
         and you don't see them and you don't hear from them until
         they show up and they have their paper with them and it's the
         first time you see them, the first time you see their work, and
         you go through and you help them and then they leave. And
         whether they come back or not it's up to them but you're not
         really as tied to them. And I felt more tied to the success of
         the students in this class. I really wanted them to do better.

                                                    - Sam, course-based tutor

         One of the best features of my introductory English course
         was the built-in support system that was available to me. It
         was a small class, and my professor was able to give all of us
         individual assistance. In addition, the class had a peer tu-
         tor who was always available to help me. My tutor helped
         alleviate my anxiety over the understanding of assignments
         as she would go over the specifics with me before I started it

                                                                                                    7
Introduction

         ... When I did not understand something, my professor and
         tutor would patiently explain the material to me. My fears
         lessened as my confidence grew and I took more chances with
         my writing, which was a big step for me.

                                     - Max, first-year developmental writer

         I'd be interested in seeing how having a tutor in my class all
         the time would work, but at the same time one of the things
         I'm afraid of is that the tutor would know all the readings
         that we're doing and would know the kinds of arguments I'm
         looking for and they might steer the students in that direction
         instead of giving that other point of view that I'm hoping they
         get from the tutor.

                                        - Sarah, graduate writing instructor

    We hear the voice of a course-based tutor at the University of Washington
(UW), Sam, reflecting on her experiences working more closely with develop-
mental writers in one course. We feel her heightened sense of commitment to
these students, her desire to help them succeed in that particular course. We will
hear much more about Sam's experiences in Chapter Three. We also hear the
voice of a developmental writer from Southern Connecticut State University
(SCSU), Max, a student with autism who worked closely with a course-based
tutor. Max intimates how his peer tutor acted much like an assistant or associate
teacher for the course. He suggests how this tutor earned his trust and boosted
his confidence, helping to provide a warm and supportive learning environment
conducive to preparing him for the rigors of academic writing and communi-
cation. And, in the third quote, we hear from a graduate student and course
instructor at the University of Washington, Sarah, who expresses her concern
for having a tutor too "in the know" and how that more intimate knowledge
of her expectations might affect the student writer/tutor interaction. We will
hear much more from student teachers like Sarah (as well as more experienced
classroom instructors) especially in Chapters Three and Four. Experiences like
the ones hinted at by these three diverse students (at very different levels) deserve
closer listening for what they have to teach us all, whether we feel more at home
in the writing center or writing classroom.

ANSWERING EXIGENCIES FROM THE FIELD(S)

    While enough has been written on this topic to establish some theoretical
and practical starting points for research, currently there are two major ave-

8
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

nues that warrant generative investigation. First, although many CBT programs
include one-to-one and group tutorials, there are few studies on the effects
of participant interactions on these tutorials (Bruland; Corbett "Using"; and
Mackiewicz and Thompson being notable exceptions). And only two (Corbett,
"Using"; Mackiewicz and Thompson, Chapter 8) provide transcript reporting
and analyses of the tutorials that frequently occur outside of the classroom. Valu-
able linguistic and rhetorical evidence that bring us closer to an understanding
and appreciation of the dynamics of course-based tutoring--and peer-to-peer
teaching and learning--can be gained from systematically analyzing what tu-
torial transcripts have to offer. Second, is the need for research on the effects
of CBT with multicultural and nonmainstream students (see Spigelman and
Grobman, 227-30). CBT provides the potential means for extending the type
of dialogic, multiple-perspectival interaction in the developmental classroom
scholars in collections like Academic Literacy in the English Classroom, Writing in
Multicultural Settings, Bakhtinian Perspectives on Language, Literacy, and Learn-
ing, and Diversity in the Composition Classroom encourage--though not without
practical and theoretical drama and complications.

    Beyond Dichotomy begins to answer both these needs with multi-method
qualitative case studies of CBT and one-to-one conferences in multiple sections
of developmental first-year composition at two universities--a large, west coast
R1 (the University of Washington, Seattle) and a medium, east coast master's
(Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven). These studies use a com-
bination of rhetorical and discourse analyses and ethnographic and case-study
methods to investigate both the scenes of teaching and learning in CBT, as well
as the points of view and interpretations of all the participating actors in these
scenes--instructors, peer tutors, students, and researcher/program administra-
tor.

    This book extends the research on CBT--and the important implications
for peer-to-peer learning and one-to-one tutoring and conferencing--by exam-
ining the much-needed rhetorical and linguistic connections between what goes
on in classroom interactions, planning, and one-to-one tutorials from multiple
methodological and analytical angles and interpretive points of view. If we are
to continue historicizing, theorizing, and building synergistic partnerships be-
tween writing classrooms and the peer tutoring programs that support them, we
should have a deeper understanding of the wide array of choices--both meth-
odological and interpersonal--that practitioners have, as well as more nuanced
methods for analyzing the rhetorical and linguistic forces and features that can
enable or deter closer instructional partnerships. This study ultimately presents
pedagogical and methodological conclusions and implications usable for edu-
cators looking to build and sustain stronger pedagogical bridges between peer

                                                                                                    9
Introduction

tutoring programs and writing classrooms: from classroom instructors and pro-
gram administrators in Composition and Rhetoric, to writing center, writing
fellows, supplemental instruction, and WAC/WID theorists and practitioners.

    The lessons whispered by the participants in this book's studies echo with
pedagogical implications. For teaching one-to-one, what might Sam's thoughts
quoted above about being "more tied to the success of the students" or Sarah's
intimations regarding a tutor being more directly attached to her course add
to conversations involving directive/nondirective instruction and teacher/tutor
role negotiation? What might Max's sentiments regarding writing anxiety--and
how the pedagogical teamwork of his instructor and tutor in his developmen-
tal writing course helped him cope--contribute to our understanding of what
pedagogical strategies tutors and teachers might deploy with struggling first-year
students? In short, what are teachers, tutors, and student writers getting out
of these experiences, and what effects do these interactions have on tutor and
teacher instructional choices and identity formations? An important and related
question for the arguments in this book, then, becomes how soon can devel-
oping/developmental student writers, potential writing tutors, and classroom
instructors or teaching assistants be involved in the authoritative, socially, and
personally complicated acts of collaborative peer-to-peer teaching and learning?
When are they ready to model those coveted Framework for Success in Postsec-
ondary Writing "habits of mind essential for success in college writing?" When
are they ready to balance between strategically directing thought and action and
holding back when coaching peers to become more habitually curious, open,
engaged, creative, persistent, responsible, flexible, and metacognitive? There are
important pedagogical connections between how and with whom these habits of
mind are fostered and how students develop as college writers (see, for example,
Thaiss and Zawacki; Beaufort; Carroll) that studies in CBT can bring into high
relief. In sum, this book will explore, elaborate on, and provide some answers
to the following central question: How can what we know about peer tutoring
one-to-one and in small groups--especially the implications of directive and
nondirective tutoring strategies and methods brought to light in this book--in-
form our work with students in writing centers and other tutoring programs, as
well as in writing classrooms? I'll start this investigation by looking at why we
should continue to build bridges that synergistically bring writing classrooms
and tutoring programs closer together.

RECLAIMING THE WRITING CLASSROOM INTO "THE
IDEA OF A WRITING CENTER"

    Above we discussed the exigencies for this book's case studies. But bridging

10
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

and synergizing the best of writing center and writing classroom pedagogies
could be considered the uber-exigency that gave birth to CBT programs in the
first place. In his pivotal 1984 College English essay, Stephen North passionately
let loose the frustrations many writing center practitioners felt about centers
being seen as proofreading, or grammar fix-it shops, or as otherwise subservient
to the writing classroom. In this polemical "declaration of independence," North
spelled out a, thereafter, much-repeated idea that writing tutors are concerned
with producing better writers not necessarily better writing. North's emphasis
on writers' processes over products, his insistence that the interpersonal talk that
foregrounds and surrounds the one-to-one tutorial is what makes writing centers
uniquely positioned to offer something lacking in typical classroom instruction
(including the notion that tutors are not saddled with the responsibility of in-
stitutional judger-grader), touched on foundational writing center ideology. But
North's vehemence would also draw a theoretical and practical dividing line
between "we" in the center and "them" in the classroom as well as a host of cri-
tiques and counterstatements (North "Revisting"; Smith; Hemmeter; Smulyan
and Bolton; Healy; Raines; Soliday "Shifting"; Boquet and Lerner). Further, this
divisive attitude may have also contributed to the self-imposed marginalization
of the writing center in relation to the rest of the academy, as Jane Nelson and
Margaret Garner--in their analyses of the University of Wyoming Writing Cen-
ter's history under John and Tilly Warnock--claim occurred in the 1970s and
1980s. The trend for arguing from a perspective of what we can't or won't do was
stubbornly set.

    Though encouraging more of a two-way street between classroom and cen-
ter, Dave Healy, Mary Soliday ("Shifting"), Teagan Decker, and Margot Soven
have all drawn on Harvey Kail and John Trimbur's 1987 essay "The Politics of
Peer Tutoring" to remind us that the center is often that place just removed
enough from the power structures of the classroom to enable students to en-
gage in critical questioning of the "seemingly untouchable expectations, goals
and motivations of the power structures" that undergraduates must learn within
(Decker, "Diplomatic" 22). In another 1987 essay, Trimbur, drawing on Ken-
neth Bruffee's notion of "little teachers," warned practitioners of the problem
of treating peer tutors as para- or pre-professionals and to recognize "that their
community is not necessarily ours" (294). Bruffee and Trimbur worry that the
collaborative effect of peership, or the positive effects of working closer perhaps
to the student's Vygotsykyan zone of proximal development, will be lost if tu-
tors are trained to be too teacherly. Muriel Harris intimates, in her 2001 "Cen-
tering in on Professional Choices," her own personal and professional reasons
for why she prefers writing center tutoring and administration over classroom
instruction. Commenting on her experience as an instructor teaching writing

                                                                                                  11
Introduction

in the classroom, she opines: "Several semesters passed as I became ever more
uneasy with grading disembodied, faceless papers, standing in front of large
classes trying to engage everyone in meaningful group discussions, and realizing
that I wasn't making contact in truly useful ways with each student as a writer
composing text" (431). She views her experiences in writing centers, in contrast,
as enabling her to focus on "the copious differences and endless varieties among
writers and ways to uncover those individualities and use that knowledge when
interacting with each writer" (433). And there it is again, the scapegoat doing
its potentially divisive work via one of the most influential voices in teaching
one-to-one and peer-to-peer. Those of us theorizing, practicing, and advocating
CBT, then, must stay wary of the sorts of power, authority, and methodological
issues that might potentially undermine important pedagogical aspects of the
traditional one-to-one tutorial. These same issues of authority--which touch
importantly on concepts like trust-building and directive/nondirective tutor-
ing--come into play as we look to the various "parent genres" that inform the
theory and practice of the instructional hybrid that is CBT: writing center tu-
toring, WAC writing fellows programs, peer writing groups, and supplemental
instruction (Figure 1).

THE PROTEAN STATE OF THE FIELD IN COURSE-BASED
WRITING TUTORING

    As Spigelman and Grobman describe in their Introduction to On Location,
the strength--and concurrent complexity--of CBT lies in large part to the va-
riety of instructional support systems that can constitute its theory and practice,
the way these instructional genres mix and begin to blur as they are called upon
in different settings and by different participants to form the instructional hy-
brid that is CBT. The authors draw on Charles Bazerman and Anis Bawarshi
to expand the notion of genre from purely a means of textual categorization
to a metaphorical conceptualization of genre as location. In Bazerman's terms
genres are "environments for learning. They are locations within which meaning
is constructed" (qtd. in Spigelman and Grobman 2). For Bawarshi, "genres do
not just help us define and organize texts; they also help us define and organize
kinds of situations and social actions, situations and actions that the genres,
through their use, rhetorically make possible" (qtd. in Spigelman and Grobman
2). Rather than practice in the center, or in the classroom, rather than seeing
teacher here and tutor there and student over there, CBT asks all participants
in the dynamic drama of teaching and learning to realize as fully as possible the
myriad possible means of connecting. For CBT, genre as location opens to the
imagination visions of communicative roads interconnecting locations, commu-

12
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

Figure 1: The parent genres that inform CBT.
nication roads that can be free-flowing or grindingly congested, locations where
people inhabit spaces and make rhetorical and discursive moves in sometimes
smooth, sometimes frictional ways. For Spigelman and Grobman, this leads to
two significant features: a new generic form emerges from this generic blending,
"but it also enacts the play of differences among those parent features" (4; empha-
sis added). This generic play of differences--between parent forms, between par-
ticipants acting within and upon this ever-blurring, context-based instructional
practice--makes CBT such a compelling location for continued rhetorical and
pedagogical investigation.

    Pragmatics begin to blend with possibilities as we begin to ask what might
be. What can we learn from CBT theory and practice that can help us build
more synergistic pedagogies in our programs, for our colleagues, with our stu-
dents? Furthering Spigelman and Grobman's idea of the play of differences, by

                                                                                                  13
Introduction

critiquing the smaller instructional genres (themselves, already complex), read-
ers will begin to gain an intimate sense of the choices involved in the design of
protean, hybrid CBT programs and initiatives. This break-down of the parent
instructional genres will also provide further background of the many ways prac-
titioners have strived to forge connections between writing classrooms and writ-
ing support systems discussed above, and begin to suggest pedagogical compli-
cations like directive/nondirective instruction in the theory and practice of CBT.

Writing Center Tutoring

    Writing center tutoring is the most obvious, influential parent genre to start
with. Harris, Bruffee, and North have pointed to perhaps the key ingredients
that make writing center tutorials an important part of a writing curriculum.
Harris has helped many compositionists see that the professional choice of do-
ing or supporting writing center work can add much to both students' and
teachers' understanding of how writers think and learn. Harris claims, "When
meeting with tutors, writers gain the kinds of knowledge about their writing and
about themselves that are not possible in other institutional settings" ("Talking"
27). Bruffee similarly makes grand assertions for the role of peer tutoring in
institutional change. Bruffee contends peer tutors have the ability, through con-
versation, to translate at the boundaries between the knowledge communities
students belong to and the knowledge communities they aspire to join. Students
will internalize this conversation of the community they want to join so they can
call on it on their own. This mediating role, he believes, can bring about "chang-
es in the prevailing understanding of the nature and authority of knowledge and
the authority of teachers" (Collaborative Learning 110). But this theoretical idea
of the ground-shaking institutional change that can be brought about by peer
tutoring runs into some practical problems when we consider such dimensions
as subject matter expertise, personality, attitude, and just how deeply entrenched
the power and authority of the classroom instructor really is. A tutor snug, even
smug and secure in his or her belief that they are challenging "the prevailing un-
derstanding" and authority of the teacher or institution in one-to-ones may be
naively misconstruing the complex nature of what it means to teach a number
of individuals, with a number of individual learning styles and competencies,
in the writing classroom. Often the voices of hierarchical authority ring loud in
tutors' and students' ears, understandably transcending all other motives during
instructional and learning acts.

    Tutors and instructors involved in CBT instructional situations bring their
own internalized versions of the "conversations of the communities" they belong
to or aspire to join. Some tutors, for example, bring what they have come to

14
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

understand or believe as the role of a tutor--often imagined as a nondirective,
non-authoritarian peer--into classroom situations where students may have in-
ternalized a different set of assumptions or beliefs of how instruction should
function in order for them to join the sorts of communities they aspire to join.
Instructors, in turn, may look to tutors to be more hands-on and directive or
more minimalist and traditionally peer-like, often causing authority and role
confusion between everyone involved. Bruffee compounds this dilemma of tu-
tor authority with his view of the mediating role of peer tutors. In support of his
antifoundational argument for education, in the second edition of Collaborative
Learning, Bruffee distinguishes between two forms of peer tutoring programs:
monitoring and collaborative. In the monitoring model, tutors "are select, supe-
rior students who for all intents and purposes serve as faculty surrogates under
faculty supervision. Their peer status is so thoroughly compromised that they are
educationally effective only in strictly traditional academic terms" (97). In con-
trast, Bruffee argues that collaborative tutors: "do not mediate directly between
tutees and their teachers" (97); they do not explicitly instruct as teachers do,
but rather "guide and support" tutees to help them "translate at the boundaries
between the knowledge communities they already belong to and the knowledge
communities they aspire to join" (98). Bruffee, however, does acknowledge the
fact that no collaborative tutoring program is completely uncompromised by
issues of trust and authority, just as no monitoring program consists only of
"little teacher" clones.

    As we will see in the following sections--and throughout this book--the
issues raised by Harris and Bruffee become increasingly multifaceted as social
actors play on their notions of what it means to tutor, teach, and learn writing in
and outside of the classroom. In CBT situations, the task of assignment trans-
lation can take a different turn when tutors have insider knowledge of teacher
expectations. The affective or motivational dimension, often so important in tu-
toring or in the classroom (especially in nonmainstream settings), can either be
strengthened or diminished in CBT. And the question of tutor authority, wheth-
er more "tutorly" or "teacherly" approaches make for better one-to-one or small-
group interactions, begins to branch into ever-winding streams of qualification.

WAC Writing Fellows

    This idea of just how and to what degree peer tutoring might affect the power
dynamics of the classroom leads us straight into considerations of writing fel-
lows programs. The fact that writing fellows usually comment on student drafts
of papers and then meet one-to-one with students, sometimes without even
attending class or even doing the same readings as the students (as with Team

                                                                                                  15
Introduction

Four detailed in this book), points immediately to issues of power, authority,
and tutor-tutee-teacher trust-building relationships relevant for CBT. The role
of the writing fellow also raises the closely related issue of directive/nondirec-
tive approaches to peer tutoring. These theoretical and practical challenges hold
special relevance for writing fellows (Haring-Smith). While Margot Soven com-
mented on such logistical issues as students committing necessary time, careless-
ly written student drafts, and issues of time and place in meetings in 1993, the
issue most practitioners currently fret over falls along the lines of instructional
identity, of pedagogical authority and directiveness. Who and what is a writing
fellow supposed to be?

    Several writing fellows practitioners report on compelling conflicts during
the vagaries of authority and method negotiation (Lutes; Zawacki; Severino and
Trachsel; Corroy; Babcock and Thonus 75-77; Corbett "Using," "Negotiating").
Jean Marie Lutes examines a reflective essay written by a University of Wiscon-
sin, Madison fellow in which the fellow, Jill, describes an instance of being ac-
costed by another fellow for "helping an oppressive academy to stifle a student's
creative voice" (243). Jill defends her role as peer tutor just trying to pass on a
repertoire of strategies and skills that would foster her peer's creativity. Lutes
goes on to argue that in their role as writing fellows, tutors are more concerned
with living up to the role of "ideal tutor" than whether or not they have be-
come complicit in an institutional system of rigid conventional indoctrination.
In an instance of the controlling force of better knowing the professor's goals
in one-to-one interactions, another fellow, Helen, reports how she resorted to a
more directive style of tutoring when she noticed students getting closer to the
professor's expectations. Helen concluded that this more intimate knowledge of
the professor's expectations, once she "knew the answer" (250 n.18) made her
job harder rather than easier to negotiate. The sorts of give and take surround-
ing CBT negotiations, the intellectual and social pressures it exerts on tutors,
leads Lutes to ultimately argue that "the [writing fellows] program complicates
the peer relationship between fellows and students; when fellows comment on
drafts, they inevitably write not only for their immediate audience (the student
writers), but also for their future audience (the professor)" (239).

    Clearly, as these cases report, the issue of changing classroom teaching prac-
tices and philosophies (to say nothing of institutional change) is difficult to
qualify. It places tutors in a double-bind: The closer understanding of teacher
expectations, as Bruffee warned, can cause tutors to feel obligated to share what
they know, moving them further away from "peer" status. If they don't, they may
feel as if they are withholding valuable information from tutees, and the tutees
may feel the same way, again moving tutors further away from peer status. Yet
Mary Soliday illustrates ways this tension can be put to productive use. In Every-

16
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

day Genres she describes the writing fellows program at the City College of New
York in terms of how the collaborations she studied led professors to design and
implement improved assignments in their courses. One of the keys to the suc-
cess of the program, Soliday claims, involves the apprenticeship model, wherein
new fellows are paired with veteran fellows for their first semester. Only after
experiencing a substantial amount of time watching their mentors interact with
professors--witnessing their mentors trying to grasp the purposes and motives
of their professorial partners--were these WAC apprentices ready to face the
complexities of negotiating pedagogical authority themselves (also see Robinson
and Hall). Cautionary tales (like the ones presented in Chapters Three and Four
of this book) have also led writing fellow practitioners to attempt to devise some
rules of thumb for best practices. Emily Hall and Bradley Hughes, in "Preparing
Faculty, Professionalizing Fellows," report on the same sorts of conflict in au-
thority and trust discussed above with Lutes. They go on to detail the why's and
how's of training and preparing both faculty and fellows for closer instructional
partnerships, including a quote intimated by a fellow that he or she was trained
in "a non-directive conferencing style" (32).

    But what, exactly, are the features of a "nondirective" conferencing style? Is
it something that can be pinpointed and mapped? Is it something that can be
learned and taught? And, importantly for this study, what useful connections
might be drawn between directive/nondirective one-to-one tutoring and small-
group peer response and other classroom-based activities?

Peer Writing Groups

    And the pedagogical inter-issues don't get any less complicated as we turn
now to writing groups--what I view as the crucial intersection between writ-
ing center, peer tutoring, and classroom pedagogies central to CBT. Influenced
by the work of Bruffee, Donald Murray, Peter Elbow, Linda Flower and John
Hayes, Anne Ruggles Gere, and Ann Berthoff, in Small Groups in Writing Work-
shops Robert Brooke, Ruth Mirtz, and Rick Evans attempted to illustrate how
students learn the rules of written language in similar ways to how growing
children learn oral language--through intensive interaction with both oral and
written conversations with their peers and teachers. Marie Nelson's work, soon
after to be deemed the "studio" approach in the work of Rhonda Grego and
Nancy Thompson, provides case studies that supported Brooke, Mirtz, and
Evans's claims with compelling empirical evidence. For example, and espe-
cially pertinent to the case studies reported on in this book in Chapter Four,
Nelson's study of some 90 developmental and multicultural response groups
identified consistent patterns of salutary development in students learning to

                                                                                                  17
Introduction

write and instructors learning to teach. Student writers usually moved in an
overwhelmingly predictable pattern from dependence on instructor authority,
to interdependence on their fellow group members, ultimately to an internal-
ized independence, confidence and trust in their own abilities (that they could
then re-externalize for the benefit of their group mates). Nelson noted that this
pattern was accompanied by, and substantially expedited when, the pedagogical
attitudes and actions of the TA group facilitators started off more directive in
their instruction and gradually relinquished instructional control (for a smaller,
2008, case study that supports Nelson's findings see Launspach).

    But as fast as scholars could publish their arguments urging the use of peer
response groups, others began to question this somewhat pretty picture of col-
laboration. Donald Stewart, drawing on Isabel Briggs Myers, argued that people
with different personality types will have more trouble collaborating well with
each other. Brooke, Mirtz, and Evans, while ultimately arguing for the benefits
of writing groups, also described potential drawbacks like students negotiating
sensitive private/public writing issues with others, reconciling interdependent
writing situations with other writing teachers and classes they've experienced
that did not value peer-to-peer collaborative learning, or working with diverse
peers or peers unlike themselves. In her 1992 "Collaboration Is Not Collab-
oration Is Not Collaboration" Harris, focusing on issues like experience and
confidence, compares peer response groups and peer tutoring. She explains how
tutoring offers the kind of individualized, nonjudgmental focus lacking in the
classroom, while peer response is done in closer proximity to course guidelines
and with practice in working with a variety of reviewers. She also raises some
concerns. One problem involves how students might evaluate each other's writ-
ing with a different set of standards than their teachers: "Students may likely
be reinforcing each other's abilities to write discourse for their peers, not for
the academy--a sticky problem indeed, especially when teachers suggest that
an appropriate audience for a particular paper might be the class itself " (379).
Fifteen years later, Eric Paulson, Jonathan Alexander, and Sonya Armstrong re-
port on a peer response study of fifteen first-year students. The researchers used
eye-tracking software to study what students spend time on while reading and
responding. The authors found that students spend much more time focused on
later-order concerns (LOCs) like grammar and spelling than higher-order con-
cerns (HOCs) like claim and organization, and were hesitant to provide detailed
critique. While their study can be criticized due to the fact that the students in
the study were responding to an outside text rather than a peer group member's
text, and none of the students had any training or experience in peer response,
the findings echo Harris's concerns regarding students' abilities to provide useful
response. Obviously, the issue here is student authority and confidence. If stu-

18
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

dents have not been trained in the arts of peer response, how can they be expect-
ed to give adequate response when put into groups, especially if the student is
a first-year or an otherwise inexperienced academic reader and writer? How can
we help "our students experience and reap the benefits of both forms of collab-
oration?" Harris is curious to know (381).

    Writing center and peer tutoring programs from Penn State at Berks, UW
at Seattle, University of Connecticut at Storrs, and Southern Illinois University
at Carbondale, among many others, have answered Wendy Bishop's call from
1988 to be "willing to experiment" (124) with peer response group work. Tutors
have been sent into classrooms to help move students toward meta-awareness of
how to tutor each other. In effect, they become tutor trainers, coaching fellow
students on strategies to employ while responding to a peer's paper. But stu-
dent anxiety around issues of plagiarism and autonomous originality are hard
to dispel. Spigelman suggests that students need to know how the collaborative
generation of ideas differs from plagiarism. If students can understand how and
why authors appropriate ideas, they may be more willing to experiment with
collaborative writing ("Ethics"). It follows, then, that tutors, who are adept at
these collaborative writing negotiations, can direct fellow students toward un-
derstanding the difference. But as with all the issues we've been exploring so far,
the issue of the appropriation of ideas is as Harris suggests a sticky one indeed.
In another essay Spigelman, drawing on Nancy Grimm and Andrea Lunsford,
comments on the desires of basic writers interacting with peer group leaders who
look to the tutor as surrogate teacher ("Reconstructing"). She relates that no
matter how hard the tutors tried to displace their roles as authority figures, the
basic writers inevitably complained about not getting enough grammar instruc-
tion, or lack of explicit directions. While on the other hand, when a tutor tried
to be more directive and teacherly, students resisted her efforts at control as well.
Spigelman also relates how she experiences similar reactions from students. Her
accounts, as with Lutes above, suggest that it is no easy task experimenting with
and working toward restructuring authority in the writing classroom.

    In the 2014 collection Peer Pressure, Peer Power: Theory and Practice in Peer
Review and Response for the Writing Classroom (Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker)
several essays attempt to provide answers to the authority and methods questions
Harris and Spigelman raise. One of the recurring themes in the collection is the
reevaluated role of the instructor in coaching peer review and response groups.
Contributors like Kory Ching and Chris Gerben illustrate how instructors can
take an active (directive) role in coaching students how to coach each other in
small-group response sessions by actively modeling useful response strategies
(also see Hoover). Ellen Carillo uses blogs and online discussions to encourage
student conversation and collaborative critical thinking as an inventive, gener-

                                                                                                  19
Introduction

ative form of peer response. Carillo encourages students to question the nature
of collaboration and to become more aware of the ways authors ethically partici-
pate in conversation as a form of inquiry. And Harris herself, in her afterword to
the collection, offers in essence a revisit to her "Collaboration" essay. Like several
other authors in the collection, Harris draws on writing center theory and prac-
tice, combined with classroom peer response practice, to speculate on how we
just might be making some strides in working toward viable writing-center-in-
spired strategies for successful peer-to-peer reciprocal teaching and learning in
writing classrooms. Ultimately, Harris's summation of the collection, and her
thoughtful extensions and suggestions, argue for a huge amount of preparation,
practice, and follow-up when trying to make peer response groups work well,
suggesting as E. Shelley Reid does, that perhaps peer review and response is the
most promising collaborative practice we can deploy in the writing classroom.
Harris realizes there are multiple ways of reaching this goal: "Whatever the path
to getting students to recognize on their own that that they are going to have the
opportunity to become more skilled writers, the goal--to help students see the
value of peer review before they begin and then to actively engage in it--is the
same" (281). Harris makes it clear that she believes a true team effort is involved
in this process of getting students to collaboratively internalize (and externalize)
the value of peer response, an effort that must actively involve student writers,
instructors, and--as often as possible--peer tutors.

    It is important that those practicing peer review and response come to under-
stand just how useful the intellectual and social skills exercised and developed--
through the reciprocity between reader/writer, tutor/student writer, tutor/in-
structor--really can be. Isabel Thompson et al. agree with Harris's sentiments in
their call for studies that compare and contrast the language of writing groups
to the language of one-to-one tutorials. This line of inquiry would be especially
useful for CBT, since tutors are often involved in working with student writers
in peer response groups, usually in the classroom. I attempt exactly this sort of
comparative analyses in Chapters Two, Three, and Four.

Supplemental Instruction

    The final branch of peer education we will look at, supplemental instruction
(SI), is given the least amount of coverage in peer education literature, though
it purports to serve a quarter million students across the country each academic
term (Arendale). SI draws theoretically from learning theory in cognitive and
developmental educational psychology. There are four key participants in the SI
program, the SI leader, the SI supervisor, the students, and the faculty instructor.
The SI leader attends training before classes start, attends the targeted classes,

20
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

takes notes, does homework, and reads all assigned materials. Leaders conduct
at least three to five SI sessions each week, choose and employ appropriate ses-
sion strategies, support faculty, meet with their SI supervisor regularly, and assist
their SI supervisor in training other SI leaders (Hurley, Jacobs, and Gilbert). SI
leaders work to help students break down complex information into smaller
parts; they try to help students see the cause/effect relationship between study
habits and strategies and resulting performances; and because they are often in
the same class each day, and doing the same work as the student, they need to be
good performance models. SI leaders try to help students use prior knowledge
to help learn new knowledge, and encourage cognitive conflict by pointing out
problems in their understandings of information (Hurley, Jacobs, and Gilbert;
Ender and Newton). In this sense, supplemental instruction also demands that
SI leaders, much like tutors, must negotiate when to be more directive or non-
directive in their pedagogical support.

    Spigelman and Grobman report on the links between supplemental instruc-
tion and composition courses. Drawing on the work of Gary Hafer, they write:
"Hafer argues that it is a common misperception that one-to-one tutoring works
better than SI in composition courses, which are not identified as high-risk
courses and which are thought by those outside the discipline to be void of `con-
tent'" (236). In Hafer's view, the goals of SI have more in common with collabo-
rative composition pedagogy than do one-to-one tutorials in the writing center.
These choices between what one-to-ones are offering versus what other potential
benefits may present themselves with other peer tutoring models make for inter-
esting comparative considerations and potential instructional choices. Several of
the case studies I've been involved in over the years, including ones reported on
in this book, incorporate several prominent features of the SI model, including
tutors attending class on a daily basis, doing the course readings, and meeting
with student writers outside of class. (For more on SI, visit the website for the
International Center for SI housed at the University of Missouri at Kansas City.)

    The rest of this book sets up and presents case studies of my experimenta-
tion over the years with hybridizing these parent genres that make up CBT. I
illustrate the many ups and downs of diverse people with different personalities
and views of "best practices" in teaching and learning to write trying to get
along, trying to understand how they might best contribute to a synergistic
instructional partnership while attempting to realize the best ways to impart the
most useful knowledge to developing student writers. Synergy (from the ancient
Greek synergia or syn- "together" and ergon "work") involves identifying the best
of what each contributing collaborator has to offer. As we've been touching on,
one of the most crucial considerations tutors--indeed any teacher--must face
in any instructional situation is the issue of how directive versus how nondirec-

                                                                                                  21
Introduction

tive they can, should or choose to be and, importantly, how this intertwines with
the issue of authority and trust negotiation. Kenneth Burke writes, "we might
well keep in mind that a speaker persuades an audience by the use of stylistic
identifications ... So, there is no chance of our keeping apart the meanings of
persuasion, identification (`consubstantiality') and communication (the nature
of rhetoric as `addressed')" (Rhetoric 46). This book aims to focus our attention
on the importance of these interpersonal "stylistic identifications," urging teach-
ers and tutors to consider the true balancing act demanded by the directive/
nondirective pedagogical continuum.

CHAPTER SUMMARIES

    Chapter One, takes a careful look at the ongoing rhetoric of directive and
nondirective tutoring strategies. This issue has a long history in writing center
literature, and it brings us to the heart of some of one-to-one teachers' most
closely-held beliefs and practices. I examine the conflict inherent when tutors are
brought into the tighter instructional orbit that is CBT and how practitioners
have dealt with thorny issues of instructional authority and role negotiation
when moving between center and classroom. Carefully analyzing the literature
on peer tutoring, I argue that CBT contexts demand a close reconsideration of
our typically nondirective, hands-off approach to tutoring, that tutors involved
in CBT, especially with developmental students, can better serve (and be bet-
ter served) if they are encouraged to broaden their instructional repertoires, if
directors and coordinators cultivate a more flexible notion of what it means to
tutor in the writing center, in the classroom, and in between. I begin exploring,
however, the complications involved in this idealistic notion of instructional
flexibility.

    Chapter Two offers the multi-method, RAD-research case study methods and
methodology employed in Chapters Three and Four. I begin to offer some of
the back-story on the dramatic effects the widely varying level of interaction in
and out of the classroom--as well as variables like tutor experience, training,
identity, and personality--ended up having on participants' actions in and per-
ceptions of their CBT experiences. I detail methods of analyses for one-to-one
tutorials for Chapter Three and peer response groups in Chapter Four.

    Chapter Three presents and analyzes the one-to-one tutorials that occurred
with four teams from the UW. Audio-recorded one-to-one transcripts are the
central focus of analysis used to explore the question: What rhetorical and lin-
guistic patterns surface during one-to-one tutorials, and what relationship (if
any) do participant interactions and various CBT contexts have on these one-
to-ones? I carefully analyze how the discourse features of tutorial transcripts such

22
                                                                             Sharing Pedagogical Authority

as number of words spoken, references to instructors and assignment prompts,
overlaps, discourse markers, pauses and silences, and qualifiers hint at larger
rhetorical issues involved in the drama of closer collaboration. I attempt to tri-
angulate and enrich these linguistic analyses comparatively with the points of
view of participants.

    Chapter Four provides the findings and analysis of CBT partnerships from
the UW and SCSU engaged in small-group peer review and response facilitation
and other classroom interactions. While field notes from in-class observations
offer my views, I also present interviews and journal excerpts from the par-
ticipants and report on feedback from students to provide more perspectives
on these interactions. This chapter points to some illuminating findings that,
when compared to the studies of one-to-one tutorials from the UW, offer readers
an intimate look at the myriad choices practitioners have with CBT--and the
teaching and learning implications involved for all participants.

    In the Conclusion I discuss implications of this study's findings in relation
to my primary research question: How can what we know about peer tutoring
one-to-one and in small groups--especially the implications of directive and
nondirective tutoring strategies and methods--inform our work with students
in writing centers and other tutoring programs, as well as classrooms? I begin
with the implications of how this question played out in all aspects of the case
studies, from the participants' points of view, to the one-to-one tutorial tran-
script analyses and interpretations, and finally to the peer response sessions and
other classroom activities I observed and followed up on. Finally, I open the con-
clusion to implications for tutor education and development, program building,
and I suggest choices for teaching, learning and researching writing including
interconnections between one-to-one and small-group teaching and learning.

                                                                                                  23
CHAPTER ONE

TUTORING STYLE, TUTORING
STRATEGY: COURSE-BASED TU-
TORING AND THE HISTORY,
RHETORIC, AND REALITY OF THE
DIRECTIVE/NONDIRECTIVE IN-
STRUCTIONAL CONTINUUM

         I don't want students to perceive me as having all the answers,
         yet very often I do have the answers they are looking for, and
         the students themselves know it ... What sort of message are
         we sending to the students we tutor if they perceive us as
         withholding information vital to their academic success?

                             - Elizabeth Boquet, "Intellectual Tug-of-War"

         Familiar memes--don't write on the paper, don't speak more
         than the student-writer, ask non-directive questions--get
         passed among cohorts of writing tutors as gospel before they
         even interact with writers in an everyday setting.

            - Anne Ellen Geller, Michele Eodice, Frankie Condon, Meg
                                               Carroll, and Elizabeth Boquet

    Arguably, no single issue in writing center and peer tutoring theory and prac-
tice gets at the heart of one-to-one, small group, or classroom instruction as the
question of directive/nondirective teaching methods. The question of how and
when tutors (or instructors) should use techniques like open-ended ("Socratic")
questioning versus just telling students what they think they should do, or what
the tutor might do themselves if they were in the tutee's position, raises issues
involving tutor authority, tutor-tutee (and even instructor) trust, tutor train-
ing (or "tutor education" or "apprenticing"), and writing process versus prod-
uct--all relevant concerns in any writing instruction situation. However, when
the rhetorical situation of typical one-to-one tutoring changes--when tutors,

                                                                                                  25
Chapter One

students, and instructors are brought into tighter instructional orbits--so too
must typical instructional methods and styles be reconsidered. Further, add into
the equation the fact that student writers, tutors, and instructors might have
various levels of experience, preparation, and personality and things get even
more dramatically complicated. This is the case in situations involving the closer
collaboration of CBT programs. How can tutors and tutor coaches (directors,
coordinators) adjust their typical tutoring and tutor training styles and methods
to accommodate these sorts of multifaceted rhetorical situations?

    In their 2008 College English essay, Elizabeth Boquet and Neal Lerner draw
on critiques of Stephen North to argue that we need to be more open to expe-
riencing two-way streets in theory, research, and practice--in short, instruc-
tional learning--between writing classrooms and writing centers. Lerner argues
further in his 2009 The Idea of a Writing Laboratory that writing centers can be
much more than physical places or removed sites for tutoring. Writing center
theory and practice can branch out into many methods and forms for peda-
gogical experimentation. He writes, "Rather than a classroom teacher acting as
expert witness, jury, and judge in evaluation of students' writing, writing centers
have long offered themselves as nonevaluative, relatively safe places, as experi-
ments in the teaching of writing" (15). But what happens when a tutor travels
from that relatively "safe" center to the forbidding land of the "expert" classroom
teacher? My experimental research and practice on CBT since 2000 has led me
to important questions this chapter addresses: How and in what ways can what
we know about the rhetoric of peer tutoring styles and methods from writing
fellows, supplemental instruction, writing groups, and teaching one-to-one be
applied and studied. Then how and why might we share these finding with all
teachers of writing? The rhetoric of the directive/nondirective instructional con-
tinuum--so often debated, refined, and even resisted in writing center and other
peer tutoring circles--offers much in terms of teaching philosophy, holds great
practical and critical promise, and needs to be shared with all teachers of writing.
In many ways, the focus on how participants negotiate the directive/nondirec-
tive continuum offers immense teaching, learning, and communicative implica-
tions. Like Harry Denny, I am interested not only in the pragmatics of peer-to-
peer teaching and learning, but what these pragmatics might reveal in terms of
the bodies (minds) and politics of the various social actors in these collaborative
learning ecologies. How and why can purposefully withholding knowledge from
a student--in order to activate their own critical and creative powers--affect the
teaching-learning dynamic? When and in what ways can simply telling students
or tutors what they should or must do be more or less beneficial?

    Much has been written on the nondirective or minimalist tutoring approach
(see, for example, Ashton-Jones; Brooks; Harris, Teaching One-to-One) and sub-

26
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

sequent critiques of this approach (see Clark "Collaboration," "Perspectives";
Clark and Healy; Shamoon and Burns; Grimm; Boquet "Intellectual," Noise;
Carino; Geller et al.; Corbett, "Tutoring," "Negotiating"; compare to Gillespie
and Lerner's notion of control/flexibility). I will begin by analyzing several key
texts that comment on and critique general assumptions and influential argu-
ments surrounding this debate, including Irene Clark and Dave Healy's 1996
"Are Writing Centers Ethical?" and Peter Carino's 2003 "Power and Authority
in Peer Tutoring." I will move on to review texts that use empirical case-study re-
search in their arguments that CBT contexts demand a close reconsideration of
the typically nondirective, hands-off approach to tutoring. Finally, foreground-
ing the case studies in Chapters Two-Four, I will begin to illustrate in this chap-
ter why--precisely because the idealistic notion of "instructional flexibility" is
easier said than done--arguments involving tutoring style, via the directive/
nondirective continuum, offer important analytical lenses with which to scruti-
nize the "play of differences" that occur in various CBT situations.

"REALLY USEFUL KNOWLEDGE": THE DIRECTIVE/NON-
DIRECTIVE INSTRUCTIONAL CONTINUUM AND POWER
AND AUTHORITY

    When diving deeply into a discussion of directive/nondirective tutoring, we
soon begin to realize that--as in any educational situation--we are dealing not
just with methodological-instructional, but also political and personal, issues.
Clark and Healy track the history of the nondirective (or noninterventionist)
approach in the "orthodox writing center." They describe how in the 1970s and
early 1980s, in response to open admissions, writing centers began to replace
grammar drills and skills with what would become the HOCs/LOCs approach
to tutoring. Along with this new instructional focus, however, came a concur-
rent concern--fear of plagiarism. The fear of plagiarism goes hand-in-hand with
the issue of intellectual property rights--or students' rights and ownership of
their own ideas and writing--a political and personal issue pertinent to tutors,
students, instructors, and program directors. As we mentioned in the Intro-
duction, this "concern with avoiding plagiarism, coupled with the second-class
and frequently precarious status of writing centers within the university hierar-
chy, generated a set of defensive strategies aimed at warding off the suspicions
of those in traditional humanities departments" like English (Clark and Healy
245; also see Nelson and Garner). For Clark and Healy, the resulting restraint
on tutor method soon took on the practical and theoretical power of a moral
imperative. They describe how influential essays from Evelyn Ashton-Jones, Jeff
Brooks, and Thomas Thompson cemented the hands-off approach to one-to-

                                                                                                  27
Chapter One

one instruction.
    Ashton-Jones juxtaposed the "Socratic dialogue" to the "directive" mode of

tutoring. Drawing on Tom Hawkins, she characterized the directive tutor as
"shaman, guru, or mentor," while Socratic tutors are given the more co-inquis-
itive label "architects and partners." Practitioners were left to wonder if it could
be a good or bad thing if a tutor-tutee relationship develops to the point that
the tutee looks to the tutor as somewhat of a "mentor." (And in CBT situations,
especially, as we will discuss below, programs are designed with this question
in mind since peer mentorship occurs on a regular basis.) Brooks, in arguing
that students must take ownership of their texts, associated directive tutors with
editors, good editors perhaps sometimes, but editors nonetheless. Brooks goes
so far as to advise that if a tutee seems unwilling to take an active role in the tu-
torial, that tutors simply mimic the tutee's unengaged attitude and action. And
Thompson urged tutors to avoid having a pen in hand during tutorials. In the
name of the Socratic method, he also urges tutors "not to tell students what a
passage means or give students a particular word to complete a thought" (Clark
and Healy 246).

    In an ironic twist, Clark and Healy note that "by being so careful not to
infringe on other's turf--the writer's, the teacher's, the department's, the institu-
tion's--the writing center has been party to its own marginality and silencing"
(254). In answer to this perceived marginality and silencing, they offer essays by
Marilyn Cooper, Shamoon and Burns, and Muriel Harris, as well as the work of
Lev Vygotsky, that value the pedagogical feasibility of modeling and imitation
and an epistemological continuum that moves writers outside their texts to some
degree. Cooper, for example, in her close reading of Brooks, argues that tutors
who focus too intently on students' papers may be missing out on important
chances to help students with important, more general writing issues like how
the course is going in general or how to approach assignments in creative ways.
For Cooper, and others, a strict minimalist approach forecloses the act of nego-
tiation--the "really useful knowledge"--that could take place in a one-to-one,
negotiation that takes both the tutor's and the tutee's goals into consideration.

    Peter Carino urges writing center personnel to reconsider the importance of
the too-often vilified directive tutor. Like Clark and Healy, he sets up for critique
the idea of interventionist tutoring as anathema to the strict open-ended ques-
tioning style advocated by Brooks. Carino then discusses Shamoon and Burns's
"A Critique of Pure Tutoring" in which the authors explain how master-ap-
prentice relationships function in fruitful and directive ways for art and music
students. In the master-apprentice relationship, the master models and the ap-
prentice learns by imitation, from the authority of the master artist, the tricks
of the trade. In that essay, Shamoon and Burns also suggest the importance of

28
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

imitation to classical-rhetorical education. Reflecting on Clark and Healy's essay,
Carino concurs that nondirective approaches are defense mechanisms result-
ing from the marginalized history of writing centers within the university and
their subsequent paranoia over plagiarism. Further, Carino applauds how Nancy
Grimm advocates the directive approach so that traditionally marginalized or
under-prepared students are not barred from access to mainstream academic
culture. (I will continue this discussion below.)

    Conclusively, Carino suggests a dialectical approach to the directive/nondi-
rective dilemma, implying that directive tutoring and hierarchical tutoring are
not synonymous:

         In short, a nonhierarchical environment does not depend on
         blind commitment to nondirective tutoring methods. Instead,
         tutors should be taught to recognize where the power and
         authority lie in any given tutorial, when and to what degree
         they have them, when and to what degree the student has
         them, and when and to what degree they are absent in any
         given tutorial. (109)

    He offers a seemingly simple equation for when to be direct and when to
be nondirect: the more knowledge the student holds, the more nondirective we
should be; the less knowledge the student holds, the more directive we should
be. (Suggesting the roles specialist and generalist tutors might also play.) He
wisely, affectively qualifies this suggestion, however, by stating that shyer but
more knowledgeable students might need a combination of directive prodding
to urge them to take responsibility for their work and nondirective question-
ing to encourage them to share their knowledge, while chattier but less knowl-
edgeable students could benefit from nondirective questions to help curb hasty,
misdirected enthusiasm, and directive warnings when they are making obvious-
ly disastrous moves. Unfortunately, Carino does not also characterize what to
do when the tutor holds more or less subject matter or rhetorical knowledge,
or when the tutor is shyer or chattier. And this is where current research in
CBT can help explore this question. And this is also where the terms directive/
nondirective can be compared to other closely related pedagogical concepts like
control/flexibility (Gillespie and Lerner). Interestingly, Carino points to the di-
chotomy of power and authority that has historically existed between the class-
room and the center, complementing and amplifying Clark and Healy's notion
of fear of plagiarism. Because centers have a "safe house" image compared to the
hierarchical, grade-crazed image of the classroom, writing center practitioners
feel the need to promote a nondirective approach, which they view as sharply
contrasting the directive, dominating, imposing nature of the classroom. This

                                                                                                  29
Chapter One

attitude has led to some pretty confining dictums--like tutors not holding a
pen or pencil in their hand--that can unintentionally hinder helpful teaching
and learning.

    A minimalist philosophy may sometimes actually cause tutors to (un)inten-
tionally withhold valuable knowledge from students. Muriel Harris recounted
in 1992 how a student rated her as "not very effective" on a tutor evaluation
because she was trying to be a good minimalist tutor; the student viewed her as
ineffective, explaining, "she just sat there while I had to find my own answers"
(379). Although we could certainly question the student's perceptions, the fact
that one of writing centers' most valuable players, admittedly, might sometimes
drop the ball prompts us to continue questioning the writing center's dualized
directive/nondirective philosophies. Yet if we do a double-take on Harris's views
on this issue, we see that she has always seen both approaches as important.
Clark and Healy point to an earlier work of Harris's from College English in
1983 "Modeling: A Process Method of Teaching" in which Harris advances a
much more directive approach. In describing the benefits of intervening sub-
stantially in students' writing processes Harris asks "what better way is there to
convince students that writing is a process that requires effort, thought, time,
and persistence than to go through all that writing, scratching out, rewriting, and
revising with and for our students?" (qtd. in Clark and Healy 251; emphasis
added). Harris, early on, like Shamoon and Burns, understood the value and
importance of the ancient rhetorical tradition of modeling and imitation in the
service of invention and style. In order to perform such moves as "scratching out"
and "rewriting" tutors must have some confidence in their ability (the theoret-
ical and practical feasibility and kairotic timeliness involved) in offering more
directive and traditionally "risky" and potentially intrusive suggestions on issues
of substance and style.

"WHAT SORT OF MESSAGE ARE WE SENDING?" TOWARD A
HUMBLE/SMART BALANCE

    The issues presented above--questions of tutor authority, role negotiation,
and instructional method and style--while immediately relevant for CBT, also
parallel important, somewhat more general, scholarship in writing center theory
and practice and student-teacher writing conferences, scholarship with method-
ological strengths and weaknesses that reflect our field's developing understand-
ing over time. Laurel Black's Between Talk and Teaching offers a rigorous exam-
ination of the assumptions teachers bring to one-to-one conferences with their
students, assumptions applicable for all teachers of writing. Black opens her book
with the concept of conferences as one-to-one conversations, which may or may

30
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

not use the student's text as the prime mover of conversation. Black points to
Lad Tobin's view of the genealogy of conferencing from "first generation" teach-
er-focused to "second generation" student-focused conferences in which both
leave all agency in the hands of the teacher. What Tobin, and in turn Black, look
to is a "third generation" of conferencing "that takes into account the dynamic
relationship aspects of each writing conference: the student's relationship to the
text, the teacher's relationship to the text, and the student's and teacher's rela-
tionship to each other" through conversation (Tobin qtd. in Black 16). But Black
goes on to suggest the complexity of this ideal notion of conferencing when she
writes: "Warning bells should go off as we read about conference `conversation'"
(21). Black's work on writing conferences offers a rich spectrum of both the
larger rhetorical issues of power and authority in conferencing with an attention
to micro linguistic features and cues. The strength of Black's work lies in the
acknowledgment and exploration of the complexity of conferences as a speech
genre in which, as in one-to-one tutorials, a delicate balance is sought between
conversational talk and teaching talk. Black sees the complex interplay between
the cognitive, social, and linguistic as contributing forces--to varying degrees,
at different locations, in specific moments--to the unstable speech genre that is
one-to-one conferencing (echoing to some degree our discussion of the generic
"play of differences" in CBT from the Introduction). Yet in Black's analysis of
conference transcripts we do not hear the students' point of view, nor the in-
structors', nor do we get any real sense of what the pre-conference relationship
between the students and the instructors are like.

    The work of Nancy Grimm, which also displays a concern for the cognitive,
social, and linguistic forces in one-to-one teaching, has made a major impact
on the ways writing center professionals (re)view their theory and practice. Yet,
like Black, her research falls short of providing the surrounding contextual in-
formation necessary to make full use of her findings. Her conceptualization of
directive/nondirective tutoring can also be held up to scrutiny. In her concise
yet theoretically sophisticated 1999 Good Intentions, Grimm juxtaposes the im-
plications of Brian Street's autonomous and ideological models of literacy to
the work we do. Arguing that our traditional hands-off approach to one-to-one
instruction is often misguided, she writes:

         Writing center tutors are supposed to use a nondirective
         pedagogy to help students "discover" what they want to say.
         These approaches protect the status quo and withhold insider
         knowledge, inadvertently keeping students from nonmain-
         stream cultures on the sidelines, making them guess about
         what the mainstream culture expects or frustrating them into

                                                                                                  31
Chapter One

         less productive attitudes. These approaches enact the belief
         that what is expected is natural behavior rather than culturally
         specific performance. (31)

    Like Cooper five years earlier, Grimm calls for writing center practitioners
to move away from a focus on the paper to the cultural and ideological work
of literacy: negotiating assignment sheets to see if there might be any room for
student creativity or even resistance; making students aware of multiple ways of
approaching writing tasks and situations, making tacit academic understandings
explicit; rethinking tired admonishments regarding what we cannot do when
tutoring one-to-one. Grimm illustrates what a tough job this really is, though,
in her analysis of Anne DiPardo's "`Whispers of Coming and Going': Lessons
from Fannie."

    While Grimm, drawing on Street and Delpit, forcefully argues for the im-
portance of moving past our infatuation with nondirective tutoring, she may
be inadvertently pointing to why it is also perhaps just as important for us to
continue to value some of our nondirective strategies--suggesting the truly sub-
tle nature of this issue. DiPardo's essay describes and analyzes the tutorial rela-
tionship between Morgan, an African-American tutor, and Fannie, a Navajo
student who just passed her basic writing course and is attempting the required
composition course. Both DiPardo and Grimm speculate that Morgan's repeat-
ed attempts to prod and push Fannie toward what Morgan believed was reali-
zation or progress, only pushed Fannie away from any productive insights. The
tutorial transcript presented by DiPardo illustrates how Morgan dominated the
conversation, often interrupting Fannie (though unfortunately we do not get
micro-level analysis like how long pauses were after questions, etc.), how Mor-
gan appropriated the conversation, attempting to move Fannie toward her idea
of a normal academic essay. While this approach may ostensibly resemble the
directive approach advocated by Grimm, Lisa Delpit, and others, what it leads
Grimm and DiPardo to conclude is that tutors must be encouraged to practice
"authentic listening": "As DiPardo's study illustrates, without authentic listening,
the very programs designed to address social inequality inadvertently reproduce
it, `unresolved tensions tugged continually at the fabric of institutional good
intentions' (DiPardo 1992, 126)" (Grimm 69; also see Clark "Perspectives," 46).
Ironically, listening, or allowing the student to talk a little more during one-to-
ones to enable them to supposedly be more in control of the tutorial discourse,
is one of--perhaps the most fundamental of--nondirective strategies.

    Carol Severino, drawing on Ede and Lunsford for her 1992 essay "Rhetor-
ically Analyzing Collaborations," associates directive tutoring with hierarchical
collaboration and nondirective tutoring with dialogic collaboration (recall Cari-

32
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

no's words above). But her analysis of two conferences from two different tutors
with the same student points perhaps more emphatically toward our assump-
tions of what the ideal tutoring session is supposed to sound like. The student is
Joe, an older African American returning student taking a class entitled "Race
and Ethnicity in Our Families and Lives." Severino analyzes the transcripts of
sessions between Joe and Henry, a high school teacher in his thirties working
on his MA in English, and Joe and Eddy, a younger freshman with less teaching
experience. Like the sessions that DiPardo and Grimm analyze above, Henry
uses his teacherly authority, from the very start of the conference, by asking
closed or leading questions that control the flow of the rest of the tutorial. In
contrast, during the session between Joe and Eddy, Eddy starts off right away
asking Joe open-ended questions like how he feels about the paper, and where he
wants to go from there. For Severino, this sets a more conversational, peer-like
tone that carries through the rest of the tutorial. Although obviously privileging
the nondirective/dialogic approach, Severino concludes by asserting that it is
difficult to say which of the above sessions was necessarily "better." The problem
with Severino's analysis, however, is that we do not get a clear enough picture of
exactly what was going on during the tutorial. As with Fannie above, we do not
know how Joe felt about the interaction. Perhaps he found greater value in Hen-
ry's more directive approach. Further, we do not know what stage of the draft
Joe is in in either tutorial (information that might have contributed to the level
of directive or nondirective instruction). Nonetheless, the value in Severino's
overall argument involves her urging those who prepare tutors to avoid prescrip-
tive tutoring dictums that do not take into consideration varying assignment
tasks, rhetorical situations, and student personalities and goals--the "always"
and "don't" that can close off avenues for authentic listening and conversation.

    Four, more recent, case studies, while also having their limits, inch us closer
toward building feasible theoretical frames and methods for analyzing the de-
ployment of--and pedagogical implications of-- directive/nondirective instruc-
tional strategies. Susan Murphy's 2006 study of tutorials uses Goffman's theory
of self-presentation and Brown and Levinson's theory of politeness to frame her
argument that analyzing discourse strategies of self-presentation can provide
clues to how tutors enact nondirective strategies. Her discourse analysis of four
tutorials illustrates various graduate student tutors alternately imposing and dis-
placing authority. One graduate tutor, working with a student on a novel the
tutor is unfamiliar with, attempts to perhaps "save face" by aligning himself with
the field of English, in the process using jargon like "flashback," "rhetoric," and
"foreshadowing," and even going so far as to urge the student to "Go read some
criticism. Develop some ideas about the book" (75, 77). On the other hand, an-
other graduate tutor, while also displaying an alignment with the field through

                                                                                                  33
Chapter One

the use of the pronoun "we," alternately distances herself from literary critic
experts and aligns herself more closely with the student writer with the pronoun
"they." Murphy argues this sort of desire to save both her own face and the face
of the student writer "seems to be a result of a desire to both claim and reject the
authority that comes with her role as graduate student, teacher, and consultant,"
requiring being smart and humble simultaneously (78). In their 2012 study of
tutorials, Jamie White-Farnham, Jeremiah Dyehouse, and Bryna Finer report
similar issues with authority and trust in their attempts to map "facilitative" and
"directive" tutoring strategies. The authors note the directive strategy of using
tag questions like "right?" at the end of sentences to keep students "on board"
as well as, like in Murphy's study, alignment with the authority of the instructor
and the field with a phrase like "often, when teachers say that, they do mean ...
" (5). Yet the authors also report having trouble definitively mapping what they
call facilitative tutoring.

    Two 2009 articles by Isabel Thompson and colleagues provide both breadth
and depth of analyses that might help further differentiate and qualify between
more directive and nondirective tutoring strategies. Thompson et al.'s "Examin-
ing Our Lore" offers a study of 4,078 conference surveys from Auburn Univer-
sity's English Center to ascertain how "various conference attributes related to
writing center mandates affected tutors' and students' conference satisfaction"
(87-88). 26 of the tutors were graduate students, and 16 undergraduates; 3,330
conferences were conducted with students enrolled in freshman composition
courses. The researchers' cogent findings--based on compelling statistical data--
support Carino's and others' assertions from above regarding the complex nature
of traversing the directive/nondirective continuum. Students reported high sat-
isfaction with tutorials when they felt the tutors were answering their questions;
students also reported satisfaction when they felt comfortable during the con-
ference. Despite the fact that tutors were trained in nondirective approaches,
tutors reported that the more directive they were, the more satisfied they were
with the conference. How much tutors talked (or conversationally "dominated"
the session) or how closely tutors acted like "peers" had little statistical effect on
student satisfaction. Thompson et al. ultimately support arguments from Clark
("Perspectives") that, in practice, tutors are unable to avoid being directive, and
students, in fact, appreciate this directiveness. Yet, the authors are careful to
qualify this claim when they assert:

         Neither our survey nor other empirical research about writing
         center conferences suggests totally discarding nondirective
         tutoring strategies. Students' efforts, feelings of being chal-
         lenged, willingness to take risks, and independence are vital

34
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

         for their engagement ... tutoring strategies have been found
         most satisfactory when they are flexibly used--when they vary
         between assuring students' comfort and ownership of their
         writing and answering students' questions to improve writing
         quality. (96)

    This concern with balancing tutorial methods to include attention to both
acts of trying to coach students toward strategies to improve their papers (or
writing in general) and the pedagogically affective is given a more focused look
by Thompson in another 2009 article.

    Thompson's highly detailed microanalyses of one successful tutorial session,
"Scaffolding in the Writing Center," uses the frame of scaffolding to investigate
how analysis of both verbal and nonverbal cues might help further contextualize
directive and nondirective (or facilitative) tutoring strategies. Thompson's anal-
yses complements and enriches Severino's discussed above, by illustrating how
a peer undergraduate tutor starts off a session using more typically recognized
nondirective strategies, like Eddy, to get the student writer involved and taking
ownership of the paper. (Thompson characterizes the tutor and student writer
as follows: "The tutor is an experienced and well-respected undergraduate male,
a senior majoring in psychology, the student is a female freshman" [425].) But
she also details how, as the session progresses, the tutor feels freer to deploy, like
Henry, more directive strategies. What results is a more balanced humble/smart
session, like the one reported by Murphy above, that both the tutor and tutee
rated "highly successful." Especially promising in regards to mapping/catego-
rizing directive and nondirective strategies is Thompson's frame of scaffolding.
She divides this frame into three categories: one, direct instruction, and two
that--for the sake of analysis--we might consider more facilitative or nondi-
rective, cognitive scaffolding and motivational scaffolding. Thompson details
why developing trust and comfort requires an active session where verbal cues
like backchannels, pauses, and overlaps hint at the "subtle persuasion" involved
in moving closer to the fruitful intersubjectivity of the coveted successful tu-
torial. While the directive instruction category is obviously more in line with
directive strategies--giving explanations, answers or examples, or posing lead-
ing questions--and cognitive scaffolding sounds very much like nondirective
strategies--demonstrating, giving part of an answer or asking an open-ended
question then "fading out"--I would argue that the third category, motivation-
al scaffolding--using humor, providing positive or negative feedback, evincing
sympathy and empathy--could be considered a nuanced form of nondirective
tutoring, perhaps one requiring the sort of facilitative "authentic listening" called
for by DiPardo and Grimm. Visually, we might imagine directive/nondirective

                                                                                                  35
Chapter One

    Figure 2: Overlapping reality of directive/nondirective strategies.
strategies overlapping at any given moment during tutorials, as in Figure 2.

    Applying these methodological insights to CBT settings, I want to pose the
same "higher risk/higher yield" question that Boquet asks in Noise from the Writ-
ing Center of any tutor: "How might I encourage this tutor to operate on the
edge of his or her expertise?" (81). Then I want to analyze what happens when
tutors must negotiate this challenging new role. What happens when a less-ex-
perienced or less-"trained" or perhaps even over-trained tutor attempts to work
with a student writer? What happens when tutors--with varying levels of ex-
perience or training, with different personalities, with different notions of how
they are "supposed" to act--are connected much more closely with the students
and instructor of the course?

"THEY LIKE TO BE TOLD WHAT TO DO": NEGOTIATING
DIRECTIVE/NONDIRECTIVE TUTORING ASSUMPTIONS
WHEN MOVING BETWEEN THE WRITING CENTER AND
THE DEVELOPMENTAL WRITING CLASSROOM

    Above we discussed how tricky it can be to balance directive/nondirective
instructional methods when teaching one-to-one. Others who have report-
ed on their experiences as small-group peer response facilitators (often done
in writing classrooms rather than at the center) have echoed these and other
concerns--while also expounding on the benefits of small-group tutoring, in-
cluding opening avenues for closer writing classroom/center connections and

36
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

teaching students how to better tutor (peer review) each other's work (Spilman;
Lawfer; Shaperenko; Corbett "Bringing," "Role"; Decker "Diplomatic"). In my
earlier work on CBT, I reflect on my experiences visiting classrooms in the late
1990s and early 2000s. In the brief 2002 "The Role of the Emissary" I narrate
two visits to classrooms, one where I simply discuss the services of the writing
center, and the other where I actually sit in on a peer review and response ses-
sion. My argument in that early essay calls for writing center tutors to boldly
travel into classrooms with full confidence in their abilities to share what they've
learned about learning to write. But the thinly-veiled attitude I dance in that
essay was motivated by a belief touched on in the Introduction of this book:
the scapegoating attitude that writing center and one-to-one tutoring is a bet-
ter teaching-learning paradigm than classroom instruction. In the On Location
chapter "Bringing the Noise," I narrate idealistic scenes involving students, tu-
tors, and instructors getting along famously in the classroom--while illustrating
how tutors can embrace more directive instructional roles that can complement
more nondirective strategies during peer response facilitation (also see Decker
"Diplomatic"; Anderson and Murphy; Gilewicz). I also describe how something
as simple as having a tutor visit to talk about her personal experiences with ac-
ademic writing can offer interpersonal points of identification and connection
between tutors and students, students and the academy, and the writing center
and the classroom. These sorts of experiences in traversing into classrooms, into
the turf of a classroom instructor to listen to fellow students and to talk with
them about whatever concerned them most at that time, would provide the
impetus for further practice and future experiences. But others in the same col-
lection offer a more conflicting view of what can occur when making the leap
between center and classroom--especially when tutors trained in nondirective
instructional approaches bring this more hands-off philosophy to the develop-
mental writing classroom.

    Barbara Liu and Holly Mandes, though also celebrating overall success in
CBT initiatives, describe how certain adjustments had to be made to the typ-
ical nondirective approach when tutors were moved into the classroom. The
authors explain the transition of moving tutors from the writing center into the
classroom for their developmental writing course, English 100Plus at Eastern
Connecticut State University in terms of three problematic assumptions: writers
usually come to the center of their own accord; the typical one-to-one tutorial
is supposed to focus on the writer not the paper; and the writing tutor's role is
of learner, listener, and questioning conversation partner, not expert teacher.
Liu and Mandes would soon come to realize that "the nonintrusive, writing
center(ed) model in which Eastern's tutors had been trained did not always meet
the needs of the students with whom they were working in the classrooms" (88).

                                                                                                  37
Chapter One

Yet the authors maintain that less-prepared writers are often more apprehensive
than mainstream student writers because they are aware of being, or have at
least been identified by others as, somehow remedial. When tutors are circu-
lating in the classroom, in their zeal to help, they can all too easily "invade the
writer's comfort zone" treading "a thin line between help and invasion" (91). In
building a relationship based on trust, tutors come to learn that the demands of
on-location tutoring and mentoring may cause them to have to reevaluate and
redeploy some of the most cherished pedagogical strategies learned during their
tutor training.

    Like Liu and Mandes, Melissa Nicolas also points to the fact that this ar-
rangement requires students to meet with tutors, rather than the typically op-
tional writing center meeting. In her "Cautionary Tale" we see the difficulty in
tutors moving from a more writing center-like setting to an instructional setting
that demands that they move beyond the role of the emissary to closer commu-
nicative contact and negotiation with teachers and students in the classroom.
This new arrangement puts tutors in a high-risk situation where they may be
struggling to apply what they have been taught from orthodox writing cen-
ter theory and practice to this new and different instructional context. Nicolas
reports how this caused authority and role confusion in the tutors. One tutor
explained how, even though she tried to downplay her authority while working
with students, still "they just always seem to look at me or toward me ... They
like to be told what to do ... It's kind of confusing. It's sort of like a balancing
act where you try not to be in it too much but try to be there, but it's like you're
not there. It's hard" (120). The hard fact is that when tutors are in the classroom
in the capacity of a helper or assistant of some sort it will look to students as if
they must be there for a reason--the reason of course to share some knowledge
or skill that the students may not necessarily possess. And just as classroom
teachers either learn to balance levels of control and directiveness, questioning
and listening, or just letting students run with ideas, tutors and students develop
a heightened sense of these instructional moves. Here, again the idea that student
desire for what they see as what they need, and the willingness either to oblige
the student or not--or tutor desire to live up to the theoretical ideal tutor--is not
always an easy choice for peer tutors to make. It is the double-bind that under-
scores each move the tutor makes whether tutoring one-to-one or collaborating
in the classroom.

    Finally, we must also factor into the equation that so many developmental
classrooms are filled with diverse students, and diverse tutors. In relation to
my treatment of Grimm DiPardo, and Severino above, Lisa Delpit insists that
"there are codes or rules for participating in power; that is, there is a `culture of
power'" ("Silenced" 568) that students and teachers must negotiate. Delpit be-

38
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

lieves that those who hold power are often least aware of it, while those without
it are fully aware of their marginal subject positions. Delpit further claims that
explicit, direct teaching of these codes or rules enable those outside the margins
of power to gain access to the resources needed for positions of power (569).
Drawing on a study of cross-cultural interactions by John Gumpertz, Delpit
suggests that efforts toward nondirective, power-displacing instruction may ac-
tually be less helpful for some students than more direct, power-acknowledging
methods. Others (Mann; Neff; Corbett "Learning") claim that students with
various learning disabilities (LDs) require tutors who are willing to take a more
active, interventionist role in these students' learning to write and writing-to-
learn performances. These questions of the connections between instructional
method and tutor, student, and even instructor identity will resurface repeatedly
in the following chapters.

RENEGOTIATING OUR BEST INTENTIONS

    This review of the directive/nondirective literature begins to illustrate why
scholars in writing center and peer tutoring theory and practice urge practi-
tioners to keep our pedagogy flexible and attuned to the protean nature of peer
collaborative interaction. In short, tutors need to be aware of the rhetorical com-
plexity that any given tutorial or any given visit to a classroom can entail. This
complexity means that tutor coaches should stay wary of the all-too-tempting
rules of thumb and "familiar memes" Geller et al. caution against in the opening
quotes that can lead to Black's "reductive binaries," unintentionally cementing
strained social relationships between tutors, tutees, and instructors. Writing cen-
ter and peer tutoring people are proud of our history of caring and focusing
attention on the individual learner. But in our quest to always be the good guys,
the guide on the side rather than the sage on the page, have we alienated some
outside our centered family circles? Harking back to the parent genres in the
Introduction, in dramatistic terms, Burke writes that the scapegoat is "in effect
a kind of `bad parent,'" and that "the alienating of inequities from the self to
the scapegoat amounts to a rebirth of the self. In brief, it would promise a con-
version to a new principle of motivation--and when such a transformation is
conceived in terms of the familial and the substantial, it amounts to a change
of parentage" (Grammar 407). Writing center practitioners--like many writ-
ing teachers--have perhaps played the blame game too often and for too long,
resulting in lopsided theory and practice. Whether blaming the classroom/cen-
ter discursive goat--plagiarism, teacher assignments, grades--or the directive/
nondirective instructional goat, writing center scholarship grapples with ways
practitioners might continue to reevaluate and revise our best intentions. CBT

                                                                                                  39
Chapter One

theory and practice seeks to reclaim the consubstantiality of the writing center
and the writing classroom: moving the idea of a writing center dramatically from
physical place to theoretical and practical space, enlarging and enriching the
scope of teaching one-to-one and in small groups, and creating a larger arena for
rhetorical investigation, reconsideration, and reevaluation.

    We can reevaluate the importance of the classical-rhetorical idea of modeling
and imitation in the service of invention, arrangement, style, and delivery--in
short, in learning how to learn and teach writing. Adding the idea of modeling,
a willingness to sometimes take a more hands-on approach to tutoring, can
complement a tutor's instructional repertoire. Tutor coaches (be they directors,
or more experienced co-workers) can offer suggestions--or models, or exam-
ples--of when it might be more or less appropriate to be more or less directive
or nondirective. Something as fundamental as asking a student at the beginning
of a tutorial what phase their draft is in, a question that neither Healy and Clark
nor Carino address, could go a long way toward setting up just how hands
on or off a tutor can be (or how much researchers can surmise from tutorial
transcripts). We can (and often do) realize that sometimes it's all right to give a
pointed suggestion, to offer an idea for a subtopic, to give explicit direction on
how to cite MLA or APA sources, (in later drafts) to offer examples of alternate
wording and sentence constructions, in short, to practice along a continuum of
instructional choices both collaborative and empowering, allowing for alternate
moments of interpersonal and methodological collegiality and agency-building.
Once we feel that our best intentions more closely match our potential for best
practices, we can find ways to further question and more rigorously examine
these reconsidered notions.

    But how well will all my effusive rhetoric above regarding directive and non-
directive tutoring--"tutoring on the edge of expertise," cultivating instructional
"flexibility" or a "smart/humble" balance--hold up under both macro-contex-
tual and micro-analytical scrutiny? In the remaining chapters I will undertake
one of the most rigorous examinations of in-the-field practices of tutors, in-
structors, students, and coordinator engaging in the close collaboration of CBT
ever attempted. The same questions concerning directive/nondirective tutoring
philosophy and strategy and CBT we've been touching on in this chapter will
resurface, but in much greater depth and detail: How do tutors in various CBT
scenarios deal with walking the fine line between collaboration and plagiarism,
between intervention and invasion? How does more intimate knowledge of
course content, teacher expectations, and/or closer interpersonal connections
between teachers and students, affect the ways tutors deploy directive and non-
directive strategies? How does tutor training in directive/nondirective strategies
and philosophies hinder or enhance their interactions with student writers? And

40
                                                                          Tutoring Style, Tutoring Strategy

returning to that central question from the introduction: How can what we
know about peer tutoring one-to-one and in small groups--especially the impli-
cations of directive and nondirective tutoring strategies and methods brought to
light in my and others' case studies--inform our work with students in writing
centers and other tutoring programs?

    The above scenarios reported in the literature begin to clearly illustrate just
how complicated things can get when you combine various instructional as-
pects of the parent genres, as well as different participant personalities, goals,
and instructional experiences and backgrounds. These scenarios take us closer
to an understanding of how authority, trust and directive/nondirective method
negotiation intertwine to either deter or promote successful CBT partnerships.
But in the next chapter I will begin to offer readers a set of methods and meth-
odological tools that will enable a much deeper multi-perspectival, triangulat-
ed view of how these pedagogical issues played out in my case-study research.
While scholars caution practitioners and experimenters that tutors may need
to be more or less directive when interacting more closely with instructors and
courses, my study suggests just how tricky this notion really is. I'll report on
tutors whose performances shattered my expectations: tutors with much expe-
rience who talked too much and listened too little; conversely, tutors who held
back so much that students felt like these tutors weren't doing all they could to
help, or tutors with very little experience identifying--and making meaningful
connections--with teachers and fellow students.

                                                                                                  41
CHAPTER TWO

METHODS AND METHODOLOGY:

LOCATING PLACES, PEOPLE, AND

ANALYTICAL FRAMES

         If talk, conversation, and teaching are at the center of a writ-
         ing center's praxis and pedagogy, then it only makes sense that
         we should continue using every technique in our method-
         ological tool kit to study and understand them.

                                                         - Michael Pemberton

         For a classroom-based tutoring program to succeed in provid-
         ing a multivoiced forum for discussion of student writing, the
         assessment of that program itself needs to be multivoiced.

                            - Jane Cogie, Dawn Janke, Teresa Joy Kramer,
                                                            and Chad Simpson

    My current work in CBT follows Burke's methodological imperative in an
attempt to "use all that there is to use" (Philosophy 23) in case study research of
CBT. The research methods employed are designed to be multi-method (Lig-
gett, Jordan, and Price; Corbett "Using") and RAD or replicable, aggregate,
and data-supported (Haswell; Driscoll and Perdue). Thompson et al. arguably
hint at a difference between the typical writing center tutorial and the types
of teaching and learning that can occur in CBT when they claim, "It is likely
that students come to writing centers to improve the grades on their essays and
that they expect to feel comfortable during conferences, However, they do not
come to writing centers to form peer relationships with tutors" (96). As we've
touched upon in this book, one of the more potentially positive occurrences
afforded by the closer classroom/center interaction is the tighter interpersonal
relationships that can form among the participants, including student writers
and tutors. Yet this closer connection is precisely why our methods and meth-
odology must be more nuanced. As the rhetorical situations for participants
become more seemingly over-determined, our tools of analyses must become
even more fine-grained and triangulated to pinpoint and make transparent any
possibly determinable variables.

                                                                                                  43
Chapter Two

    An important action this multi-method triangulation allows is the ability to
identify rhetorical and linguistic patterns between one-to-one tutorials and peer
response group facilitation. As mentioned in relation to peer response groups in
the Introduction, Thompson et al. posit that, in order to get a closer understand-
ing of the way dialogic collaboration is reciprocally realized across tutorial prac-
tices, it would be edifying to compare the discourse features of one-to-one tutor-
ing with peer response sessions. This is an especially important consideration for
CBT and the complicating play of differences that occur as peer tutors attempt
to facilitate peer response groups in the classroom. In the following sections (and
again in Chapter Four), I begin my attempt to address what Thompson et al. call
for in terms of the comparative analyses of the discourse of one-to-one tutorials
and peer response facilitation we started reviewing in the previous chapters.

DATA COLLECTION INSTRUMENTS

    In order to get multiple points of view from the case study participants Ta-
ble 2-1 explains the data collection instruments employed as well as why these
particular tools were used.

    In the following sections, I describe the settings the participants were re-
cruited from and operated in, and introduce the participants for each respec-
tive team. I also spend some time explaining in greater depth my methods and
methodologies for analyzing tutorial transcripts and peer response groups for the
sessions detailed in Chapters Three and Four. In this extended methodological
frame, I outline some of the strengths and weaknesses of other studies of tutorial
transcripts and explain steps I've taken to account for these strengths and weak-
nesses in my own methods and methodologies.

SETTINGS

    In order to start building a clear-as-possible picture of the context surround-
ing the four UW and two SCSU teams involved at the time these case studies
were conducted, I will explain the two UW writing center settings that the tu-
tors hailed from and worked at, as well as the context of how the SCSU tutors
were recruited.

    The first, the English Department Writing Center (EWC), I am quite famil-
iar with, having worked there as an assistant director from 2000-2008. During
the time these case studies were conducted, the EWC offered a tutor training
course in writing center theory and practice unique at the UW campus, En-
glish 474. In this five-credit course tutors are introduced to the fundamentals
of one-to-one instruction. They read from a course packet that includes over

44
                                        Methods and Methodology

Table 2-1. Data collection instruments

Instruments             Purpose and Function

End-of-term inter-      Intended to ascertain the background experiences of tutors and TAs,
views with all writing  to get an overall sense of their perceptions of how their interactions
instructors (graduate   went, to get an idea of what they perceived as their roles, and to see
TAs) and tutors         what suggestions or recommendations they might have for better
                        practice. Designed also to get a sense from TAs and tutors how they
Hand-written field      felt the other participants in their groups, including students, reacted
notes of in-class peer  and how this interaction compared to their previous experiences with
response sessions       tutors or tutoring (see Appendix A for interview questions).
                        Collect and identify data for both micro-level linguistic analyses
End-of-term student     and analyses of broader rhetorical frameworks in small-group peer
questionnaires (see     response sessions, and to allow for comparative analyses to one-to-one
Appendix B)             tutorials (see Categories and Codes for Analyzing Tutorial Transcripts
                        and Small-Group Peer Response Sessions, and Figure 4, below).
End-of-term student     Designed to get an overall idea of how students felt about their
course evaluations      in-class and one-to-one interactions with their tutors, and to gather
Tutor notes and         students' comparative impressions of this experience in relation to
journals                other tutoring experiences they've had.
Course materials, in-   Intended to gather a sense of what students thought about the course
cluding assignments     and instructor (and tutor) as a whole.
and syllabi             Intended to supplement and enrich interview and field note data, to
Audio-recordings of     ascertain more personalistic observations and reflections.
36 one-to-one tutor-    Intended to provide context for analyses of one-to-one audio record-
ing sessions (from      ings, field observations, interviews, and tutor notes/journals
the UW teams)
                        Intended to gather data to micro-analyze linguistic features and cues
                        of one-to-one tutorials, in relation to broader rhetorical frameworks.
                        Also intended to collect contextual and linguistic data that can be used
                        to comparatively analyze small-group peer response sessions (see Cate-
                        gories and Codes for Analyzing Tutorial Transcripts and Small-Group
                        Peer Response Sessions, and Figure 4, below).

twenty-two influential essays and book excerpts; they write argumentative essays
on related topics; and they interact in a collaborative classroom environment
that revolves around class discussion of readings and peer response workshops
of each other's writing. Tutors are required to observe two one-to-one sessions
from experienced fellow tutors before they begin tutoring themselves. Sessions

                                                                                                  45
Chapter Two

are allotted up to fifty minutes. Once they arrive in the Center to begin practic-
ing what they've been studying, tutors find themselves surrounded, easily within
listening distance, of other new and experienced tutors conducting tutorials.
Often tutors begin to talk informally about everything under the sun between
sessions (see Decker, "Academic (Un)Seriousness"). While tutors read essays that
describe both directive and nondirective approaches (for example Brooks; Clark,
"Collaboration") the "Mission Statement" for the Center, at the time of this
study posted conspicuously on the wall at the Center for all to read, leaned
much more toward the minimalist approach. Figure 3 details what tutors "will
and will not" do, a chart excerpted directly from the end of the statement. From
my experience, the EWC served primarily mainstream students, many from the
UW's mainstream FYC course English 131. All of the tutors I had worked with
in CBT initiatives in the past had come from the EWC, including three of
the tutors in this study: Megan, Sam, and Julian. Though I had experimented
widely with having tutors attached directly to my composition classrooms on a
regular basis, the majority of our CBT efforts involved sending tutors into class-
rooms for briefer peer review and response facilitations (Corbett, "Bringing,"
"The Role"; Corbett and Guerra; Corbett and LaFrance; Decker "Diplomatic";
Cogie et al.).

    The second UW setting, the Instructional Center (IC), a division of the
Office of Minority Affairs, provides tutorial services for a variety of courses and
subjects (including a writing center) designed for "at risk" students at the UW.
I first came into contact with the IC writing center while teaching for the Ed-
ucational Opportunity Program (EOP), a program that coordinates classes like

Tutors will collaborate in ...                            Tutors will not ...
Brainstorming, outlining, and discovering pre-writing     Generate ideas
strategies

Developing and clarifying thesis statements               Suggest or reword thesis

Developing organizational strategies                      Suggest an organization

Recognizing where elaboration or clearer transitions are  Provide vocabulary
needed

Determining how and when to document outside sources Analyze reading materials

Recognizing when more research is needed to support       Supply content
claims

Figure 3: English Department Writing Center Mission Statement excerpt

46
                                                                                 Methods and Methodology

the two-quarter stretch FYC course, English 104/105, jointly with the Expos-
itory Writing Program (EWP). During a visit to the IC in 2003 I spoke with
representatives there about the CBT initiatives we had been working on at the
EWC. This piqued their interest, and began a relationship that included IC
tutors visiting my EOP classrooms to help with peer response. I approached IC
administrators again for this study and they found a tutor, Madeleine, willing
to participate. I also volunteered as a peer tutor for the IC writing center Spring
quarter 2007. During this experience I saw the professional tutors that work
for the IC working side-by-side with undergraduate, a couple of graduate, and
a couple of volunteer tutors. Interestingly, at the time of this study, the IC did
not provide new tutors formal training in writing center theory and practice.
New tutors were offered the option of observing sessions with more experienced
tutors, if they so desired. In contrast to the EWC, there is no real time limit to
sessions, so one-to-ones can easily go over an hour; students can work on their
writing and work with tutors intermittently. Like the EWC, the space at the
IC is rather small; tutorial sessions are conducted well within hearing distance
of each other. So instead of receiving structured and systematic training, new
tutors learn on-the-job, through trial and error, and by listening, observing, and
talking with experienced tutors. Finally, in contrast to the conspicuously-posted
"Mission Statement" of the EWC, the IC has no such mission statement for
their writing center. Rather than have methodological mandates, writing tutors
for the IC learn very much by trial and error.

    The participants from the third setting at SCSU, in contrast to the UW
tutors, did not originate from a writing center. When I took the job as co-coor-
dinator of the Composition Program at SCSU, New Haven, in the fall of 2008,
I was immediately confronted with more of the same sort of developmental
learners I had worked with at the UW: students with lower SAT scores, first-gen-
eration and working-class students, more students with learning disabilities--in
short, students who needed and could benefit from more focused individualized
instructional support. Fresh from my CBT experiences and studies at the UW, I
wanted to follow up on what I believed were some of the more successful com-
ponents of those studies. I felt that something unique and full of potential took
place, especially with Madeleine's Team Three detailed below. So I asked Mya,
one of our top instructors of our basic writing course English 110, if she would
be interested in participating in this study, and if she had a tutor in her current
course she might recommend as a course-based tutor for her subsequent course.
She asked the student she had in mind, Gina, and Gina agreed. What followed
were two back-to-back terms that illustrate what can happen when continuity
between participants in CBT occurs. None of the SCSU teams received any spe-
cial training to prepare them for their roles as course-based tutors. Rather, they

                                                                                                  47
Chapter Two

all originated from Mya's 110 courses, a course that emphasized writing process
pedagogies like multiple drafts and peer review and response sessions.

    I have lingered on this discussion of settings in order to emphasize the im-
portance of the preparatory environment (preexisting context) that underscores
the one-to-one and classroom-based tutoring that occurred in the UW and
SCSU case studies. I will touch on possible implications of the differences in
these settings' instructional practices and (where applicable) philosophies in lat-
er sections.

PARTICIPANTS

    In this section I will introduce the six teams involved in the case studies, the
first four from the UW, and the fifth and sixth from SCSU. Readers will begin
to get to know the participants and the respective CBT models they worked to-
gether in. Later, in Chapters Three and Four where applicable, participants will
detail their impressions of how their interactions with students and with each
other played out in one-to-one tutorials and classroom peer response sessions
and other in-class collaborations. The two models employed were the in-class
model and the writing advisor model. Essentially, the in-class model had tutors
embedded in the classroom on a day-to-day basis, while the writing advisor
model involved tutors much less in the classroom. Details for each TA/tutor
team, respectively, are provided below.

Team One: Julian and Anne

    Julian, from Team One, is a white, senior English/Comparative Literature
major who had worked in the EWC for two years, including a quarter as an in-
class tutor with me. Julian commented minimally on papers and met one-to-one
with students at the EWC. He also attended two in-class peer reviews. He has
the most experience tutoring one-to-one and in the classroom of all the tutors.
Having worked with Julian very closely for two years prior to this study, I found
him outspoken and highly intelligent.

    Anne is a white, third year TA in English Language and Rhetoric. She had
one year of teaching experience with first-years prior to this pairing. She had
extensive training and experience, about five years, teaching one-to-one for the
EWC and CLUE (CLUE, or the Center for Learning and Undergraduate En-
richment, is another campus student-support service that houses an evening
writing center.) She had also presented at several national and regional writing
center and Composition and Rhetoric conferences.

48
                                                              Methods and Methodology

Table 2-2. Team One descriptions

The Model                      The Tutor                      The Instructor
Writing Advisor Tutor
                               Julian is a white, senior En-  Anne is a white, third year
Tutor commented on papers      glish/Comparative Literature   TA in Language and Rheto-
and met one-to-one with stu-   major who had worked in the    ric. She had taught two years
dents at the English Depart-   EWC for two years, includ-     of traditional FYC prior to
ment Writing Center (EWC).     ing a prior quarter as an in-  this pairing. She had exten-
He attended two in-class peer  class tutor. He had the most   sive training and experience
response sessions.             experience tutoring one-to-    in tutoring one-to-one for the
                               one and in the classroom of    EWC.
                               all the tutors.

Table 2-3: Team Two descriptions

The Model                      The Tutor                      The Instructor
In-Class Tutor
                               Megan is a white, senior       Laura is a second year,
Tutor attended class every     Communications/ English        Chinese international grad
day and worked one-to-one      major with two years tutoring  student and TA in English
with students at the English   in the EWC. She planned to     Literature. She had one year
Department Writing Center      pursue K-12 teaching. Like     of teaching experience in
(EWC).                         all the EWC tutors (except     a traditional first-year compo-
                               Sam) she took a 5-credit       sition (FYC) classroom prior
                               course in writing center       to this pairing.
                               theory and practice.

Team Two: Megan and Laura

    Team Two includes Megan and Laura. Megan attended class every day and
worked one-to-one with students at the EWC. Megan is a white, senior Com-
munications/English major who had been tutoring at the EWC for two years.
She was planning to pursue K-12 teaching. Like all the EWC tutors (except
Sam) she took a five-credit course in writing center theory and practice. Megan
considered herself not the strongest writer. During her interview she described
how struggling with an English class, from which she eventually earned a 4.0,
persuaded her to apply to the EWC. Having worked with her an entire summer,
to me Megan always seemed very nice (often "bubbly") and approachable.

    Laura is a second year TA and Chinese International student, focusing on
postcolonial studies and Asian-American literature. She had one year of teaching
experience with first-years prior to this pairing.

                                                              49
Chapter Two

Team Three: Madeleine and Sydney

    Due to her schedule, Madeleine, from Team Three, attended class every
other day and worked one-to-one with students at the IC. Madeleine is an Af-
rican-American sophomore English (creative writing) major who had worked
for the IC only one quarter prior to this pairing. She enjoys performing spo-
ken-word poetry. She did not receive any formal training in one-to-one teaching
prior to this pairing. She attended a college prep high school and participated
in running start. Prior to this study, I was not familiar with the personality or
tutoring patterns of Madeleine.

    Sydney, a woman of color (African-American) herself, is a second year TA
studying nineteenth- and twentieth-century African-American literature. She
had about five years of teaching and tutoring experience with high school stu-
dents and one year of teaching with first-years prior to this pairing. On her wish-
list, Sydney had written me a note asking, if at all possible, for a tutor of color.
Serendipity worked in her favor in the form of Madeleine, whom I would later
learn was the only IC tutor willing to participate in this study.

Table 2-4: Team Three descriptions

The Model                       The Tutor                       The Instructor
In-Class Tutor
                                Madeleine is an Afri-           Sydney is a second year, Afri-
Tutor attended class every      can-American, sophomore         can-American TA in English
other day and worked one-       creative writing major who      Literature. She had several
to-one with students at her     had tutored one quarter for     years of teaching experience
Center.                         her Center prior to this pair-  with high school students and
                                ing. She did not receive any    one year teaching traditional
                                formal training in teaching     FYC prior to this pairing.
                                one-to-one.

Table 2-5: Team Four descriptions

The Model                       The Tutor                       The Instructor
Writing Advisor Tutor
                                Samantha (Sam) is a white,      Sarah is a second year, Latina
Tutor commented on student      senior English/Biology major    TA in English Literature.
papers and met one-to-one       who had worked in her Cen-      She had one year of teaching
with students at her Center.    ter for a total of two years.   experience in a traditional
She visited class only once to  She had read several articles   FYC classroom prior to this
introduce herself.              on writing center theory and    pairing, and two years of
                                practice prior to tutoring.     experience teaching ESL.

50
                                                                                 Methods and Methodology

Team Four: Sam and Sarah

    Team Four includes Samantha (Sam) and Sarah. Sam commented on stu-
dent papers and met one-to-one with students at the EWC. She attended class
only once to introduce herself. Sam is a white, senior double English/Biology
major who had worked as a tutor for the EWC and for the Dance Program for
a total of two years. Although she is the only EWC tutor who did not take the
five-credit training course, she had read several articles on writing center theory
and practice and co-authored an article on group tutoring and personal state-
ments. When I originally interviewed Sam, she seemed very shy and reserved. I
was actually slightly concerned that she might be too reserved for peer tutoring
(more on this later).

    Sarah is a Latina, second year TA, focusing on nineteenth-century American
literature. She had one year of teaching experience with first-years prior to this
pairing. She also had two years' experience tutoring ESL students.

Team Five: Gina and Mya

    Gina, from Team Five, is a white sophomore who plans on majoring in nurs-
ing. She attended class every day, did all of the course readings, and gave com-
ments to some student papers outside of class. She said she felt her experiences
as a student in English 110 with Mya, the term just prior to this one, prepared
her well for her role as a course-based tutor because Mya worked with students
just as much on general skills for succeeding in college as on their writing skills.
She admitted that, while previous peer response experience helped prepare her
for her tutoring role, she tried harder when helping students with peer response
for this course than she did as a "student" in the previous course. As readers
will hear more about in Chapter Four, Gina worked closely in the class with an

Table 2-6: Team Five descriptions

The Model                    The Tutor                       The Instructor
In-Class Tutor
                             Gina is a white sophomore       Mya is a white, adjunct in-
Tutor attended class every   who plans on majoring in        structor with about ten years
day, did all of the course   Nursing. She had taken En-      teaching college first-year
readings, and gave comments  glish 110 with the instructor,  composition, two years teach-
to some student papers out-  Mya, the previous Fall term.    ing high school, and fifteen
side of class.               She had no previous experi-     years as a home educator
                             ence tutoring or teaching.      prior to this case study.

                                                             51
Chapter Two

autistic student, Max. Having a learning disability (LD) herself, dyslexia, she
understood that Max might need a little more help and attention.

    The instructor, Mya, is a white, adjunct instructor with about ten years
teaching college first-year composition, two years teaching high school, and fif-
teen years as a home educator prior to this case study. She said she already had
a "bond" with Gina, since they were together in English 110. Mya then let me
know about Gina's LD. She was aware that Gina has trouble understanding and
comprehending what she reads.

Team Six: Kim, Penny, and Jake

    Team Six enjoyed a unique partnership wherein one instructor, Jake, was
assigned an in-class tutor, Kim and Penny, for each of his two sections. As men-
tioned above, like Gina, both tutors had been students in Mya's 110 course the
previous term. Kim is a Latina freshman who planned on majoring in nursing.
She had no previous experience tutoring or teaching. Interestingly, Kim had
been in the same peer response group as Max, the autistic student that Sara from
Team Five above worked closely with. Penny is a white, freshman Education
major. She also had no previous experience tutoring or teaching.

    Jake is a white, adjunct instructor with about five years teaching college first-
year composition prior to this case study, including several developmental writ-
ing courses. Jake talked about how Kim and Penny had different personalities
and approaches, Kim more outgoing and vociferous and Penny more reserved.
He said that he actually encouraged this diversity, "letting students [tutors] find
their own way."

CATEGORIES AND CODES FOR ANALYZING TUTORIAL
TRANSCRIPTS AND SMALL-GROUP PEER RESPONSE SES-
SIONS

    As described above, the one-to-one tutorials presented in Chapter Three
were audio-recorded. The data for the small-group sessions reported in Chapter
Four are from my field notes. Tutors, instructors, and students were solicited for
their impressions of both. And all course materials, including assignments, were
collected for this study. Drawing largely on Black, Harris, Gillespie and Lerner,
and Gilewicz and Thonus, rhetorical and conversation discourse analyses are
the primary methods for coding and analyzing one-to-one tutorial transcripts.
The analyses will offer broader rhetorical frameworks as well as ways to analyze
linguistic features and cues that can also be used to analyze small-group peer
response sessions. Attention to how the linguistic features of tutorial transcripts

52
                                                                Methods and Methodology

Table 2-7: Team Six descriptions

The Model                       The Tutors                      The Instructor
In-Class Tutors
                                Kim is a Latina freshman        Jake is a white, adjunct in-
Tutors attended class every     who plans on majoring in        structor with about five years
day, and gave comments to       Nursing. She had taken En-      teaching college first-year
several student papers outside  glish 110 with the instructor,  composition prior to this case
of class.                       Mya, the previous Fall term.    study, including several devel-
                                She had no previous experi-     opmental writing courses.
                                ence tutoring or teaching.

                                Penny is a white, freshman
                                Education major. She had
                                taken English 110 with the
                                instructor, Mya, the previous
                                Fall term. She had no previ-
                                ous experience tutoring or
                                teaching.

hint at larger rhetorical issues complicates and enriches Grice's "tacit assump-
tion of cooperation," outlined in his conversational maxims of quality, quantity,
manner, and relevance (see Blum-Kulka 39-40), in relation to CBT. As Carolyn
Walker and David Elias's frequently cited analysis of teacher-student conference
transcripts argued--and, in relation to tutor-tutee conferences, Thompson et
al.'s study supports--the quantity or ratio of student to teacher talk did not
affect either participants' perceptions of the conference's effectiveness. What this
suggests is that even though writing center practitioners talk much about the
value of getting students to do most of the talking, students themselves often
tacitly assume that teachers or tutors will do most or much of the talking, and if
they do not then the students' expectations might be disrupted.

     Harris's "Why Writers Need Writing Tutors" provides an overarching rhe-
torical framework for how tutors can help writers. Tutors can: (1) encourage
student independence in collaborative talk; (2) assist students with metacog-
nitive acquisition of strategic knowledge; (3) assist with knowledge of how to
interpret, translate, and apply assignments and teacher comments; and (4) assist
with affective concerns. In Teaching One-to-One Harris offers seminal analyses
of tutorials from Roger Garrison and Donald Murray, as well as tutors (though
these tutors are not categorized as peer or professional or graduate students).
These transcript analyses offer a useful overview of directive and nondirective
methods, ways tutors help students acquire writing strategies, techniques for

                                                                53
Chapter Two

active listening (including listening for student affective concerns), and how
questions can be used in various ways with different effects.

    Gillespie and Lerner supply further analysis from tutorials, though most of
the tutorial transcripts they analyze are between undergraduate writers and grad-
uate tutors. They extend many of Harris's findings, especially in regards to the
complex way various questioning techniques and strategies affect the control
and flexibility of any given tutorial. In asserting "questions aren't necessarily a
nondirective form of tutoring" (112) their analyses of tutorial transcripts reveal
content-clarifying questions, three types of open-ended questions (follow-up,
descriptive meta-analysis, and speculative), as well as directive questions that
lead tutors away from the conversation advocated for by most writing center
scholars to their appropriation of one-to-one tutorials. (Although, Thompson
and Mackiewicz offer an important caveat. In their study of questions used by
experienced tutors in 11 one-to-one conferences the authors found that "it is not
possible to describe a `good' question outside of the context in which it occurs,
and even in context, the effects of questions are difficult to determine" [61].)
One of the most important suggestions the authors make involves note-taking
as an important aspect of tutorials. They advise tutors to read the entire paper
before offering any suggestions, taking careful notes so that students can walk
away with a transcript of what happened. Otherwise, the authors explain, much
of what went on during the conversation will be lost, tutors may make unneces-
sary comments, and tutors may be too controlling or directive during the session
(also see Harris, Teaching 108).

    But both Harris and Gillespie and Lerner, due to their goals of training
often beginning tutors, fall short of pushing the analysis of transcripts to the
micro-linguistic level. Black and Gilewicz and Thonus offer discourse analysis
of conference and tutorial transcripts that can help link the macro-rhetorical
issues to the micro-linguistic features and cues of one-to-ones. Like Harris, and
Gillespie and Lerner, Black pays careful attention to the issue of directive and
nondirective conferencing strategies (also drawing on Garrison and Murray).
Black takes the idea of typical classroom discourse, characterized by initiation-re-
sponse-evaluation, an arguably directive form of instruction (see Cazden 30-59),
and shows how it makes its way, often unintentionally, into conference talk. Im-
portantly, Black applies both conversation and critical discourse analysis to the
examination of one-to-one conferences. Black also explores how interruptions,
backchanneling, fillers, words like "you know," can control and coerce students,
"subtly forcing another speaker into a cognitive relationship that becomes a lin-
guistic relationship that marks and cements the social relationship" (47). Like
Black, Gilewicz and Thonus pay attention to pauses, backchannels, and fillers.
And like Harris and Gillespie and Lerner, they are sensitive to the way questions

54
                                                                                 Methods and Methodology

can be used to encourage or discourage conversation. The authors take us a step
further, however, in their breakdown of fillers into backchannels, minimal re-
sponses, and tag questions, their attention to pauses, and--especially relevant to
this study--their subdividing of overlaps into interruptions, joint productions,
and main channel overlaps. (Joint productions occur when one speaker finishes
another speaker's words or phrases. Main channel overlaps happen when speak-
ers utter words or phrases simultaneously.) For example, the authors claim that
"joint productions, more than interruptions or main channel overlaps, represent
movement toward greater solidarity and collaboration" (36) rather than leave all
control in the hands of the tutor.

    Yet, while offering important micro-level sociolinguistic analyses, both Black
and Gilewicz and Thonus also fall short by not providing enough contextual in-
formation that could help readers make better sense, or provide more of their own
interpretations, of the authors' research findings, including why tutors or teachers
may be more or less directive in a given tutorial or conference. My attempt to
triangulate data, to account for Erving Goffman's "wider world of structures
and positions" (193) via interviews and follow-ups, transcriptions, and student
questionnaires are efforts in trying to account for larger CBT contextual factors.
These factors become especially important when attempting analyses of small-
group tutorials.

    Several elements of the analytical frame for one-to-ones discussed above
also apply to small-group peer response sessions (Figure 4). All four of Harris's
categories for how tutors can help writers can be highly useful as an overarch-
ing macro-frame. The use of various sorts of questions, overlaps, fillers, and
frequency and length of pauses can help in the comparative micro-analyses of
one-to-ones and small-group tutoring. Especially promising, as well as slightly
problematic, is Teagan Decker's idea of the "meta-tutor"--a concept that pro-
vides a conceptual and analytical bridge between one-to-one and small-group
tutoring and peer response. She claims that tutors leading small-group response
sessions should "become meta-tutors, encouraging students to tutor each other.
In this capacity, tutors are not doing what they would be doing in a one-on-one
conference in the writing center, but rather they are showing students how to
do it. Their role, then, does change, but at the same time remains consistent"
("Diplomatic" 27). As Decker explains, this role is different from the ones tutors
typically engage in at the center. In a one-to-one setting tutors need only share
what they can about the writing process, while meta-tutoring requires a level of
metacognition that enables a tutor to teach students how to do what they do--
but without seeming as if the tutor is withholding important information. This
coaching students how to coach each other really makes tutors have to agilely
balance directive/nondirective strategies. We will see in Chapter Four how this

                                                                                                  55
Chapter Two

Figure 4: Macro- and micro-heuristic for coding, analyzing, and comparing one-to-
one transcripts and in-class peer response field notes.
notion of the meta-tutor played out with the teams. But, first, I will turn our
focus toward the balancing acts involved in the one-to-one tutorials from the
UW teams.

56
CHAPTER THREE

MACRO- AND MICRO-ANALYSES
OF ONE-TO-ONE TUTORIALS:
CASE STUDIES AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON

         If writers are learning how to think about their writing based
         upon the conversations we have with them in writing center
         sessions, then our examination of those conversations can
         reveal the issues and challenges of learning to write in college
         and how writers learn to overcome them.

                                           - Paula Gillespie and Neal Lerner

         It's easy enough to think that once the door to that tutoring
         room is closed, it's only you and the writer, but the many
         forces swirling outside that room have not gone away.

                                           - Paula Gillespie and Neal Lerner

         What I learned from analyzing transcripts of my conferences
         is how great a distance lay between my image and my words,
         my goals and my practice.

                                                       - Laurel Johnson Black

    By the time I was ready to design the case studies presented in this chapter
and in Chapter Four, I had already conducted several preliminary studies at
the UW. For example, at the 2005 International Writing Research Conference
in Santa Barbara, I presented the findings of a comparative study of tutors in
Dance. I analyzed the tutorial transcripts of sessions between students in Dance
and me (then a graduate student and assistant writing center director), a fresh-
man undeclared major tutor, and a senior Dance/Russian double major tutor.
The term prior to this study, the freshman tutor had apprenticed with me. I
modeled for her and encouraged her to practice a more nondirective approach,
centered on open-ended questions. While I likewise encouraged the Dance
major tutor to use a similar approach, she did not have the benefit of a quar-

                                                                                                  57
Chapter Three

ter's-worth of practice before the study. My findings echo Severino's from Chap-
ter One, and Thompson and Mackiewick's study, regarding the use of open-end-
ed questions to help students mentally work through their ideas and establish a
more conversational tone to the tutorials. As with Severino's study, the freshman
tutor and I had great success with Dance majors in our frequent use of non-
directive, open-ended questions, while the senior Dance major was either at a
loss for what to do or resorted to simply telling her peers what she thought they
should do, which resulted in the tutor doing almost all of the talking during her
session. This study, among others, made me very curious about the notion of
"peer." It made me question just how important tutorial method really is when
tutoring one-to-one. Would any tutor attempting to use a nondirective ap-
proach conduct successful tutorials? It also made me consider a related question:
when, and under what circumstances, is a student ready to become a peer tutor?

    In Chapter One I discussed how and why course-based tutors need, to some
extent, to let go of some of the DOs and DON'Ts that can blind them to the
needs of the individual student in a specific situation. But I also discussed how
difficult this can be when participants are immersed in the swirl of pedagogical
and interpersonal social drama involving the negotiation of the hybrid "play
of differences" among and between the four parent genres. This chapter offers
readers comparative micro-analyses from the 36 one-to-one tutorials conducted
by the tutors from Teams One through Four. I will also compare the different ac-
counts and points of view of participant experiences, gathered from interviews,
to each other. Questions concerning directive/nondirective tutoring philosophy
and strategy and CBT we discussed in the previous chapters will resurface, but
in much greater depth and detail in relation to one-to-one tutorials: How does
more intimate knowledge of course content, teacher expectations, and/or closer
interpersonal connections between teachers and students, affect the ways tu-
tors negotiate and deploy directive and nondirective strategies? How does tutor
training in directive/nondirective strategies and philosophies hold up or play out
during practice? How does negotiating the directive/nondirective continuum
affect the quest for tutorly identity or reciprocal trust between participants? And
what does all this have to add to our understanding of the rapport- and relation-
ship-building that can occur in CBT, interpersonal relationships that can add
value to our developing understanding of peer-to-peer teaching and learning?
As I suggested in Chapter Two, it is relatively easy for researchers to pull tutorial
transcripts, or field notes, or even memories out of context and interpret them in
ways that best serve their rhetorical purposes. But it is another thing all together
to attempt to provide enough of the preexisting contexts--as well as micro-anal-
yses--that might allow readers to adhere more closely to my interpretations. Or
better yet, to encourage readers to perhaps more readily and freely draw some of

58
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

their own interpretations and conclusions as well.
    Transcription notations were developed ad hoc as I coded audio-record-

ings. They were used for ease of voice-recognition transcription and will hope-
fully allow for easy reading:

         ( ) indicates interlocutor's fillers including minimal responses,
         backchannels, and tag questions.

         CAPITALIZED WORDS indicate commentary by tran-
         scriber: For example, SEVEN SECOND PAUSE indicates
         length of pause; INTER indicates interruption; JOINT-
         PROD indicates joint production (joint productions occur
         when one speaker finishes another speaker's words or phrases);
         MAINCHANOVER indicates main channel overlap (main
         channel overlaps happen when speakers utter words or phrases
         simultaneously).

AS IF SHE HADN'T SAID A WORD: JULIAN'S TUTORIALS

    Julian from Team One had relatively little in-class interaction with the stu-
dents in the course. His six tutorials all took place in the eighth week (Table 3-1).
They all revolved around a major paper in which students were asked to analyze
and make an argument about the rhetoric, ideology, usefulness, and feasibility
of one of the topics from George W. Bush's 2006 State of the Union Address,
topics including the No Child Left Behind Act; the war in Iraq; and immigra-
tion, especially the US/Mexican border. His six sessions averaged 36 minutes,
with the longest lasting 53 minutes and the shortest 22 minutes. Careful analysis
helps illustrate Julian's most salient tutorial pattern--the fact that he talks too
much while allowing relatively much less student talk-time (or, concurrently,
tutor listening-time). Couple this with the fact that he often talks a lot before
he has heard the entire student's paper, and we are often left wondering why he
is talking so much, often in the abstract, about the student's ideas and writing.

    In session four, Julian works with a highly reticent student who is having ob-
vious trouble negotiating the assignment. I quote this excerpt at length because
it illustrates the extreme that Julian can go to in his verbosity, in his domination
of the session:

         STUDENT: So right here I'm giving stats on like the casual-
         ties and stuff like that UNDECIPHERABLE

         JULIAN: Okay maybe try playing around actually using

                                                                                                  59
Chapter Three

Table 3-1: Linguistic features and cues from Julian's (Team One) one-to-
one tutorials

Linguistic Features and Cues          Julian                           Students
# of Sessions                               6
Average Length (minutes)                   36                             5,835
Total Words Spoken                                                            27
Average # of Words Spoken per Minute  15,049
Content-clarifying Questions               70                                 13
Open-ended Questions                       20                                   1
Directive Questions                        93                                 13
References to TA                            8                                   4
References to Assignment Prompt            14                                   9
Interruptions                              12
Main Channel Overlaps                      28
Joint Productions                           1
                                            4

    those somehow in the opening paragraph. I'm making this
    up but due to to the casualties increasing the true number
    is blah blah blah the increased cost the cost of filling out the
    increased security that's where we should just maybe a frame-
    work early over to talk about what you're talking about later
    so they're sort of expecting it. Does that make sense (yeah)
    or am I just rambling? (No that makes)INTERso you guys
    talked about stakes a little bit right? (yeah) okay so READ-
    ING STUDENT'S PAPER "although both the opposing
    and supporting sides make good points I would agree that we
    ultimately need to follow President Bush's plan and increase
    our troops in Iraq war." So what? I don't think you quite
    got the stakes there. Like literally think about it as like a bet
    you're making to read or write what is at stake like what are
    the stakes? Like in a poker game if you're writing what we
    did if you're wrong or like if President Bush is right and what
    if these things don't happen? When we lose why is this so
    important? I may just off-the-cuff I'm not expecting why is it
    important? (um)INTER I'm not expecting you to write this
    sentence I'm just asking you why you picked this because it's
    like you said it's slightly more interesting sorta grabs your at-
    tention why like what's important about what's going on here?

60
                                                             Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

STUDENT: SEVERAL UNDECIPHERABLE WORDS

JULIAN: Yeah okay just get specific with it. Do you think we
need to follow President Bush's plan because it affects every-
body? How does it affect everybody? Like what's at stake? Like
security? Like what else? What are the issues at play?

STUDENT: I don't know.

JULIAN: That's cool. Just make a note for yourself or some-
thing. I just think about it because that's the kind of stuff I
read. That idea makes sense right? Just kick it around. One
thing to do is if you're totally like it's not coming to you
forget about it for a while because it looks like you've got a
good structure of your body paragraphs right? And this last
sentence suggested like talking a little about there are many
clear facts like what are you talking about? See where you can
end up in your conclusion like ultimately we'll only need to
listen to Bush ready to do this because these things are like
like why do we need to? What is President Bush saying that
we need to do these things for right? So he says that we need
to do this because ABC right? Do we need to do for AB and
C if he's right if he's correct right? Where Bush says what we
need is for AB and C and you look at that and he is right we
do need to do it for these reasons one of those can be your
stakes because that's what you're talking about right? You just
need to introduce them in a general way. I know I'm rambling
but I'm trying to say that the topics are the central ideas of
your body paragraphs. You can sort of like generalize about
them; just sort of go back and connect them to claim. (yeah)
FIVE SECOND PAUSE That's got to actually do a lot. When
I get stuck on opening paragraphs like I'll just because I don't
know I don't know how the writing process goes for you but
you my intro paragraph takes me and my claim takes me
about as much time as writing half of my body paragraphs,
so sometimes I'll write by pulling my quotes and I'll write the
central paragraphs and then in writing them I'll be like oh
I do have something to say in like my conclusion. I'll I'll go
back and generalize to make a claim. (all right) I'm talking a
lot like let me ask you a question. You guys have talked about

                                                                                       61
Chapter Three

         rhetorical analysis right? So what do you think about the
         rhetorical analysis you have so far on Bush in this first and
         second paragraph?

         STUDENT: I don't know what rhetorical means.

         JULIAN: Okay cool. Rhetoric right the word "rhetoric" is
         always a like it can mean writing or speech or presentation-
         al language. I don't know who coined the term but the big
         famous historical thing that it comes from is like a Roman
         senator who taught about it TURNING TO ANOTHER
         TUTOR hey Kate who was the famous Roman guy who like
         is the famous rhetorician? Yeah yeah thank you this famous
         Roman guy named Cicero who was like a major slick politi-
         cian. I forget what he did, but he basically swayed the pop-
         ulace just by like the power of his speech. So the idea is he is
         like not just what he says but like why do you think he said
         this exactly or what's he trying to accomplish with it right? So
         rhetoric is like using language in specific ways to accomplish
         specific goals. (ok)

         STUDENT: The way he's saying it then he's trying to keep
         you're going into details and kinda like so that everybody can
         understand what he's talking about and because he's emotion-
         al in the words that he's, I don't know, try to explain like why
         Bush is basically explaining like why we need to think about
         sending more troops.

         JULIAN: Totally, no, I think you're right on the money; like I
         heard you saying like he's avoiding numbers and statistics and
         he's using emotional language. That's awesome; that's the kind
         of stuff you want to get explicit and say right? But this will do
         more to it, so much easier to figure out you like okay I know
         you totally got that in, their fears. He's avoiding numbers
         and statistics but who is he using emotional language? Was
         he maybe using images that have a high impact? He talks
         about flying a plane at you but I heard that and I'm like I had
         mental images of 9/11 right? Of airplanes into the building.
         So you figure out what you think he's doing right? And then
         you've got to posit some sort of argument about why you

62
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

         think he's doing it. The first tactic I would try, because it
         might not be obvious at first, take a look at the issues you are
         talking about so if these are the issues you've identified that
         are applied to the Iraq war against the people are for right?
         Where are the issues involved with it? Monetary cost, other
         political things right? So how does what he says and the way
         he says it relate to these issues right? So like how is he posi-
         tioning himself with his language upon the key issues of the
         debate that you've identified? That's kind of what you are be-
         ing asked to do for rhetorical analysis. Does that make sense?
         (yes) And you've got the hard part down; you figured out the
         issues that you are talking about and you figured out where
         your key passages are. Now you got to like sort of connect
         them and just sort of like a sentence or two about how and
         why these different sentences are helping him or not helping
         him. Maybe you think he messed up or maybe should have
         said this. Bush maybe the speechwriters and you find some-
         thing in stuff like that (ok). TEN SECOND PAUSE Did you
         talk with Anne about the feasibility, usefulness and ideological
         implications? (Yeah) Did that make sense? (yeah) Cool, so
         could you take me to your like what your thoughts are so far
         on this?

         STUDENT: Like put both the supporting and the refusal of
         the arguments for and some of what the opposing sides are
         saying some of the different ways we can go about it and how
         some of his things are feasible.

    In this striking example, Julian, granted, is faced with an incommunicative
student whose inability to grasp the assignment makes Julian's job tough. But
notice how in that second interruption Julian asks a question and just as the
student begins to annunciate a reply, "um," Julian jumps in with more questions.
Julian's next question meets with "I don't know" which spins him on more ram-
bling. And he knows he is rambling, which causes him to actually slow down
and ask a question that leads him to figure out the student does not understand
the idea of rhetorical analysis. This seems promising. Yet rather than ask some
questions that might get the student thinking, allow time for a response, and
maybe even write some notes, notice how Julian will ask a question, then an-
swer it himself (ironically, almost like a "rhetorical" question). Repeatedly, as
evidenced in the above passage, and continuing throughout this session, Julian

                                                                                                  63
Chapter Three

asks "does that make sense?" The student invariably responds curtly with "yes,"
"yeah," and "I think so." Julian also uses the tag question "right?" ubiquitously.
When Julian finally asks what the student's overall thoughts are, the student
replies with a scanty summary of what Julian had been proselytizing about. Ob-
viously, it's not making as much sense as the student ostensibly lets on. Exam-
ples like this appear repeatedly in Julian's tutorial transcripts. We hear repeated
instances of Julian asking a question, not waiting or allowing enough pause for
student response, then moving on to offer extended stretches where he tries hard
to offer useful suggestions.

    In his sixth tutorial, Julian's actions suggest that though he is metacognitively
aware of his rather "inauthentic" listening habit, the problem is indeed a deep
one. At the very beginning of the session, the student says "she [Anne] gave us
this peer review thingy." As if she hadn't said a word, Julian responds: "How is
your week going?" They never get back to the student's initial utterance.

    Of the eight student questionnaires I received back, seven were primarily
negative, and one positive. Several students commented that Julian did not seem
to know what was going on in the course: "I thought it was going to help out
but it didn't ... Didn't seem as Julian was up to date with our class assignment."
Another, "he was never here in class to know what was going on." Another, "he
didn't know what our class was doing (never updated)." Another, "Meeting with
Julian seemed like a waste of time because he didn't really help me out or give me
ideas for my papers and didn't right [sic] anything down ... Get a better in-class
tutor that will actually be updated with the way our class is going and has input
on our papers." Finally, evidence from the questionnaires shows that Julian was
at least somewhat helpful to two students. One said that he "had good feedback
on my paper." And the first student above who said "I thought it was going to
help out ..." hints at what might have been if Julian had been in class more often:
"He helped when he was in class but other than that, I still have to agree with it
not helping at all."

PRAISE AND TEACHER'S PRESENCE: MEGAN'S TUTORIALS

    Megan, from Team Two, ended up having 15 sessions, the most of all the
tutors, including four return visits (Table 3-2). Megan was the only tutor for
whom students visited more than once. Megan's sessions came in two waves: the
first round included eight tutorials in the seventh week of the course, and the
second included seven tutorials in the tenth or final week of the quarter (before
final exams week).

    The first eight tutorials dealt with short, two-page response papers on the
texts from class: the movie Wag the Dog, and documentaries The Living Room

64
                                      Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

Table 3-2: Linguistic features and cues from Megan's (Team Two) one-to-
one tutorials

Linguistic Features and Cues                 Megan        Students
# of Sessions                                     8/7
Average Length (minutes)                               2,150/2,444
Total Words Spoken                             11/18          24/19
Average # of Words Spoken per Minute  8,986/11,675
Content-clarifying Questions                                     2/6
Open-ended Questions                         102/93              0/0
Directive Questions                            15/18          26/20
References to TA                                12/8            5/22
References to Assignment Prompt                 5/12          17/23
Interruptions                                   7/17
Main Channel Overlaps
Joint Productions                                 1/1
                                                8/17
                                                  1/8
                                                  3/8

Wars, and From News to Entertainment; and written texts from their course read-
er including excerpts from Sandra Silberstein and Michel Foucault. The sessions
averaged only 11 minutes, with the shortest session lasting only six minutes and
the longest lasting 31 minutes. Megan did not read the students' papers aloud,
nor have them read it aloud as she normally might. She said that the sessions
were so short because the papers were so short and she wanted to try to see as
many students as possible. Certain patterns that pertain to subsequent sessions
quickly began to surface. After clearing the way with initial questions, Megan
began to fall into a clearer pattern. It seems she would begin with praise, and
then lead into a critique followed quickly by a suggestion which I associate with
Harris's metacognitive acquisition of strategic knowledge:

         MEGAN: Yeah (yeah), ok, cool I think you obviously have a
         good grasp on the readings and you could probably bring a
         few quotes from the reading The Living Room Wars in toINT-
         ER

         STUDENT: Oh yeah don't worry about that I've got it.

         MEGAN: Yeah and the movie is tricky like I said that is
         something that's pretty apparent to me too so I think that will
         be pretty easy to do. Do you have any questions or?

                                                                                                  65
Chapter Three

         STUDENT: Not really

         MEGAN: I know it's kinda brainstorming and you've al-
         ready been thinking about it so once you kind of combine
         everything and start having a rough draft we can work off of
         that; you can come back and whatnot. It sounds like you've
         already thought about it and can already see the parallels and
         you have some good ideas. And don't be afraid, you're right
         it could be easier to have those two-paragraph structure, but
         I think that you could find a lot just using those two parts
         of the movie then using Bush and Clinton like that could
         be easily be two pages in itself. So if its two paragraphs I
         wouldn't worry too much about it (ok). So awesome, thanks
         for coming in.

    Readers will immediately recognize this as the same pattern that constitutes
most end-comments given on student essays. Megan starts by praising the stu-
dent's "grasp on the readings" but quickly moves on to imply evaluation and
provide suggestion. I say imply because even though Megan does not directly
evaluate, she does imply evaluation by stating what is missing: direct quotes
from the text. Megan follows a similar pattern in the rest of the first round of
tutorials. She frequently tends to apprehensions that students voice and praises
their good ideas. Yet at the same time she frequently, explicitly directs students
to do what she would do, as in the case above when she advises "just using those
two parts of the movie."

    The seven sessions of the second round of conferences in week ten follow
very similar patterns, characterized mostly by the role that the TA Laura plays,
as students are negotiating the final portfolio assignment. Overlaps abound as
students fully understand that their grades for the course are at stake, and that
Megan may be able to help them do better on their portfolios. Students contin-
ue to voice sentence-level issue concerns and Megan continues to aid them with
this, often linking these issues to larger structural and conceptual considerations.
Students in this second round came to Megan hoping to hear that they were not
too far off the assignment and to get suggestions for improving their papers and
make the most out of the chance offered by the cover letter. In the final session
in particular a student voices his concern with his grade for the course. He had
visited to talk about the cover letter, and ended up easing his worry perhaps a
bit through his interaction with Megan. This final session, more than any other,
showed Megan's peer-like willingness to help strategize given the student's strong
desire for a good grade:

66
                                                             Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

MEGAN: You could kind of do it two ways. (mmhm) You
could either because I don't know her as a TA like her grad-
ing at all (mm) and I don't know her from last year either
(mmhm) so I have nothing MUTUAL LAUGHTER to judge
her on so I would try to figure out yourself will it be better to
argue can I get a 4.0 or you could also argue get an A which
would be like what a 3.8 to 4.0 on it?

STUDENT: Oh okay so I should say A instead ofINTER

MEGAN: You could either way. I mean do which you think
would be bestMAINCHANOVER(I feel like)do what you
really want.

STUDENT: If I said I deserve a 4.0 she's going to be like
ahhhh you don't really deserve a 4.0 soINTER

MEGAN: Yeah maybe like an A or something MUTUAL
LAUGHTER and maybe too or you could say something like
I know last time my portfolio was a 3.6 (mmhm) and I'm try-
ing to improve on that so then at least she might be like "oh
he invested himself and is trying to improve" and you have
like a 3.7 to 4.0 (oh ok) which is still good. So that's some-
thing else you can say something like I'm really hoping to
this revision process that by taking the class again to improve
on my writing through going through the revision process
again but really I'm hoping to get a better grade than I did
last time on my portfolio because I got a 3.6 and I really want
to improve. (ok) That would be a better way to do it. I might
if it were me and you definitely (mmhm) don't have to do it
like I say but this is a suggestion but I might go with (yeah)
becauseMAINCHANOVER(that way I don't have to say)
then she'll know that your like constantly trying to improve
not only making revisions to your paper but you're also trying
to improve from last timeJOINTPROD

STUDENT: Yeah and not only like I'm not asking for a grade
(yeah) I'm asking for whatever she wants (yeah) to say. Okay.

MEGAN: Yeah that might be a good angle so either way-

                                                                                       67
Chapter Three

         MAINCHANOVER(that might be a good angle I like that)
         whatever one you think is that yeah so either way whatever
         you think would be best but that might be a good way be-
         cause then she'll really know like you're constantly (yeah) like
         even from last year you're trying to improve your grades (ok)
         and your revision process. (ok) Yeah I think that sounds good.

    This 14 minute session was characterized by five instances of mutual laugh-
ter, 12 overlaps, and numerous fillers. Clearly this student saw the potential
value of, and took an active conversational role with, Megan in helping him to
negotiate the portfolio and in his rhetorical choices for presenting his case for an
A in the course to Laura.

    Of the nine completed student questionnaires I received, five were clearly
positive in terms of the one-to-one tutorials: one student said the tutorial was
"helpful." Another said, "Seeing her one-to-one was a lot better. I felt more
comfortable." Another, "helpful because the teacher may have problems; [the
tutor] acts as a mediator." Another, "It was nice to have someone to talk with
about your paper one-to-one." And another that it was "more helpful" than her
in-class interaction.

DIRECTING TALK AND TEXTS: MADELEINE'S SESSIONS

    Madeleine, from Team Three, ended up conducting only four tutorials. All
of Madeleine's tutorials occurred within three days of each other, in the sixth
week of the quarter (Table 3-3; Note that the third of Madeleine's four sessions,
detailed below, was singled out for analysis from the rest due to its atypical fea-
tures). All four of Madeleine's recorded sessions dealt with four to six page major
papers in which students were to make an argument involving articles on two
views of multicultural education from Ronald Takaki's "A Different Mirror" and
Arthur Slesinger's "The Return of the Melting Pot" and the English 105, or the
second part of the stretch course, class they were taking. The sessions averaged
50 minutes, with the shortest lasting 31 minutes and the longest 71 minutes.
Madeleine read the students' papers in the first two sessions aloud and she read
them silently in the last two. I could not detect any noticeable effect this had on
the content and flow of any of the sessions.

    Madeleine evinced certain patterns in her tutoring practice that shaped the
content and flow of the tutorials. Madeleine usually took control of the session
early and held firm control of the conversational floor. Her sessions are charac-
terized by little to no praise; plenty of criticism and directive suggestions, usually
with no qualifications; and large chunks of time spent on talking, near-lecturing

68
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

Table 3-3: Linguistic features and cues from Madeleine's (Team Three) one-
to-one tutorials

Linguistic Features and Cues             Madeleine        Students
# of Sessions                                     3/1
Average Length (minutes)                               1,919/2,997
Total Words Spoken                             50/59          13/51
Average # of Words Spoken per Minute  12,115/7,614
Content-clarifying Questions                                     0/2
Open-ended Questions                         81/129              0/1
Directive Questions                               5/4         10/50
References to TA                                23/2            7/25
References to Assignment Prompt                 23/5            24/6
Interruptions                                     7/4
Main Channel Overlaps                             1/0
Joint Productions
                                               21/44
                                                  3/6
                                                  3/5

really, about the readings. The teacher, Sydney, plays an integral role in Made-
leine's sessions. But Madeleine, rather than the students, brings the presence of
Sydney into the session early on. This excerpt, from the beginning of the first
tutorial, is typical of how Madeleine starts her sessions:

         MADELEINE: Okay looking at your introduction?

         STUDENT: Yeah introduction and claim.

         MADELEINE: And your claim. Is it okay if I read aloud?

         STUDENT: No go for it. MADELEINE READS STU-
         DENT'S PAPER ALOUD FOR ABOUT TWO MINUTES

         MADELEINE: Okay I kind of see what you're trying to say.
         You're trying to say you're trying to set up the stakes like in
         the second paragraph? (yeah) You're trying to say that racism
         exists and the reason that racism exists is because people don't
         know about themselves (mmhhm). What I would say first
         of all about the beginning of your paper or the beginning
         paragraph is that it doesn't really have a claim that directly

                                                                                                  69
Chapter Three

         references both accounts (mmhmm) and maybe that's because
         you didn't have a copy of UNDECIPHERABLE

         STUDENT: Oh you mean the article?

         MADELEINE: Well first of all we're supposed to be talking
         about is multicultural education important? And you didn't
         really say anything about multicultural education in the
         beginning (oh) and so you just want to like mention that
         (okay). And also you're supposed to be stating whether or
         not you agree with the class that you just took. Like on race
         citizenship and the nation (ok). Like what she wants you to
         do is look at the class and think okay what have I gained from
         this class; like is it necessary for us to be studying these con-
         cepts or because the two different arguments are Takaki had
         his arguments well let's take the other guy first Sl- (Slesinger)
         JOINTPROD something hard to say. He basically says that
         multicultural education, it kind of like boosts people's self-es-
         teem right?

    Notice how after reading for a bit, Madeleine starts telling the student di-
rectly what the student is trying to say rather than ask her. Then Madeleine
jumps straight into criticism of this student's introduction and claim without
praising any aspect of the student's writing. She shows her close understanding
of the assignment and implies an alignment with Sydney's expectations by tell-
ing the student, with the modal auxiliary, what she is "supposed" to be doing.
Madeleine amplifies her alignment with Sydney and the prompt by bringing in
the pronoun and presence of Sydney: "what she wants you to do." Madeleine
typically uses the tag question "right?", as in the example here, not to necessarily
elicit a student response as with an open-ended question, but (much like Julian)
rather just to make sure that the student is following her suggestions. Madeleine
goes on from the excerpt above to bring in Sydney via "she" twice more before
she stops referring to her.

    The above directive suggestions also in many ways parallel the third session,
characterized by what I came to see as a struggle or fight for the conversational
floor. This hour-long session involved so many overlaps by both interlocutors
(92 interruptions, 16 joint productions, and 32 main channel overlaps) that
it was quite painful to transcribe, even with voice-recognition software. This
session is characterized by a student who fights for the conversational floor, espe-
cially in regards to the main concept she wants to cover in her essay, politics. The
student brings up this issue as a possible focus for her claim early in the session

70
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

and several times thereafter. But Madeleine ignores the idea repeatedly:

         STUDENT: I want to get out the thing is I have like three
         different things I'm trying to talk about (mm) and I don't
         know how to go at it; like I'm talking about how politically
         there are going to be more students educated and having a
         background of different peopleINTER

         MADELEINE: Yeah but I mean it's not just about it's not just
         about knowledge it's about knowledge of not only yourself
         like and how you fit into American history but how other
         groups not just black and white right? (yeah) fit into Ameri-
         can history because Takaki one of his main arguments is also
         that American history has been really black-and-white like it's
         either white or it's the other (yeah) and the other is usually
         black. But that's not true because there's been like Latinos and
         there's been Asians and there's been Native Americans that
         have all helped to shape what America isINTER

         STUDENT: Yeah but what about because what I'm talking
         about here are the political process as a whole; like I actually
         take okay one of my positions is in a medical profession and
         the other one is a political position you know like what I'm
         saying? Okay I get the point that I'm not supposed to talk
         specifically about people going into the university and taking
         these courses and coming out a certain way, but that's kind of
         what I did. I'm talking about if you have a better understand-
         ing of each other there is going to be more laws formulated
         their going toINTER

         MADELEINE: But don't you think it's a little bit deeper than
         just having a better understanding likeINTER

         STUDENT: Well but that was that was deepINTER

         MADELEINE: Yeah but you're talking about he doesn't just
         say we need to like have a better understanding like try to use
         some of the terminology that he uses; one of the most import-
         ant things that he says "we are influenced by which mirror we
         choose to see ourselves as" ...

                                                                                                  71
Chapter Three

         STUDENT: So the political one though I thought that would
         be okay; maybe I should just focus in on the student actually
         going into the schools oINTER

         MADELEINE: Well what you need to do is have an argu-
         ment. So you agree with Takaki. Do you know what Takaki's
         claim is? (he) TEN SECOND PAUSE

    This sort of conflict in goals continues until the student emotionally ex-
presses her frustration in not being able to match Madeleine's insistence that she
understand the texts (or Madeleine's interpretations of the texts):

         MADELEINE: I mean if you have to read it a couple more
         times INTER

         STUDENT: Well I'm trying to read a lot but it's just like I
         don't get what I'm doing though Madeleine ...

    This is the first time a student has used Madeleine's name in any of the tu-
torial transcripts, an indication perhaps of the frustration that has been bottling
up. Yet this is also the only time in all the tutorial transcripts I analyzed that a
student called their tutor by name, suggesting a slightly more positive interpre-
tation, perhaps, of the dramatic give and take of this interaction. Marie Nelson
argued that the type of resistance this student evinces might actually suggest this
student's potential to make dramatic progress because the resistance "showed
how much students cared" (qtd. in Babcock and Thonus 91). This echoes Mad-
eleine's own words regarding her motivation for this project: "I hoped that they
would view my enthusiasm for the content as an example of it actually being
cool to care."

    Tellingly, not one comment regarding one-to-one tutorials came back from
student questionnaires. Yet students had much to say about their in-class interac-
tions with Madeleine, as readers will hear in the next chapter.

SURRENDERING CONTROL THROUGH THE ACT OF WRIT-
ING: SAM'S SESSIONS

    Sam from Team Four was the tutor the least involved in any classroom ac-
tivity. She was also expected to play the role of outside reader, or in her terms
"independent consultant," in one-to-ones. Having less insider knowledge of
the content of the course, and given Sam's typically nondirective approach, it
would be reasonable to assume that Sam practiced a highly nondirective tutorial
method with these students. Sam ended up conducting 11 tutorials total, eight

72
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

sessions in the seventh week of the quarter, and three more in the tenth or final
week (Table 3-4). All of Sam's sessions involved five to six page major papers.
The first eight, including the tutorials detailed below, dealt with James Loewen's
article on heroes and heroification, "Handicapped by History: The Process of
Hero-Making." Since Sam had read most of the papers and supplied written
comments beforehand, her sessions were designed to fit within a 30-minute time
frame: the average session lasted 25 minutes, with the longest lasting 36 minutes
and the shortest 16 minutes. Sam neither had students read papers aloud nor
read them aloud for them.

    Like the other tutors, Sam's tutorials began to show patterns early on that
continued throughout her sessions. In contrast to Madeleine, Sam would usually
start off by asking the students what they wanted to work on. This open-ended
start would help set up Sam's habitual use of open-ended questions (OEQs) fol-
lowed by follow-up questions and occasional directive or leading questions. Sam
often used a praise-critique-suggestion sequence in her replies. Sam would qual-
ify her suggestions much more often with phrases like "I would" or "I might"
when nudging students toward acquisition of strategic knowledge. After the first
few sessions, she began to say things like "I see a lot of students/people doing
this" often when offering direct suggestions. Perhaps due to her more "outside
reader" status, Sam referred back to the TA Sarah much less frequently than
Megan, Julian, or Madeleine, instead using the phrase "the reader" to denote
audience. In most of the papers, Sam talked about structure, the link between

Table 3-4: Linguistic features and cues from Sam's (Team Four) one-to-one
tutorials

Linguistic Features and Cues             Sam   Students
# of Sessions                              11
Average Length (minutes)                   25    11,292
Total Words Spoken                                    41
Average # of Words Spoken per Minute  18,181
Content-clarifying Questions               66           3
Open-ended Questions                       20           0
Directive Questions                      137          37
References to TA                           21         12
References to Assignment Prompt             1         49
Interruptions                               1
Main Channel Overlaps                      12
Joint Productions                           7
                                            9

                                               73
Chapter Three

topic sentences and claim, between conclusion and claim. This often caused
her to deal with sentence-level issues in relation to larger structural/rhetorical
concerns. Finally, Sam's most salient and compelling patterns involved her use
of note-taking and pauses and their overall effect on the content and flow of the
tutorials. Sam's sophisticated use of note-taking and pauses caused students to
talk much more than in Megan, Julian, or Madeleine's sessions, and led to what
I would describe as collaborative speaking and writing through the act of collabo-
rative writing or note-taking.

    Sam began nine of her eleven sessions asking OEQs involving what the stu-
dents wanted to work on: "Do you have any questions that you want to talk
about?" is the typical way she opens up the tutorial. The two atypical openers
in which Sam did not start in this way both started off with her asking about
the students' claims. In the following excerpt, from the first round of tutorials,
Sam evinces her typical praise-critique-suggestion pattern at the beginning of
the tutorial:

         SAM: ... So it might be that you partly started reading the
         comments here but one of the things that I noticed about
         your paper is that you do a really good job of demonstrating
         your familiarity with all the material (mmhm). Like I can
         tell that you've done all the reading and paid close attention.
         What I think that you're missing though is a claim (mmhm)
         which is kind of a big part of writing an argumentative paper.
         So there's some scratch paper over there that you can take
         notes on if you want. But how I'd like to start is what what
         was your claim that you had in mind when you were working
         on the paper?

    Even though Sam does not start off with her typical opener in this excerpt,
she still begins with the broad OEQ regarding claim. More pointedly, in this
session Sam begins to show her awareness of the importance of note-taking. In
other sessions, she will ask students to take notes, while she takes notes as well.
Sam's use of note-taking and pauses play the pivotal role in the content and
flow of her tutorials, affecting not only how much students talk, but perhaps
more importantly, to what degree they take agency in the tutorial--the number
one factor that distinguishes her tutorials from all the ones conducted with the
other teams.

    In the following excerpt from a tutorial that lasted about 22 minutes, the
student overlaps Sam's speech 12 times, while Sam does not overlap the student's
once. The student is arguing that heroification is a bad influence on kids. Notice
how pauses, questions, and overlaps function in the following extended excerpt:

74
                                                             Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

SAM: Okay so you think SIX SECOND PAUSE so what's
your take on heroification and how it affects little kids?

STUDENT: It helps to bias them, makes them makes them
feel like you have to do the impossible SIX SECOND PAUSE
the impossible by being perfect, having no flaws.

SAM: Okay so heroification is bad for kids to 16 SECOND
PAUSE image, expectations.

STUDENT: Yeah it's just the image, what's right.

SAM: Okay and you said something about it rocks their mind
with what do you mean by that?

STUDENT: The wrong example of what to do. 12 SECOND
PAUSE

SAM: Okay, so why do you think that people do this? What
did you understand from Loewen? Why do people try to
hide the bad things? SEVEN SECOND PAUSE Why do you
think people persist in presenting these unreal representa-
tions?

STUDENT: Just to do what they do now. They're trying to
help. I have no idea why.

SAM: They're trying to helpJOINTPROD

STUDENT: Like kids try to be better. I mean that's FOUR
SECOND PAUSE

SAM: Okay so heroification is meant to make kids be better.
That you argue thatJOINTPROD

STUDENT: It doesn't do that.

SAM: Okay good. 22 SECOND PAUSE so if you were to
sum that up into one statement because what we have here is
it's not really something specific or arguable yet which is what
a claim has to be. So if you were to sum up your ideas here in

                                                                                       75
Chapter Three

         a statement one declarative statementINTER

         STUDENT: So like tell why heroification is bad? (mmhm)
         Just because it gives the wrong ideas to kids on how to grow
         up.

         SAM: Okay so would you write that in your paper and state it
         like that?

         STUDENT: A lot like that. I don't know how I'd state it; it's
         easy to write down. I wouldn't say it's bad though. Heroifi-
         cation has a negative influence on kids because it gives them
         the wrong reasons to 43 SECOND PAUSE growing up it's
         negative for some kids TEN SECOND PAUSE the wrong
         reasons.

         SAM: Well reasons for doing this. (yeah) Okay so that's good
         so I would just add that because this is yourINTER

         STUDENT: In this sentence just get rid of this?

         SAM: No leave this. This is a good transition here especially
         since you say that he focuses on high school. It still relates
         to kids; it just brings up the talk about kids which you do.
         Heroification has a negative influence on, etc.

         STUDENT: So I can put this before the sentence?

         SAM: I would put it hereJOINTPROD

         STUDENT: After the sentence? Ok.

         SAM: Because this is like your transitionJOINTPROD

         STUDENT: So that'd move into myINTER(so it's) into that
         and I just want to this.

         SAM: Yeah I would just kind of insert this here but then you
         have to talk about why you believe this is true.

         STUDENT: So I would do that in the next paragraph? (so)

76
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

         INTERor would I do that like in the same paragraph?

         SAM: Well that's what the rest of your paragraph is about.
         Basically you have to argue your point, make me believe you.
         TEN SECOND PAUSE.

    Sam begins with her typical OEQ. What the transcript does not reveal is
that in the first long 16 second pause, Sam is writing notes. Sam has written
something down, and then refers back to that in her follow-up question. Then
Sam allows a 12 second pause after the student responds "the wrong example of
what to do." After this pause, Sam asks more follow-up questions. When the stu-
dent initially replies that she has "no idea why" and Sam begins to rephrase the
student's beginning comments "they're trying to help," the student overlaps with
a joint production, "like kids try to be better." In two more lines the student
overlaps with another joint production. The next 22-second pause allows time
for both participants to collect thoughts and get to the big picture, the claim.
In the next few lines the student expresses the difficulty in trying to verbalize
something as complex as wording the claim on the spot. But a few lines later
a long 43 second followed closely by a ten-second pause allows the student to
think more. The student interrupts Sam two lines later, expressing her concern
at the sentence-level. Sam then explains through praise why she could keep that
sentence and how it relates to the higher-order concerns involving structure and
thesis: "This is a good transition here especially since you say that he focuses
on high school. It still relates to kids it just brings up the talk about kids which
you do heroification has a negative influence on, etc." The remainder of the
excerpt above involves the student illustrating her agency by overlapping Sam's
speech three more times--two of which she actually interrupts Sam's attempt
to respond. Notice how the line between interruption and joint production be-
gins to slightly blur when the conversation is really flowing, when the student
is realizing some agency and urgency, and when the tutor (Sam) allows for this
sort of conversational play. (During initial transcriptions, I had some difficulty
in distinguishing between interruptions and joint productions in some spots.)

    Sam's longest session evinces many of the same patterns described above,
further illustrating the collaborative effects of Sam's particular style. During
analysis, I was struck by how similar this student was to the one that Madeleine
from Team Three had such conversational struggle with in her session above. In
this 36 minute session, the student overlaps Sam's speech 20 times, while Sam
only overlaps the student's speech five times--including three instances where
the student does not allow Sam to take control of the conversational floor. In this
session Sam shows one of her patterns early in the tutorial when she says "So one
problem that a lot of people have tends to be coming up with the claim in the

                                                                                                  77
Chapter Three

beginning." Sam refers to what she notices that others have been doing often,
perhaps deflecting any sort of individualized, evaluative finger-pointing. The
student starts off describing his claim as involving his belief that heroification
is ok for young kids, but that when they start to mature they need to be able
to think critically about this issue. Sam proceeds to ask questions and provide
suggestions on how the student can rethink his topic sentences in relation to his
claim. In typical fashion, she qualifies most of her suggestions, "When you're
revising I'd probably, what I recommend ..." Discussion of the essay's structure
leads to a discussion of the student's prewriting strategies. Later the conversation
turns back to more specific instances of getting the student's purposes across
clearly to the reader. Here Sam shows her typical reference to the reader: "So all
that's really needed is that you want to make sure that you specifically say this at
the beginning of this paragraph (oh ok) so that we know that that's what you're
saying. (oh ok) So that we know that as we read the scene we go `okay so this is
where he's going with this.'"

    A few turns later, the student second-guesses himself when he feels that Sam
has disagreed with one of his points:

         STUDENT: ... That was just like me presenting both sides of
         the argument; but clearly, like I'm thinking maybe it doesn't
         belong because you're telling me like okay this UNDECI-
         PHERABLE.

         SAM: Okay so do you feel like this fits in with any of your
         major points so far? Sorry I didn't have a good look at the first
         paragraph should beJOINTPROD

         STUDENT: More of a benefit really.

         SAM: Or yeah what was the first body paragraph?

         STUDENT: It was more like morale of like heroification can
         be used to build up morale. To want to be great you don't
         need to hear the negative sides to put a high standard upon
         yourself; I guess that was kind of it. We could just move that
         chunk overINTER(well ok)

         SAM: So let's think about this, you've got heroification can
         build up morale, but then if it gets too blown up out of
         proportion then there's a danger that it will break down and
         fail because it's a lie. (mmhm) And then the third danger is

78
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

         that those that are deceived won't be able to UNDECIPEH-
         RABLE what they're thinking. So of those three which do you
         think it fits better with?

         STUDENT: Definitely more on the benefit. Well I'm not
         really sure because that part of my argument was more like I
         realize I was more focused on possibilities and I kinda wanted
         to end on a little bit of both because it shows that kinda gave
         two sides but mainly push towards one thing whether some-
         thing good can come out of it if you're going to set yourself
         for the challenge.

    In contrast to the fight-for-the-floor pace and tone of Madeleine's third tuto-
rial, in this excerpt and throughout this and all of her sessions, Sam takes a much
less argumentative (doubting, dissenting) and much more cooperative (believ-
ing, assenting) stance in relation to the student's ideas. Notice how precisely Sam
refers back to the student's ideas and words:

         So let's think about this. You've got heroification can build on
         morale, but then if it gets too blown out of proportion then
         there's a danger that it will break down and fail because it's a
         lie. (mmhm) And then the third danger is that those that are
         deceived won't be able to UNDECIPHERABLE what they're
         thinking. So of those three which do you feel it fits better
         with?

    Because Sam has been writing notes, co-constructing an outline with the
student, she can repeat back, with some great detail and clarity, the student's
own ideas and how they relate to the overall essay. The student then can help add
to this co-constructed oral/literate text. This exemplifies what I would describe
as collaborative speaking and writing through the act of synergistic writing or
note-taking.

     Rather than dismiss any of the student's ideas, or try to force ideas on the
student (as Madeleine, Julian, and Megan were all prone to do sometimes) Sam
uses questions to try to get at how this student's idea might be worked into the
essay's structure. This reliance on traditionally nondirective questions is due to
some degree to the fact that Sam has not done the course readings. But it is
also due, I believe, to Sam's methodology. Sam's tenacious ability to stick to
using questions to allow students time to process and respond and then to write
down notes as the conversation moves forward as her basic "nondirective" mo-
dus operandi enables her to turn the conversation over to the hands and minds
of the students. In one session Sam waited for 89 seconds after asking a student

                                                                                                  79
Chapter Three

"So where's your topic sentence on this paragraph"? That same student, after
thinking through things for 89 seconds, responded in some detail. While tutors
are typically advised to wait fifteen seconds for a reply before reframing the
question, some questions may require longer cognitive processing. Courtney
Cazden, drawing on Hugh Mehan, claims these "metaprocess questions ask for
different kinds of knowledge and prompt longer and more complex responses"
(46). While "what is your topic sentence?" may seem simple enough on the
surface, imagine all the cognitive steps the student must go through to give a
cogent reply: processing the question, putting the question of how the topic for
one area of the paper relates to the larger structure of the rest of the paper, and
finally trying to find the words to express those connections. This moves the
student simultaneously from the larger rhetorical-structural issues of the paper
to the micro-linguistic syntactical and lexical level of the topic sentence. Each
student that Sam worked with walked away with jointly-constructed notes that
they could use while revising their essays.

    Of the 12 student questionnaires I received, ten were overwhelmingly pos-
itive and only two were either critical or ambivalent. (The ambivalent one was
from a student who did not visit Sam in the first place.) Most students com-
mented on the convenience of the partnership and the availability of Sam. Stu-
dents described specifically how helpful Sam was during one-to-ones. For ex-
ample, one student wrote: "It helped me strengthen my paper and understand
what the readings were trying to get across to its audience." Another, "She gave
me ideas and hints to making my paper be voiced more by me rather than the
quotes I used." Another, "She helped me gather my thoughts clearly, gave me
advice to make my paper stronger." Two students commented favorably on Sam
commenting on their papers before they met: "we would go to our appointment
and she would have our paper already read so we didn't have to wait. She would
just tell us what we had to work on." Another, "It was a lot better because at least
the tutor would read it beforehand and it would not take as long as opposed to
making an appointment or a drop-in where they would read it on the spot and
it would take a while." Finally, one student commented on what she saw as a
problem, suggesting what some students must think of writing centers in gen-
eral: "The tutor was not familiar with the subject taught in class; therefore she
wasn't able to help on specific questions or be any more helpful than the tutors
at the writing center."

DISCUSSION: TUTORING ON THE EDGE OF EXPERTISE

    Granted, the case studies represent extremes in tutorial instruction and tu-
tor preparation and should only be taken for what they truly are, qualitative

80
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

case studies conducted in local contexts. Yet, analyzed side-by-side (Appendix
C)--and from so many methodological angles--they suggest multiple points
for more general comparative consideration, especially in regards to tutoring
method. While CBT scholars caution practitioners and experimenters that tu-
tors may need to be more or less directive when interacting more closely with
instructors and courses, my studies suggest just how tricky this notion really is.

    Julian's (Team One) basic modus operandi of having the student read the
paper aloud, while stopping intermittently to talk about things as they went,
seemed to cause Julian to talk unnecessarily, and in ways that only occasionally
invited students to take agency in the sessions. Julian made infrequent use of the
valuable tool of note-taking, a technique that might have substantially altered
the content and flow of his one-to-ones. If he had asked his questions, then
waited for a response, then taken notes for the students (especially those that
were not as engaged or not taking any notes themselves) his sessions may have
sounded more like Sam's, and students and Anne may have felt that these one-
to-ones were adding something of value to this partnership. Instead, Julian--
despite his meta-awareness that he tends to talk too much (listen too little) in
a tutorial--repeatedly dominated the conversational floor, often interrupting
students' train of thought, answering the questions he should have been waiting
for a response on, and even out-and-out ignoring (or more often, overlooking)
student concerns and questions. Stunningly, during our interview, Julian even
told me that he felt the one-to-one tutorials were "successful."

    When held in comparison to Megan and Kim, however, Julian's style does
not seem that drastically different or reprehensible. In fact, all three of these tu-
tors exhibited similar tendencies to dominate much of the conversational floor
in their own ways. (Students actually talked more, proportionately, with Julian
than with Megan or Kim.) Julian, unfortunately did not have the same oppor-
tunity as the in-class tutors to redeem himself in any way via consistent and pro-
ductive interactions in the classroom. (I'll return to this comparative discussion
in the next chapter.)

    Megan's (Team Two) tutorials took two different routes: shorter sessions in
which she did almost all of the talking, asked few questions, and followed her
usual pattern of praise-critique-suggestion; and longer sessions in which stu-
dents, concerned with negotiating their portfolios or Laura's comments, showed
more engagement and concern, but still talked much less. These shorter sessions
resemble the kind of conferences advocated by Garrison, shorter sessions where
the tutor/teacher acts more like an editor directly intervening and offering sug-
gestions. In a sample session with a student, Garrison often uses phrases like
"this is what I would do" or more emphatically "do this" or "I want you to."
He will even ask the student a question, then, rather than wait for a response,

                                                                                                  81
Chapter Three

move on to the next question or suggestion or critique (see Harris, Teaching
One-to-One 143-45). In the excerpt Harris cites, Garrison does not praise, but
moves quickly from critique to critique. In contrast, Megan follows a pattern
of praise-critique-suggestion that students must certainly be familiar with from
teacher end-comments on their papers, and perhaps even from peer review.
Drawing on Aristotle's idea of praise as action, Spigelman argues that students
in classroom writing groups need to be taught the value of both epideictic and
deliberative rhetorical responses. "In contrast to epideictic," she writes,

         an exclusionary deliberative approach may ... contribute to
         wholesale reader appropriation with little concern for writ-
         er's intentions or motives ... When groups believe that their
         primary function is to change the existing text, they may fail
         to notice and therefore positively reinforce successful literary
         or rhetorical elements in their peer's essays ... A combined
         epideictic and deliberative process enables readers to provide
         productive, action-oriented comments, and at the same time,
         allows writers to resist appropriation by their peers ("`Species'"
         147-8).

    While it is important to praise for several reasons (Daiker; Harris, Teaching
One-to-One 71-73), some maintain that too much lavish praise may have little
positive, and perhaps even a slightly negative, effect on student learning (see
Schunk 475-6). As I listened to Megan's use of praise repeatedly in both peer
reviews and one-to-ones, I began to wonder if it was having the effect on stu-
dents she intended. Megan's praise, however, did sound more authentic when
she aligned her praise with Laura's. This associative "team praising" allowed Me-
gan to amplify her praise considerably, affectively easing the worries of students
who perhaps felt there was little worth celebrating in Laura's comments and eval-
uations. Megan also evinced a willingness to help students with sentence- and
word-level issues. Megan's transcripts show how a tutor willing to work through
sentence- and word-level concerns can immediately link these issues back to
HOCs like claim, especially the important role of word choice and carefully
defining terms so that a writer can get their intended point across to their reader
more clearly. Finally, we saw how Megan's sessions took a different turn when it
came time for students to negotiate their portfolio assignment at the end of the
quarter. When students perceive the stakes as high, and I would argue, when
they are dealing with the unfamiliar genre of the portfolio cover letter, they take
a much more active role in the tutorial. Megan's sessions began to involve explor-
atory talk much more, it seems, when the students felt the real urgency involved
in arguing the strengths and weaknesses of their performance for the course.

82
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

    We also saw in Megan's first round of sessions that she started off with a typ-
ically non-directive approach, but soon, as she progressively worked with more
and more students, she became increasingly directive, more Garrison-like. Most
likely, seeing students with the same assignment repeatedly, caused Megan to
start blurring each session together, almost into one huge tutorial. This is much
less likely to happen in a typical one-to-one tutorial outside of CBT.

     Madeleine (from Team Three) proved a highly directive tutor. As we dis-
cussed at length in Chapter Two, directive tutoring does not necessarily imply
hierarchical, authoritarian tutoring. For my analyses here (and also in relation
to Madeleine's in-class involvement discussed in the next chapter), it is worth
noting that Madeleine evinces conversational and instructional communication
patterns associated with African Americans, patterns that may account in part
for her instructional directiveness (see Delpit Other; Smitherman; Lee; Denny
42-43). Carol Lee, drawing on Bakhtin, Goffman, and Geneva Smitherman,
points especially to AAVE as a personal discourse that brings special ways of
speaking and knowing into the classroom (and, for our purposes, into one-to-
one and small-group tutorials): "Within AAVE (which may be defined as a dia-
lect of English), there are many speech genres. These genres include, but are not
limited to, signifying, loud talking, marking, and testifying" (131). She draws
on Smitherman's Talk that Talk to explain how the African-American communi-
cative-rhetorical tradition evinces some unique patterns:

   1. Rhythmic, dramatic, evocative language
   2. Reference to color-race-ethnicity
   3. Use of proverbs, aphorisms, Biblical verses
   4. Sermonic tone reminiscent of traditional Black church
   5. Use of cultural referents and ethnolinguistic idioms
   6. Verbal inventiveness, unique nomenclature
   7. Cultural values--community consciousness
   8. Field dependency (involvement with and immersion in events and situ-

       ations; personalizing phenomena; lack of distance from topics and sub-
       jects) (Smitherman, 2000, p., 186)
    Madeleine evinced especially 1, 2, 5, 7, and 8 in her tutorials, partly (perhaps
largely) because the topic of the course--race and citizenship in the nation--
brought out her passion and fluency on this topic (also see Corbett, Lewis, and
Clifford). In "Community, Collaboration, and Conflict" Evelyn Westbrook
reports on an ethnography of a community writing group where conflict and
difference are foregrounded. One group member, an African-American wom-
an (echoing Lisa Delpit's direct-instruction sentiments), rather than placing the
highest value on supporting its members through lavish epideictic praise, sees
more value in challenging its members:

                                                                                                  83
Chapter Three

         when people [in the group] say "Wow! This is good," well,
         that doesn't help me very much. But when they say, "I would
         use this or I would use that" or when they challenge the way
         I thought about [something], that's good feedback ... When
         someone questions something you do as a writer ... they are
         really saying, "Make me understand this." (238)

    While readers might understandably question Madeleine's performance
during one-to-one tutorials, in the next chapter I'll report on the degree to
which that same authoritative style was evinced and speculate on how effective
and valuable it proved to students in the classroom.

    Nondirective methods and moves were showcased by Sam (from Team Four)
in all of her one-to-one tutorials. But I might critique Sam's performances in two
ways. First, almost every move Sam made during her one-to-ones placed agency
on the tutee. She asked many open-ended and follow-up questions. She took
careful and detailed notes, to which she and the students added to and referred
back to during the course of the tutorials (see Harris, Teaching One-to-One 108;
Gillespie and Lerner 74). She allowed for long, extended, patient pauses that
aided tremendously in both the students' and her abilities to process informa-
tion and formulate responses and questions. She also--like Megan from Team
Two evinced throughout both her one-to-one tutorials and during peer response
facilitation and so unlike Madeleine--used praise strategically. Yet, I might also
say that the model Sam employed (at the specific request of Sarah) necessarily
caused her to deploy the methods she did. Because she was less in-the-know,
because she did not know as much of the content and flow of the day-to-day
course happenings, and because she was trained to approach tutorials primari-
ly from a nondirective methodology (and, recall, actually worried about being
too directive), Sam was much more situated to practice a nondirective method.
This method caused her to deploy such strategically valuable methods as almost
always starting sessions by asking what the student wanted to work on, using a
praise-critique-suggestion conversational sequence, referring to general "readers"
rather than to the instructor Sarah or to the assignment, and thoughtfully and
patiently crafting notes. We might, then, say that--like the successful tutorials
we surveyed in Chapter One from White-Farnham, Dyehouse, and Finer, and
Thompson--Sam realized the coveted humble/smart balance.

    Since Sam and Sarah from Team Four had the least amount of in-class inter-
action with each other of all the teams, I will provide some details of their own
reflections of their partnership here. The data point to an overall highly success-
ful partnership. Since Sam did not attend any classes in an instructional role,
she primarily voices how she and Sarah coordinated their activities out of class,

84
                                                                         Analyses of One-to-One Tutorials

and the effects these communications had on Sam's involvement with students:

         My involvement with the TA was pretty minimal. We mostly
         contacted each other via email. I saw her a couple of times,
         but not really during the quarter. She mostly sent me the
         prompts and we emailed each other. I'd give her my availabil-
         ity and she would send that to the class. They'd sign up for
         appointments and then she would send their sign-ups to me.

    Sam said that at first she was a little worried that she wasn't involved enough
with the students, but from what she was hearing from Sarah noted "I think it
turned out pretty well." Sam and Sarah even agreed from the start that it would
be better if Sam did not do any of the course readings. Sam suggests a fear of
being too directive: "I thought it would be more helpful to go with the prompt
with their papers ... because I might have my own ideas on where they should
be taking their papers and I wanted to avoid that. I just wanted to help them
bring out their own claims and arguments." And although Sam did not have any
in-class interaction with students, she did feel a closer connection and responsi-
bility to these students:

         I felt more tied to the success of the students in this class. I
         really wanted them to do better. I wanted Sarah to see the im-
         provements in their papers. I wanted to help them get more
         out of the class as a whole. And I think that comes with being
         connected to a particular class. It makes you more invested.

    Sam pointed to this as a reason why she would have liked to have had closer
interaction with Sarah and the class. She spoke of establishing a more definite
sense of her role in the course. She talked about coming in earlier to explain to
the students her role. And she said it would have been better if she had spoken
with Sarah more about how the class was going, or even visited the classroom
once or twice, "just maybe coming in and sitting in the back a couple of times,
letting them know you're there and you're tied to the class rather than some loner
from the outside."

    Sarah provides further insight into Team Three's unique partnership, includ-
ing Sam's minimal involvement with certain aspects of the course. Overall, Sarah
really enjoyed the partnership. Like most participants, she said she greatly ap-
preciated the convenience of having a specific tutor readily available for students
to make appointments with. Sarah said she wanted Sam to play the role of peer
tutor and outside reader for the class, rather than co-teacher: "I might've been
uncomfortable having another person in the classroom, but that might just be
my own ego [laughter]. Seriously though, one of my other concerns too is that

                                                                                                  85
Chapter Three

students might be confused having too many authority figures." Sarah decided
not to have Sam do the readings because she was afraid that "the tutor would
know all the readings that we're doing and would know the kinds of arguments
I'm looking for, and they might steer the students in that direction." Of course,
this is exactly what we saw Madeleine attempting to do in her tutorials.

    I maintain, however, that even if Madeleine had been exposed to the liter-
ature on nondirective tutoring--like Julian and Megan, who had more experi-
ence and training--she still would have experienced the same type of conflicts
in agency and authority she faced in attempting to help students negotiate the
course. (This may have even conflicted more strikingly with her perhaps more
directive African-American instructional style as we discussed above.) Although
Madeleine's four tutorials is quite a small data set, my experiences and case-study
research over the years as well as the literature on CBT strongly suggest that
tutors faced with a tutorial situation in which they have a better understanding
of the course content, teacher expectations, and perhaps even closer interper-
sonal relationships with the students, will face a tougher challenge negotiating
between directive and nondirective tutorial methods. But I do not believe this is
necessarily a bad thing, nor should it deter us from continuing to practice CBT.
I would rather continue to encourage tutors (and instructors) to practice at the
edge of their pedagogical expertise and interpersonal facility. More specifically,
for CBT and for consideration of CBT and tutors who have more or less train-
ing or experience, how might we, and why should we, encourage tutors to reap
the benefits of both directive and nondirective tutoring strategies?

    If a tutor has the confidence and motivation to connect more closely with a
writing classroom and help provide a strong model of academic communication
and conversation--regardless of how much formal training they've received--
should we be open to such teaching and learning partnerships? In the next chap-
ter, I'll present what can happen when tutors make these expeditions, interacting
with instructors and students in the classroom. Sam (and Sarah's) narrative of
success has all but been concluded. But will vociferous Julian and Madeleine
(and to a degree Megan) prove more relatively effective in the classroom than
they did in their one-to-ones? And what about those tutors from SCSU who
played all of their tutorial roles strictly in the classroom? In many ways, their
dramas have yet to unfold ....

86
CHAPTER FOUR

CONFLICT AND CARE WHILE TU-
TORING IN THE CLASSROOM:
CASE STUDIES AT THE UNIVERSI-
TY OF WASHINGTON AND SOUTH-
ERN CONNECTICUT STATE UNI-
VERSITY

         On occasion, a person with a marginalized identity gains con-
         fidence to persist in the face of prevailing winds that trumpet
         convention.

                                                                - Harry Denny

         Now is the time for peripheral visions.
                                                  - Jackie Grutsch McKinney

    In this chapter I extend the work of fellow course-based tutoring researchers
by offering detailed comparisons, drawn from my field notes and interviews, as
we inch increasingly closer to an understanding of the many factors that provoke
directive and nondirective tutoring strategies and that can encourage or deter
successful CBT classroom interactions. Rebecca Babcock and Terese Thonus
draw on research from the California State University Fresno Writing Center
to argue, in contrast to one-to-one tutorials, "the validity of tutoring groups as
an effective, and even superior, means of supporting basic writers" (92). I agree
with this claim, but I also believe it warrants continuing scrutiny. What factors
might make for successful classroom interactions? How can tutors best facilitate
and support small-group peer response sessions in the developmental writing
classroom? And what useful connections can be drawn between one-to-one and
small-group tutoring in CBT situations?

    I start my reporting and analyses with case studies of tutors involved in peer
response facilitation in the classrooms they were connected to. I'll begin with the
three teams from the UW that were actively involved in the classroom. In the
Chapter Four

first subsection, I offer detailed micro-analyses of four tutor-led peer response
sessions. These sessions are unique and worth micro-analyses due to the fact that
both tutors, Julian and Megan, were trained to adhere to a more nondirective
tutoring method and methodology. Their performances, then, when compared
to their one-to-ones from Chapter Three, aid in my efforts to draw connections
between the discourses of one-to-one and small-group tutoring. In the second
subsection, I turn my reporting and analyses toward the teams with tutors who
received no explicit training in directive/nondirective strategies. Rather than
focusing on the micro-level language of the interactions, I focus my analyses
more peripherally, more on the broader rhetorical actions and attitudes of the
participants. All in all, readers will hear detailed, multivocal and multi-perspec-
tival analyses of tutors--some of whom we've already seen deep in action--with
varying levels of experience and training and widely different personalities and
preconceived notions attempt to aid fellow students with their writing perfor-
mances on location in the classroom.

CONNECTING THE MICRO AND MACRO IN PEER RE-
SPONSE FACILITATION: TEAMS ONE AND TWO

Redemption Song or Cautionary Tale? Julian on Location

    I thought for sure--had complete trust--that Julian and Anne of Team One
would realize a fruitful partnership. Just glancing at the highly positive student
course evaluations for the course overall, one would never get a sense that things
were not all they could have been with that partnership. Yet, as we clearly saw
from our analyses of one-to-one tutorial transcripts, Julian confounded my (and
students') expectations. Surely, he fared better in the classroom. The following
scenarios take readers closer to an understanding of how authority, trust and
directive/nondirective method negotiation can intertwine to either deter or pro-
mote successful peer response facilitation.

    What follows are reports and analyses of peer response sessions facilitated by
Julian and Anne on two different days drawn from my field notes. Due to the
dynamic nature of multiple speakers in small groups, I have opted for a horizon-
tal transcription style:

         In the first peer review session, in week five, eight students are
         in attendance, arranged in two groups of four. I move to Ju-
         lian's group. He asks if people brought extra copies. A student
         replies: "Only one." First student starts to read his paper. Oth-
         er students are listening, but not writing, commenting or tak-
         ing notes yet. Julian jots notes as the student continues read-

88
                                                                      Tutoring in the Classroom

ing. Student One says: "Didn't catch your claim." Student
Two says: "Should be in your introduction." The writer points
it out and rereads it. Julian asks: "What do you all think of
that as a claim?" Student Two says: "Sounds more like your
opinion." Julian says: "Consider bringing in extra copies [of
their essays]. Student One says: "None of us knew there was
peer editing today." Julian says (commenting on the writer's
paper): "Notes on logos, pathos, ethos; good intertextuality;
citings of Takaki; with the claim feels like something's miss-
ing, stakes; could you read it again?" The writer re-reads the
claim. Julian asks: "Why is it important?" Writer repeats the
second part of the claim with some extra commentary. Julian
says: "That sounds good, that would give the stakes." Student
One says: "Could state whether or not you agree with Taka-
ki." The writer asks: "What about opinions?" Julian answers:
"The idea is the whole paper is your opinion; stating opinions
as if they are a fact, sorta like tricking your reader that your
opinion is fact." Julian asks the student reviewers: "Patterns in
a section that you did?" Student Two says: "Logos, cause he
keeps giving facts, then the stakes, then facts." Julian says: "It
seems it might not be too much more work to find the pat-
tern. If there isn't a pattern, that might be worth commenting
on." Julian asks the writer: "Any particular questions?" This
group continues in similar fashion. (At this point I notice
Anne has stayed primarily out of the groups. She spent about
ten minutes with the other group, then she went to her desk
for about ten minutes, then came back to the group.)

Julian moves on to the next group. The group he leaves
continues talking on-task. In the next group a writer is in
the middle of reading his paper aloud. Julian listens quietly.
The writer is catching and commenting on many of his own
mistakes as he reads aloud. Julian says: "That's one of the ad-
vantages of reading aloud; can catch your own mistakes." The
group members agree verbally and with head shakes. Student
One says: "Sounds like you're making a list; really choppy."
Group members again verbally and nonverbally assent. Julian
says: "I missed the beginning; what is the claim?" The writer
says: "What is a real American? She claims only white people
are true Americans." Julian asks the reviewers: "What stands

                                                                                       89
Chapter Four

         out as the stakes for his claim?" Student One says: "Word
         choice, tone." Student 2, overlapping his response with Stu-
         dent 1, says: "Go into more depth about Asian Americans."
         The bell rings and the session ends.

    What I find most interesting about both these peer review groups is how Ju-
lian actually does seem to be fulfilling his role as peer review facilitator when he
prompts (in italics) students to comment on each other's papers (much as Megan
from Team Two does below), and the degree to which Julian tries to stay as closely
as possible to the assignment prompt in his suggestions. Notice in both groups
how Julian emphasizes claim, stakes, patterns, and the rhetorical appeals--all
things detailed in the assignment prompt. On their perception of how the session
went, both Anne and Julian agreed that students should have been told to bring
in extra copies. (Each student brought only one paper copy.) Although Anne felt
this was "probably not my best peer review session ever," she liked how the open-
ing discussion of the ground rules and strategies for peer review got the students
involved early in the shaping of the session and gave them an understanding of
why they were doing things the way they were. "In the name of metacognition,
you know," she said. Julian felt that while there were some good things that oc-
curred, "overall I don't think it went very well." Julian blamed it primarily on not
having extra essay copies, and also on a lack of time, but also pointed to what
he felt was a problem with the assignment prompt: "There were so many bold
words/ideas on their essay prompt, they didn't seem to really know what to be
talking about. None of the students seemed comfortable or fully in control of all
the discipline-specific language, i.e., there was no common parlance amongst the
peer group for all the essay's aspects in discussion."

         In the second small-group peer response session I observed
         a few weeks later, Julian only worked with one group of two
         students the entire time. The main thing I noticed about this
         session was that, besides reading aloud, the students barely
         spoke at all during the entire roughly forty minutes. The frus-
         trating effect this had on Julian was palpable to me and must
         have seemed so to the students as well. Near the beginning
         of the session Julian asks Student One if he is comfortable
         reading aloud. Student One says "not really." Julian describes
         why it is a good idea to read aloud: "It helps everyone stay in
         the same place, and you might hear and catch many of your
         own mistakes." Without answering, Student One proceeds to
         read his paper aloud. Julian cuts in quickly and asks if he can
         slow down, that he "can't process what he's saying." Student

90
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

         One slows down considerably. As the student continues to
         read Anne writes more instructions on the board: "Is there a
         controlling thread of argument about what the readers need
         to take away from these texts? Is it persuasive? What would
         you say is at stake? Are all sources appropriately cited? Do the
         content, structure, evidence, appeals, tone all keep the reader
         in mind?"

         What follows, to me, is Julian's attempt to help students
         juggle all the well-intentioned prompting Anne has provid-
         ed. I would call the resulting session an example of "resource
         overload," or more is less. As in the peer review session above,
         Julian spent the entire session mostly trying to get these two
         students to talk about how they could get one of Anne's
         prompt items, "Content," working in their texts. There was
         no mention, nor any attempts at working another prompt
         item "Creative" textual potentialities into the conversation.
         Reflecting on this session, Julian felt it went poorly. He felt
         the groups were too small to encourage much comparative
         discussion. He also felt that perhaps students did not fully
         understand the assignment which, along with their unwilling-
         ness to talk about "their own writing process (or lack there-
         of )," left him with little to discuss. He said that although the
         two students hadn't really done the assignment they "pro-
         fessed to understand what the assignment was." Anne did not
         offer any reflections on this particular session.

    Although Julian felt it was overall a good thing that he did attend the two
peer review sessions, his explanations of the role he sees himself playing during
peer review points to possible reasons why he experienced such lackluster results.
Ironically, it just might be Julian's sophisticated sense of what he should be doing
during peer response that contributed to the problem. Keenly aware of authority
issues, Julian feels that his role in peer review is one of "reserved adviser." He
elaborates:

         My understanding is that my presence during the peer cri-
         tique sessions, it's not a tutoring session, it's not me working
         one-on-one trying to work with their particular writing issues.
         It's me trying to model for them skills and ways of being
         effective in future peer groups throughout their writing classes
         and college careers, so that they can be useful to other people

                                                                                                  91
Chapter Four

         when I'm not around.

    He spoke of previous peer review experiences, among the many he had partic-
ipated in, where he had taken a more directive approach and felt that this causes
students to "clam up because it stops becoming a peer critique session because I'm
not their peer anymore and the whole process breaks down and becomes some-
thing other than what it's intended to be." Julian felt that the biggest roadblock to
success, however, involved lack of regular communication between him and Anne.

    Rather than share the blame, as Julian did above, Anne, more than once,
intimated how she should have done a better job scheduling conferences, getting
Julian course materials, and most of all "including Julian in sort of the day-to-
day workings of the class and making sure that he had sort of a well-defined
role." She goes on to explain how she feels this communicative oversight later
caused students to have expectations of the sort of help they would receive from
Julian that were never met. One of these expectations may have involved how
much direct instruction they thought they might receive from Julian. Anne talk-
ed at length about how Julian's nondirective approach made her reconsider this
approach in relation to this group of developmental students. She said that she
had hoped that Julian might help disrupt her teacherly authority somewhat. She
felt that because Julian was trying so hard to stay within what he thought were
her expectations, he forfeited any opportunity for students to really stake their
own claims, something she would have valued highly: "They're the quickest to
bow to authority. They're the quickest to say `well am I doing it right?' And
the least likely in some ways to sort of say `I don't think that's a useful way of
approaching this question' or `what can we do with this assignment to make it
something real for me and not just some imagined scenario or something.'"

    Three students mentioned peer review in their course evaluations, one prais-
ing, the others critical. The first student, pointed to both her admiration of Anne,
and the value she saw in peer review: "Anne is an amazing professor and it seems
like she absolutely loves what she does and it makes me want to learn more from
her. Peer review also played a big role when writing difficult papers. It's always
nice to bounce ideas off your peers and contribute in making their papers better."
The second student, however, felt "we spent too much time reading each other's
paper[s] during peer review, leaving no time for comments ... Taking each other's
papers home to read before the actual day of peer review [would have improved
the peer review process]" The third student, commenting on what aspects of the
class detracted from his/her learning, wrote two words: "peer reviews."

Peer Review People: Megan on Location

    Megan, from Team Two, felt she was acting much more like a peer in the

92
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

classroom than a teacher, and she saw this as a good thing. She evinced to me
that she worried she would become "more of the TA or assistant TA and not the
tutor." She goes on to explain that she was relieved when other, less authoritative
roles were agreed upon between her and Laura. But Megan elaborated further
about role negotiation, especially what exactly her role was supposed to be in
the classroom:

         We didn't have too many class discussions so I wasn't really
         a discussion leader. I tried to ask questions that would really
         help them understand the readings. But I guess I was kind
         of peer review [laughter] person. I would lead peer review at
         times and kind of help them with a new way to do that ... and
         not much else actually I guess.

    Both of the peer review sessions I observed for Team Two seemed to involve
both Megan and Laura in dynamic peer review and response facilitation and
instruction with the entire class:

         For the first peer review, in the third week, 12 students are in
         attendance. Laura assigns four students to three groups, writ-
         ing the group assignments on the board. She reminds them
         that they are supposed to have two copies. Laura has Megan
         come to the front and explain how the peer review session will
         work: decide who goes first, read your essay aloud, go through
         the worksheet, note things that don't make sense. Megan says
         that Laura and she will go from group to group. Laura passes
         around the peer review sheet, and explains that these sheets
         should be attached to their essays when turned in. Next,
         Megan and Laura each attach themselves to a separate group.
         In Megan's group students begin to fill out the review sheets
         as the first writer reads his paper. Megan takes notes. Upon
         finishing reading, Megan says that he did really well and asks
         for observations from fellow group members. Student One
         says "Nice examples. It would be nice if you could include
         some quotes to bring out details." Megan replies "Good
         suggestion." Student Three says "Good flow." Student Four
         follows with "flow nice." Megan says "Introduction describing
         surveillance knew what you would be talking about ... the
         other responders gave good advice ... In academics I was hop-
         ing to hear a little more about surveillance in your social life
         and during the games ... Who is surveilling you? Be careful

                                                                                                  93
Chapter Four

         about `being watched,' word choice, maybe `surveilled' ... de-
         tails help make your points really clear; excellent, good job!"
         Megan certainly seems to be the authority figure here. She
         talks much more than the other students, who seem reluctant
         to offer any suggestions.

         Writer Two reads his paper aloud. Fellow group members jot
         down notes. (Laura is still attached to the first group, listen-
         ing, giving feedback apparently as a group member. Then she
         moves to the other group, listening, answering a few questions
         about the peer review sheet.) Megan says "Why don't we do
         the same thing ... you want to go first? The level of student
         involvement picks up a little in this next round of responses.
         Student One offers some advice to the writer regarding his
         paper: "another suggestion, lack of style ... maybe make it
         more interesting ... I might make it like a story, rather than
         explaining steps." The writer seems unsure, slightly resistant
         (non-verbally mostly), to this suggestion. After group mem-
         bers discuss what they believe is the writer's claim and offer
         a few more suggestions, Megan says "It was a good job. I'm
         going to the next group; just continue as you're doing."

         At this group (the first Laura was at; now she is at the third
         group) a student is reading aloud; other students are taking
         notes; one asks for clarification during reading. Megan takes
         notes on what she hears. Rather than Megan, Student One
         starts the response: "Good, explain what panopticon is."
         Student Two says: "Good structure, describing and compar-
         ing to panopticon; but would be nice to describe activity."
         Student One agrees. Megan says: "That's a good observation."
         One more student comments, then Megan takes over the
         conversation for the rest of the class period, ending with:
         "You guys did a great job; sometimes students don't. I've been
         in classrooms where it's like pulling teeth to get them to." A
         student asks if Megan is still taking classes. They start to chat
         about her classes, future plans in teaching, etc. He asks her
         questions; other members in the group join in; conversation is
         casual and friendly.

    Within days of this session, I solicited Megan and Laura for their impres-
sions of how things went. Laura said that she had asked students how it went

94
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

and she got back mixed reviews. Some students said the oral peer review style
made it difficult to correct grammatical errors. Some said that reading the papers
aloud helped them to recognize the structure of their papers. Laura wished she
had had one tutor for each group. Megan said that by reading aloud, she felt
students caught a lot of their own mistakes. She also commented on how many
of these students had the first part of this stretch-course together and she believes
this allowed them to feel comfortable and to be open and honest with each oth-
er. She had interesting things to say about the peer review sheets:

         I think that the peer review sheets were helpful, but some-
         times unnecessary. In group two I think they were doing what
         I would hope would happen in a peer review session, but they
         were not filling in their sheets as much. Whereas in group one
         they all filled in the sheets while the person was reading the
         paper aloud and then talked about the suggestions they had
         for the paper. I think that both were effective, but I think that
         sometimes students can get distracted with filling in the sheet
         and not giving the best feedback. For this reason, I would
         not have a peer review sheet. However, I can see how it might
         have been effective. Who knows, if there was not a worksheet
         in group one, they might have not paid as close attention and
         thus not had as many insightful comments. However, I think
         that group two did a wonderful job and may not get that
         acknowledgment because they did not fill in their worksheets
         as completely as group one. It is a tough balance.

    It is clear to see that students were caught between what Laura called the
"oral peer review" and the peer review that relied on filling out the sheet she
had used with most of these students. While Megan was encouraging verbal
conversation in her groups, Laura was emphasizing filling out the worksheet: "I
instructed the first group I worked with step by step. We answered most of the
questions on the peer review sheet. I gave less instruction to the second group,
because when I got there they already figured out a different way of doing oral
peer review."

    Four weeks later I was invited to their second peer review session. It seems as
if they had made a couple of adjustments from the first one:

         Less students end up showing up for this session, nine overall,
         divided into two groups. Laura chooses a group leader for
         group one and has that leader choose who she wants for the
         group. Laura then passes around the peer review sheet (a
         different one) and says, however, that she wants them to talk

                                                                                                  95
Chapter Four

         about their papers first. Megan goes to group one, Laura to
         group two. Having a group leader somewhat changes the
         dynamics of group one's session. The group leader initiates
         questions and prompts speakers. But Megan soon resumes
         her role as authority figure by offering suggestions liberally;
         she ends up doing over half of the talking. However, having
         a different group leader than the implied Megan did seem to
         involve students more in the flow of the conversation, sugges-
         tions offered and questions asked, than the first group Megan
         worked with above.

         The second group stands out in my memory and field notes
         for the way students seemed to control much more of the
         conversational floor. At right about the half-way point Megan
         and Laura switch groups. The flow of conversation seems
         strong and students readily offer answers to Megan's prompt-
         ing questions. But the conversation becomes really dynamic as
         Megan asks the writer about her paper. The writer talks about
         her paper on Britney Spears. Megan asks about sources. The
         writer says none. Megan asks if anyone can suggest texts/sourc-
         es for her. Student Two suggests Foucault and why. Megan
         summarizes her words. Student Four chimes in. Student Two
         offers another suggestion. Student One offers how Silberstein
         could be used. Megan agrees. Student Five offers more on
         how Silberstein could be used. Student Two questions/asks
         for clarification and offers how she sees Britney Spears in the
         media all the time. This causes the writer to explain more.
         Megan joins the conversation on Anna Nicole and Britney in
         the media all the time dealing with substance abuse. Stu-
         dent Five joins in. The writer describes an article she found
         on Anna and Britney. Megan says they have "very insightful
         comments on each other's papers" and suggests they incorpo-
         rate texts from class, "awesome." Notice how the conversation
         involved much more dynamic uptake with more students after
         Megan openly asked for suggestions from all. I spoke with
         Megan and Laura afterwards and they both felt that this peer
         review was a great success.

    The student questionnaires offered feedback that seems to support Megan's
over Laura's view of in-class interactions. Like Laura, one student commented
positively on Megan's personality: "I liked the attitude she had. She was always

96
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

willing to help us. Very dedicated to her job." However, five students comment-
ed on what they viewed as Megan's lack of overall participation in the classroom:
"She needs to be more obvious in class. Then maybe students will want to go get
help. Because it seemed like she wasn't involved." Another said, "As far as having
her in the classroom, I did not think it was helpful. I rarely even noticed she was
in our classroom. I don't think they need to come to class." Another, "Maybe the
tutor could plan some activities and get involved more." Another, "Didn't find it
too effective." And the fifth, "She didn't help out that much." Perhaps Megan's
initial worry over becoming too much of a TA, and subsequent hesitancy to
take on any authoritative instructional role in the classroom (besides peer review
leader), actually hindered her from realizing her full potential in the classroom,
though it might have helped her during one-to-one tutorials.

RECIPROCAL CARE IN PEER RESPONSE WRITING
GROUPS, AND BEYOND: TEAMS THREE, FIVE, AND SIX

Finding Her "Cool to Care" Niche: Madeleine on Location

    The peer review session I was invited to for Team Three had a very different
feel from the ones I report on with Teams One and Two above. Students in Syd-
ney's class were revising their annotated bibliographies for their final portfolios:

         Ten students are in attendance. Sydney and Madeleine enter
         the classroom together. Rather than have a peer-review
         guideline sheet, Sydney simply passes around a handout on
         annotated bibliographies. Madeleine is sitting in the front row
         among the students. Sydney gives instructions on where to go
         from their previous personal responses. They are to partner-up
         and one, write in pen or highlighter what they can keep for
         the annotated bibliography, and two, write in what is miss-
         ing. Information from the longer responses are to be brought
         down to two-three sentence summaries. Sydney writes these
         instructions on the board, and says that she and Madeleine
         will move among the groups. As students begin, Madeleine
         goes up to Sydney at the front with the assignment sheet and
         asks for some clarification. Then Madeleine begins to talk
         with the student next to her about the task. Madeleine uses
         the instruction sheet to help this student ask questions of her
         partner's text. Sydney moves quickly from group to group.
         (Sydney commented during her interview that she felt that
         Madeleine often lingered too long one-to-one with students

                                                                                                  97
Chapter Four

         during such class activities, rather than "roaming the room.")
         Madeleine refers to an article they read and continues to talk
         about how that relates to the task. Madeleine then moves to
         the student's partner, doing the same thing, explaining the
         task in more detail. Madeleine moves to another student; asks
         if he's doing ok; repeats the same further explanation. Sydney
         gathers the class's attention and talks about evaluating the
         source. As she describes evaluation, she looks over, gesturing
         to Madeleine. Madeleine adds to what Sydney is saying about
         evaluation, describing the idea of the credibility of the source
         and where it came from, or if it might be biased. Then Mad-
         eleine continues to move among students. She approaches
         two young women sitting in the back, and there appears to be
         some pre-established rapport as they begin to chat and laugh.
         The students ask about her being sick; they ask about what
         she studies. (They are off-task, but only for about a minute,
         and these students are already garrulous before and after
         Madeleine moves on.) Madeleine leaves the room for two
         minutes, comes back and sits in her seat. Sydney says pull out
         another article and do the same process on their own bibliog-
         raphy. Madeleine chats with me a bit. Sydney begins meeting
         one-to-one with a student up front with his paper. A student
         close to Madeleine asks what he's supposed to be doing right
         now. She explains. Then he asks her about a paper. A student
         behind Madeleine drops a bunch of Altoid mints. She helps
         him pick them up, and she throws them away. Madeleine
         spends the rest of the class (about five minutes) writing in
         her day-planner and reading a paper (maybe hers, maybe a
         student's?). With five minutes of class-time left, Sydney says
         they can leave if they're done. Most students begin to leave.
         Madeleine packs up and leaves as well.

    Due to the design of this class activity, I notice that Madeleine seems much
more casual and hands-off compared to both Megan (who attended class ev-
ery day) and Julian. Madeleine also approached students differently. She would
somewhat tentatively approach them and ask if they needed any help, rather
than just assume they did. In fact, Madeleine's attitude and actions in this peer
response facilitation resembled more closely what I saw taking place with the
SCSU Team Five below.

    Of the ten student questionnaires I received back, all ten were overwhelming-

98
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

ly positive. Strikingly, while no students made direct reference to the one-to-one
tutorials, nine students commented in detail on the benefits of having Madeleine
in the classroom regularly. Students also wrote much more, and more complexly,
than any of the other Teams' student questionnaires. Students talked about the
convenience of having a tutor in the know, a tutor closer to the expectations of
the class, a tutor they trusted. One student wrote: "In English 104 [the first part
of the stretch-course] I did struggle in class because I had many questions that I
needed to be answered but was scared to ask, but when having a tutor you know
that you can ask questions." Another, "The in-class tutor always raised questions
in class. She always let us know when we weren't meeting the expectations of the
course. For example many of the students were only focusing on content and
our tutor told us that we had to focus on meaning." Another, "In-class tutors
give the professors a break and also are very helpful to the students when the
professor is occupied ... When needing help in class and the teacher was helping
another student having her there to answer questions." Another, "We got a lot of
attention during class. It was like being one on one." Another, "Not having a tu-
tor [in 104] was somewhat more difficult to receive help because there was only
one instructor. Having two has made questions and help a lot faster." Another,
"It was weird at first, but later on having the tutor really helped. The in-class
tutor was like a TA for the class who goes around and helps a student in need. It
really helped me, because the tutor gave me ideas and thoughts to think about
what I was writing about." Another, "I had a better understanding because the
tutor was willing to be a part of the class." Another, "They help give ideas to the
class, as well as brainstorming situations with us." And finally, "She branches
out a lot of good ideas during discussion ... I like how she joined class conver-
sations. She always gave her feelings on what an article meant to her. Hearing
her thoughts gave me ideas ... Many of my questions were answered because if
Sydney was busy the tutor would help me."

Learning Disability and Response-Ability: Gina on Location

    Fresh from having taken the same developmental writing course the pre-
vious year, Gina from Team Five capitalized on the bond she already enjoyed
with instructor Mya. During a peer review and response session in week four, I
witnessed an amazing moment--something I had never quite seen before--that
immediately piqued my interest.

         I noticed one student in particular, Max, having a visibly
         tough time understanding what he was supposed to be doing,
         while his two peer group partners seemed to be experienc-

                                                                                                  99
Chapter Four

         ing no trouble at all. Gina, who was circulating around the
         room, later in our interview reported that she saw that Max
         was having trouble. "I noticed Max looking nervous over in
         his seat so I went over to see what I could help him with. His
         partners Kim and Adrianne already had their computers set
         up and were starting the assignment. Max wasn't as far along.
         He hadn't even logged into the computer," she said. Gina
         spent much of the remaining class session helping him get on
         track with the multiple organizational and communicative
         tasks students needed to negotiate during this peer review
         and response session: working with online files, following the
         response guidelines and instructions, and reading and offering
         feedback to his group members. Gina told Max not to worry
         too much about the comments his partners were giving him,
         but rather to focus on the comments he was writing for them.

         As Mya circulated the room she went over to Max's group.
         Max groggily said "I'm tired today, the weather." Gina con-
         tinued to good-naturedly and patiently help him navigate the
         review process. She turned to his two group members at one
         point for help. Kim came over to help out, succeeded, and
         then moved back to her computer. At one point, Max deeply
         sighed and Kim chipped in a tip on commenting. Max said
         "yeah, yeah, yeah" in relief. A few minutes later, Max said to
         Gina that he is "falling apart" and "can't concentrate." She
         continued trying to coach him on how to handle things.

         After class, Max came up to me, we said hi, and then he just
         stood there for a second. I asked how he is doing. He told me
         that he is not feeling all that well and that he is having a hard
         time with this peer review. We chatted a little more before he
         left for his next class.

    Later Gina would tell me, "I felt bad for Max because he was very over-
whelmed and also not feeling well. I tried to make him feel like he will do much
better with his group-mates' advising in a less stressful environment so it's fine
that he is not really doing anything during class." Part of the problem, and one
that distinguished this class and partnership from others I have studied, was the
amount of technology Mya uses in her courses. Mya always teaches in wired,
computer-equipped classrooms. So, unlike the peer response sessions I reported
on above, the participants in this study not only had to process the typical logis-

100
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

tics of peer response, they also had to negotiate the nuances of the technology
involved. (Another thing that may have contributed to Max's discomfort, sug-
gested by his approaching me at the end, was my very presence in the classroom
to begin with. Perhaps Max's knowing that I was there to observe and potentially
report on those observations contributed to the sensory-overload and anxiety he
experienced.) The entire visit, I noticed how patient and caring Gina was with
Max. And I started to think that there was something very important taking
place here.

    During a visit one month later, I noticed both Max and his peer response
partners taking on much more interactive collaborative roles:

         Max, today, seemed in much better shape--no visible worries,
         etc. I noticed that rather than frequently asking Gina for help
         he seemed to be much more involved with his two partners.
         In contrast to what I witnessed during my earlier visit, Max
         seemed to have a good grasp of what he was supposed to
         be doing. He asked his partners a question and they helped
         him; they asked him questions and he helped them. I was
         impressed with how these students, especially Kim, were
         collaborating with Max. In contrast to my last visit, Gina only
         came over to the group a couple of times. At one point, the
         group talked about works cited pages and the fact that neither
         of Max's partners did one, but that he did. Gina ended up
         spending much more focused time with other students,
         including a male student who was having difficulty with
         citations and formatting. Following Nelson's progression, Max
         seemed to be moving smoothly from dependence to interde-
         pendence and independence with his peer response group.

    Gina gives her impressions of her involvement with Max and his group
members in this second peer review session:

         Like always Max was right on track with what he was sup-
         posed to do. He was just double-checking that he was up to
         speed. I looked at Max's work and realized he was very ahead
         of the game. He had his e-portfolio set up very nicely. He
         already had one paper posted and was almost ready to post
         another. He then asked me to look over the second paper
         he was going to post before he posted it. I looked at what
         he changed and what Mya asked him to look over. He took
         everything Mya said and changed it. His paper looked very
         nice. I told him it looked great and it should be ready to post.

                                                                                                 101
Chapter Four

         He wanted a second opinion so Mya was called over. I was
         very happy that Max feels so comfortable to ask my opinion.
         I have noticed that every class he calls me over at least once. I
         am happy to talk with him and assure him he is on track with
         everything.

    In their end-of-term questionnaires, ten out of eleven students felt Gina's
presence in class was beneficial, and only one was ambivalent. (The ambivalent
student only wrote a couple of yes's or no's indeterminately.) Several students
commented on their overall impressions of having an in-class tutor: "makes help
only a nod away. It was great." Another, "She was very helpful with papers and
assignments. I think it was a good idea to have one in every class." And, harking
back to the comments by students involved with Julian and Anne's overall un-
successful partnership in Team One who felt that their course-based tutor did
not know what was going on in the course, one student wrote: "I liked it because
it gave you someone to help you with your work that actually sits in the class
and knows what's going on ... so maybe people feel more comfortable that way."
I also took the chance to interview the student Gina and Kim worked so closely
with, Max. He told me that he really appreciated the attention he received from
Gina, his group members, and Mya. He said he especially appreciated Kim's
help (for more on this case study, especially Gina's and Max's personal stories,
see Corbett "Learning").

Paying Care and Trust Forward: Kim and Penny on Location

    As mentioned above, two of the students from Team Five's class, Kim and Pen-
ny, were recruited to become course-based tutors for the following semester with
an experienced adjunct instructor, Jake. Team Six, illustrates what can happen
if continuity is carried forward (genealogically, if you will) from student-to-tu-
tor, from tutor-to-tutor, from instructor-to-instructor, from tutor-to-instructor.
One of the several threads that linked the participants from the two courses was
the interaction between Kim and Max. Recall, Max and Kim were peer response
group partners and, like Sara, Kim found the experience of working with Max
highly rewarding. While it would be easy to overestimate the effect Max had on
Kim's performance as either a student writer with Mya or as a course-based tutor
the subsequent term with Jake, one cannot help but believe there was indeed
some inspirational paying forward. As with the other case-study teams, I sat in
on and took field notes of in-class peer response sessions with this team. The
sessions I witnessed fell very much on a continuum of directive/controlling and
nondirective/facilitative interaction witnessed especially with Madeleine from

102
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

Team Three and Gina from Team Five. In short, in the sessions I witnessed,
Kim acted much the way Sydney from Team Three reported Madeleine acting
during class discussions--more outgoing and authoritative--and Penny acted a
bit more like Megan from Team Two--more reserved during class discussions,
but more hands-on during peer response sessions. When Jake started addressing
the entire class for the session with Kim, Kim joined in with Jake very much as
a co-teacher, even finishing his sentences a couple of times. In contrast, when
Jake spoke to the entire class that Penny was attached to, she did not join in like
Kim had. However, once students became engaged in responding to each other's
essays, both Kim and Penny became very involved in the groups. Jake had en-
couraged both classes to write on each other's essays as well as talk about them.
Both Kim and Penny did not hesitate to join in on writing comments down on
student papers as they discussed their suggestions. But these tutors went even
further in embracing authoritative roles in their respective courses, and together.

    During my interviews with all participants in Team Six, and from the jour-
nals both Kim and Penny were keeping on a class-by-class basis, I came upon
some compelling findings. Due to the fact that Kim and Penny were both work-
ing with the same instructor, Jake, albeit in two different courses, this team had
the opportunity to collaborate much more interactively than any other CBT
partnership I've studied. And they took full advantage of that opportunity. Al-
low me to end the reporting on the case studies and stories in this book by
quoting at length from Penny and Kim's journals. (One of the strengths of both
Nelson's and Brooke, Mirtz, and Evans's studies are the extensive amount of
reporting and analyses the authors provide from participant journals.) We will
begin with excerpts from Penny's journal:

         Tuesday, April 13th

         Yesterday, Jake handed out the assignment that Kim and I
         came up with. The assignment is much more specific so the
         students are able to understand and follow it. The assignment
         is called "The American Dream Museum Exhibit" [See Appen-
         dix D]. The students are to get in groups and bring any kind
         of artifact that they think represents the American Dream. On
         Thursday, the students will bring at least ten artifacts to class
         and explain to their group why they chose that. On Thursday,
         students will also narrow down their items to five each. These
         five will be the items they include in their exhibit and presen-
         tation. In a few weeks, the groups will present their museum of
         what they think represents the American Dream.

                                                                                                 103
Chapter Four

         Thursday, April 15th

         Today, the groups met with artifacts they brought in or
         images they printed and cut out. I sat with group one for a
         while, just observing and listening to what they had to say
         about what they brought in. It was interesting to see the
         different perspectives they had of the American Dream. Each
         member brought something different, but in the same way,
         that one artifact connected with a group member's different
         artifact. One group member printed out a picture of a white
         picket fence, and another member brought a picture from the
         newspaper of a perfect-looking house. I suggested that the
         members can use both of those images in the presentation to
         add to the exhibit.

         One member brought all portable items of technology (cell
         phone, iPod, etc.) and another member brought a McDon-
         ald's to-go bag. Both members had the different explanations
         for the artifacts, but I pointed out one way in which they tied
         together. I mentioned that both could represent mobility and
         how valuable time is to Americans. As I came back to this
         group later in the class, they had built off that idea even more.

         As I moved onto other groups, and listened to what they had
         to say about their items, I was impressed with how different
         the results were. After listening to each member give me
         an explanation of all the artifacts they brought, I told them
         about things that I had not heard from the other groups, but
         I heard from them. Since they are covering the same topic, it's
         important that they all have different artifacts so things don't
         get repetitive when they present their exhibits.

         Wednesday, April 28th

         Jake sent the following email:

         Hi Kim and Penny,

         I wanted to give you both a heads up that I will not be in class
         on Thursday. However I do not want to cancel class since each

104
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

         group needs to work on their exhibit design and layout.

         While I do not expect them to stay for the entire class, I
         would hope that they take the opportunity to organize their
         exhibit in detail and have each member give a tour of their
         artifacts and introductions. Each of you can provide your
         feedback and insights to the groups.

         If either of you have any questions, please feel free to email
         me or call or text my cell.

         Thanks and I'll see you on Tuesday.

         Jake

         Thursday, April 29th

         As the students walked into class, I explained to them what
         the agenda would be. They knew Jake wasn't going to be in
         class, so I told them once I met with their groups, they were
         free to leave class. Each group had to explain what their title
         of their exhibit was, read their introductions, and give me
         a tour of what each artifact in their exhibit was. After each
         group was done presenting to me, I asked questions to keep
         them thinking. If they had artifacts they didn't explain well,
         I asked them what the artifact's symbolism or representation
         was of the American Dream. Each group was well-organized
         and knew how they were going to present the exhibit to the
         class. I made sure to ask the students how and where in the
         classroom were they going to set up all of their artifacts. If I
         was unsure of a question, I sent Jake a text. I did not want to
         tell the students the wrong answer, because it was Jake who
         was grading the presentations, not me. Before the groups left,
         I told them to come to class on time the following Tuesday
         and to be ready to present. Next Tuesday and Thursday the
         groups will be presenting their exhibits.

    The following excerpts are taken from Kim's journal entries. The first one
offers her take on the day Jake was not in class. The latter two provide reporting
on the days students delivered their "American Dream Museum" exhibits near
the end of the term.

                                                                                                 105
Chapter Four

         4/29/2010

         Today was very cool. Prof J. was unable to attend class. So I
         got to act as the prof for the day  The students went over
         their exhibits and what they have so far. They both seemed to
         be very good and well thought out so far. However, only two
         people from the second group were in class today so I didn't
         really get a great sense of how their exhibit will go. Both
         groups read their introductions as if they were presenting it to
         the class ... What I enjoyed most was that even though these
         introductions were not being peer reviewed the students gave
         each other criticism and helped them reword things as well as
         encouraged them when they enjoyed what their peer wrote!

         5/4/2010

         TODAY'S THE BIG DAY!!  The students have been work-
         ing on their exhibits and they will finally be able to present
         them. Unfortunately, one student was absent. Thus, one of
         the groups was short. Also two students came late so they
         were unable to present their projects today with their groups
          The projects included a movie (The Pursuit of Happiness), a
         baseball card, lots of pictures, poems and songs, a water bot-
         tle, and more. I loved the explanations and after their intros
         last class and then again today, I could see a huge difference.
         The students who actually came today had made the changes
         to their intros for the objects and they came out very well ...
         The students really went in depth and took the explanation
         to another level. Also, the students didn't really seem nervous.
         They knew why they chose their five objects and discussed
         them well. One of the poems that was shared also made me
         think a lot. It was titled "The American Dream" and the
         student used the poem to stress how the American dream is
         represented in a negative way. The poem basically goes into
         how once people are living the so called "American Dream,"
         making money and doing well for themselves, they forget
         about the individuals who do not have wealth or even places
         to rest their head at night 

106
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

         5/6/2010

         This semester is coming to an end  We started the class
         off by having the last three students present their projects.
         These three students actually presented their projects sepa-
         rately because their groups went on Tuesday. It really made
         me remember back to the second and third class hearing the
         students read their essays and being embarrassed and rushing
         through them, whereas today they mostly spoke clearly and
         with confidence. I could definitely see the growth in such a
         short amount of time.

     In their questionnaires, students from both of Team Six's courses reported
very much the same sort of high satisfaction with the courses as with Team Five
above.

DISCUSSION: DIRECTION, NONDIRECTION, AND MISDI-
RECTION IN THE CBT CLASSROOM

    The above scenarios begin to clearly illustrate just how complicated--or
complimentary--things can get when you combine various instructional aspects
of the parent genres, as well as different participant personalities, goals, and in-
structional experiences and backgrounds. Of all the teams, Team One I initially
thought would be the most successful. Julian, with all his experience, seemed
like the ideal "writing advisor" tutor for this project. Anne, likewise had the
experience, was studying in the field of Composition and Rhetoric, and showed
early enthusiasm toward the project in general. Yet Julian summarized the over-
all experience as going "sort of poorly, less than mediocre." Julian pointed to
two primary reasons he felt the partnership did not work well: lack of commu-
nication with Anne, and confusion as to what his specific role was in the class.
Julian felt that his minimal presence in the classroom affected his relationship
with the class, creating an awkward, "ambivalent space" between himself and the
students. He felt that the students and he never got to know each other. So, he
said, students were "like `Julian's going to be our writing consultant, is going to
be part of the class,' and then I show up twice and nobody ever hears from me."
Anne voiced two main reasons why she felt the partnership floundered: her lack
of collaboration with Julian, and Julian's nondirective instructional approach.
On her initial high-hopes that quickly began to fall, she said: "When I met Ju-
lian at the beginning I thought this would be great; this has such great potential
because we both have such similar philosophies, basically teaching philosophy ...
But [laughter] in practice it wasn't quite as good."

                                                                                                 107
Chapter Four

    Despite the relatively greater amount of tutoring experience both Julian and
Anne possessed, they were ironically unable to perform with the sort of flexi-
bility and adaptability that the other teams displayed. While we might point
to instances where Julian did get directive, as when he more or less "forced" the
student to read his paper aloud during the second peer review, I would argue
that Julian did not really do that bad a job during the peer reviews, evidenced
by him trying to play what he felt was his role of question-posing facilitator,
or "reserved advisor"--in short, to play the role of Decker's "meta-tutor, en-
couraging students to tutor each other" ("Diplomatic" 27). The greatest tension
seemed to be in Julian's debatably inflexible minimalist/nondirective approach.
Repeatedly, as illustrated especially in the peer reviews above, the data point to
instances where Julian was trying perhaps too hard to play it safe, to attempt at
all costs to meet what he felt were Anne's expectations, to stick to the prompts
closely and carefully during interactions with students. Perhaps, as with Megan,
Julian worried too much about taking on a teacherly role. His feeling that Anne
was the teacher, and he was there to be a "reserved advisor," may have actually
confounded the students' expectations that he should offer whatever direct sug-
gestions he could. His attempt to be as peer-like as possible may have had the
opposite effect. Clark's study of directive/nondirective tutoring with students
who labeled themselves "poor" writers, found that these students perceived their
tutors as more successful when the tutors were directive, contributing "many
ideas" ("Perspectives" 41). In contrast to the case studies of Teams Three, Five,
and Six where tutors embraced their roles as authority figures, Julian's attempt to
stick to what he felt were Anne's expectations, coupled with his limited presence
in the classroom, only bewildered students who, it seems, wanted to know more
than anything what he thought. Julian's repeated efforts to stay within Anne's
expectations came across to student's as unwillingness to model a sense of "what
would you do?" Further, while I've been tempted to make tentative claims about
Julian's actions during tutorials in terms of gender roles, like Black, Denny, and
Judith Butler I believe gender is performative based on context. Black argues
that though feminist theorists have frequently claimed that talk between women
is "cooperative, supportive, non-competitive, nurturing, and recursive" her ex-
tensive study of teacher-to-student conferences revealed that

         female teachers dominate female students just as male teachers
         do ... they are less likely to cooperatively overlap their speech
         ... female students initiate fewer revision strategies to female
         teachers and hear less praise from female teachers ... All this
         together does not add up to the picture of cooperation, sup-
         port, and shared control that is often presented as characteris-

108
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

         tic of female-to-female speech. (68; also see Denny 101-02)

    While we saw the same sorts of instructional and conversational "domina-
tion" during the one-to-one tutorials from Madeleine, Megan, as well as Julian,
a host of other contextual forces worked to undermine the success of Team One.

    For Team Two, overall, Laura and Megan reported enjoying working togeth-
er very much. Megan talked about initial role negotiations with Laura:

         It was kind of hard because I'm not a student and I'm not her
         teaching assistant. But I'm not involved in the grading, but
         I'm supposed to help them ... it was an opportunity for the
         students to get some of the most personal and helpful advice
         in their writing, because they have someone who's there who's
         not intimidating, because it's not their professor ... I think at
         the beginning she was thinking that one day I could lead the
         class. And so I wasn't sure [laughter] what to do.

    Megan explained that she worried she would become "more of the TA or
assistant TA and not the tutor." As we noted earlier, she was relieved when other,
less authoritative roles were agreed upon.

     Laura commented on how pleasant Megan's personality was, how she was
always smiling and cheerful, how she always had a positive attitude, and how
she was easy to talk to and work with. In contrast to Megan's sentiments above,
Laura described her working relationship with Megan in terms of wanting to
keep their interactions as peer-like as possible: "I kind of see her as my peer.
Instead of asking her to do this and that I wanted to get her feedback. We kind
of designed the class together." Laura described how early in the quarter she and
Megan would meet once a week to discuss weekly schedules, class plans, and up-
coming assignments. They would also have "meta-teaching" conversations after
class. Laura described Megan's role as "conversation partner" who would "have
a lot of things to say about texts" during conversations in class (though she did
not distinguish between whole-class conversations and conversations involving
peer response).

    However, we saw that Megan and Laura had different perceptions of Megan's
usefulness in the classroom. While Laura felt that Megan was an important day-
to-day in-class player, Megan and the students felt that she wasn't quite living
up to her participative potential. And while I think she did a great job as "peer
review person," especially in the second sessions, students didn't seem to get the
same sense of the importance of her presence. Perhaps the introduction of the
"oral" peer review confused the students at first and it took a little bit of getting
used to before they could feel the full benefits of that method. In the fourth

                                                                                                 109
Chapter Four

edition of A Short Course in Writing, Bruffee distinguishes between two forms of
peer review. According to Bruffee, corresponding is a more exacting and rigorous
form where students write to each other about their papers, and conferring is an
immediately responsive, conversational form more attuned to the writer's needs.
Bruffee argues that "the most helpful kind of constructive conversation com-
bines the two ... So in peer review you write to each other about your essays first,
and then you talk about them" (170; also see Gere and Stevens). It seems that,
by the end, Team Two was certainly moving in this two-fold feedback direction,
exercising and flexing students' abilities to negotiate directive and nondirective
strategies, and Megan's ability to coach these peer-to-peer pedagogical skills. It
also seems that from the first to the second peer response session, students were
moving from dependence to interdependence. Concurrently, it appears that Me-
gan and Laura were moving away from directiveness and more toward a more
minimalist facilitative role. This supports Nelson's claims regarding the inverse
relationship between students taking and tutors/instructors relinquishing con-
trol when working toward successful peer response. Simply put, by that second
peer response session I witnessed, the attitude, action, and language of control
and directiveness had shifted from Megan to the students. This also coincides
with Harris's four reasons why writers need writing tutors, that valuable analytic
link between tutoring one-to-one and in small groups. While control seemed
to flow from Megan to the students explicitly realizing Harris's first reason--
encouraging student independence in collaborative talk--it might have more
implicitly helped students realize the other three reasons: assisting students with
metacognitive acquisition of strategic knowledge; assisting with knowledge of
how to interpret, translate, and apply assignments and teacher comments; and
assisting with affective concerns. Yet, overall, students still wanted more from
Megan in the classroom.

    Madeleine and Sydney from Team Three expressed mixed reviews of their
partnership. The tutor, Madeleine, narrated her satisfaction with the experience
from start to finish. She enjoyed all aspects of her involvement: working with
Sydney; working with students; and working with the subject of the course, race
and citizenship in the nation. On her initial interactions with students, Made-
leine said:

         I think at first they were like, "What the heck, who is this
         person?" They weren't mad or anything [laughter]. They were
         just kind of like "ok." They didn't know why I was there, but
         it was cool. After a while they just thought of me as kind of
         like another student ... They really seemed to appreciate the
         things that I said in class and after a while I think it was really

110
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

         comfortable ... And they didn't feel, at least as far as I know,
         they didn't feel like I was trying to be authoritative.

    And on her initial role negotiations with Sydney, Madeleine reported: "At
first I didn't know what my job would be in the class. And we were just like
trying to work it out the first couple of weeks of the quarter." Madeleine goes
on to describe how she soon found her niche in the classroom as "discussion
participant." During an early class discussion of readings, Madeleine joined in.
Afterwards, Sydney praised Madeleine, telling her that she felt the students had
participated in a way they "might not have been able to and she [Sydney] might
not have been able to. She felt like the students listen to me. Not really more
than they listen to her, but they tend to agree with her. So whatever she's say-
ing, whatever she's contributing to the discussion, they think `oh that's the right
way.'"

    Sydney's take on the partnership, however, portrays a much more conflicted
point of view. Sydney said that she was initially worried that someone else's pres-
ence in the classroom would make her feel like she was being watched, but that,
fortunately, did not end up being the case. This may be due to her impressions
that, echoing Madeleine's own comments, Madeleine really took on more of a
peer role in the classroom, seeming much like just another student. Sydney did,
however, detail further initial misgivings that--in her mind--ended up affect-
ing the rest of the quarter:

         Initially there was a lot of frustration just trying to match two
         personalities, two kinds of teaching styles, trying to negotiate
         where roles were ... I remember the first couple of days I felt
         like there was a little bit of showing off going on on her part.
         Maybe she felt the need to prove herself to show [herself ] as
         capable as the TA. Maybe she was trying to show me; I don't
         know. And I felt that that kind of shut down conversations
         with my students a little bit because they might have felt
         intimidated a little bit you know.

    But Sydney also talked about how she eventually came to view her interac-
tions with Madeleine in a different light: "In the end I think it took us a while,
but I feel like in the end we finally at least began to kind of click and mesh." A
big part of this eventually-realized mutual understanding may have something
to do with Madeleine's overall motives for and attitude toward this course. In
her own words: "The most important thing for me to teach the students was to
be active learners in the classroom. I hoped that they would view my enthusiasm
for the content as an example of it actually being cool to care." I believe it was

                                                                                                 111
Chapter Four

this ultimate clicking and meshing that I observed late in the term.
     While we might rightly question Madeleine's performance during one-to-

one tutorials, I certainly maintain my belief that Madeleine's authoritative style
was effective and valuable in the classroom. Delpit makes a related point that
hints at a possible reason why the diverse students from Team Three identified
so closely with Madeleine:

         The "man (person) of words," be he or she preacher, poet,
         philosopher, huckster, or rap song creator, receives the highest
         form of respect in the black community. The verbal adroit-
         ness, the cogent and quick wit, the brilliant use of metaphori-
         cal language, the facility in rhythm and rhyme, evident in the
         language of preacher Martin Luther King, Jr., boxer Muham-
         mad Ali, comedienne Whoppi Goldberg, rapper L.L. Cool J.,
         and singer and songwriter Billie Holiday, and many inner-city
         black students, may all be drawn upon to facilitate school learn-
         ing. (Other 57; emphasis added)

    Another way to consider the implications of Madeleine's performance is
when moving tutors to classrooms we could encourage a more authoritative
approach, but when they move back to the center (or wherever else one-to-one
or small-group tutorials happen) tutors should resist the temptation to overuse
what they know about the course and the instructor's expectations. One of the
reasons the tutorials conducted by Madeleine, and to large extent with Megan
and Julian (Appendix C), seemed so tutor-centric was because all three of these
tutors tried perhaps much too hard to speculate on what the teacher wanted.
Most of the linguistic feature and cue ratios--total words spoken, references to
the TA or assignment prompts, and interruptions versus main channel overlaps
and joint productions--detail salient imbalances, imbalances that overwhelm-
ingly point to almost complete tutor control. While this discursive imbalance
luckily did not seem to affect the overall successful partnerships of Teams Two
and Three, it certainly did not help the unsuccessful collaboration in Team One.
The overarching lesson? Tutors might hold on a little tighter to some nondirec-
tive methods and moves that could place agency back in the hands and minds
of the students. Of course, unlike the other tutors, Madeleine had not been
exposed to the literature on directive/nondirective tutoring, nor could I find
any indication that she was encouraged to practice a particularly nondirective
method. Perhaps, if she had received a bit of training in directive/nondirective
strategies, then Madeleine's fight-for-the-floor session might have sounded more
like Sam's parallel session, or even more like the sort of non-intrusive, flexible
collaboration I witnessed during my visit to Madeleine and Sydney's classroom

112
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

during peer response. Maybe then Madeleine could have exhibited some of
those nondirective methods and moves showcased by Sam from Team Four in
all of her one-to-one tutorials. Yet perhaps, as Nelson discovered, Madeleine had
earlier moments of directiveness, but as the course moved on, and by the time
I saw her more "laid-back" attitude and action in the classroom near the end
of the term, she had pulled back on her interventions as students became more
self-directed, interdependent, and to varying degrees independent.

    The tutor for Team Five, Gina, felt her involvement as a course-based tu-
tor for the class went "different, but better than I thought it would be." She
thought it was wonderful that students had the option of asking either her or
Mya questions during classroom activities. She also felt she was able to engage
with students on a personal as well as academic level, even though she said that
she usually sat at the head of the class with Mya when she was not circulating
around the room. She also did all of the readings for the course, but only did
one writing assignment to show students how she approached it. (Something
none of the other case-study tutors undertook.) Gina said that if she could give
other course-based tutors any advice, it would be not to overly worry or hesitate
to approach and interact with students. She felt that in the first few weeks she
did not want to bother or interfere too much, but then she started to realize that
students really appreciated her interventionist attention.

    The instructor, Mya, said that she and Gina's familiarity allowed Gina to
take a very active and highly informed role in assistant teaching for the course.
She said Gina started off a little slow at first, but very soon she felt that students
started to warm up to her and really lean on her for questions and support. She
(echoing Madeleine from Team Three) would often help jump-start class discus-
sions if students were initially silent. She felt that Gina was like a "life preserver"
that she could throw out at any time in the classroom for any particular student
who needed it. Although, she did feel this class was stronger than usual in terms
of their engagement, she very much appreciated having Gina close by to help
circulate and give more individual attention to others. She said that even though
Gina did not say a lot in class all the time, she was very upbeat and always had
wonderfully positive energy (reminiscent of Megan from Team Two). Mya said
she believes Gina's LD actually enabled her to make even stronger connections
with other students, especially Max, though she said "you can't tell Gina has a
LD by just talking with her." Mya praised Gina's communication and organi-
zation skills. When I asked her if she would do anything differently next time,
Mya said that she would have liked to plan things out a little more with Gina,
perhaps regular weekly meetings, so Gina had more say in what was going on (I
have heard this advice several times before with participants in CBT). When I
asked her if she'd be willing to have another tutor attached to her class, she said,

                                                                                                 113
Chapter Four

laughing, "I would not want to do it without one." She felt that having a tutor
did not demand any extra time on her part and was only a benefit. She felt that
working with Gina made her think just how important it is to slow down some-
times and make sure things are clear to all students.

    Much like the in-class peer response session I witnessed with Madeleine and
Sydney from Team Three, I saw Gina responding at the point of need of the
students. In other words, the potential for the tutor to control or over-direct in this
situation was mitigated due to the fact that the students themselves initiated, and
to a large degree controlled, the call for tutorial assistance. Yet scholars disagree
on what might be the best setting for fostering such student-centered control,
including minority students and students with LDs. In "Cultural Diversity in
the Writing Center" Judith Kilborn describes these contrasting philosophies in
terms of those who believe either: one, minority and diverse students should be
mainstreamed into the general population "to prepare them to interact with the
diverse population they will meet in the workplace"; or two, "minority students
are best served by services designed and run by minorities for minorities; they
feel that such services provide a sense of community and cultural pride" (393).
In "Discourses of Disability and Basic Writing" Amy Vidali questions a claim
made by Barber-Fendley and Hamel that LD students should be separated out
from the writing classroom, especially the basic writing classroom, for additional
support. Vidali argues, rather, that similarities abound between LD and non-LD
basic writing students: they are both talked about in terms of difficulty and over-
coming deficits, they often share identities and classrooms, and both are "de-
fined according to a dominant (white, male, abled) other" (53). Vidali urges us
to do what we can to unify basic writing and LD pedagogy. She believes that LD
students would then benefit from the same structural support systems afforded
basic writers in all their various diversities. I find myself agreeing with Vidali.
When we consider the effects of the interactions of both Gina and Kim with
Max, Vidali's assertions begin to make very good sense--for all participants. In a
way, then, the arguments for more unified instructional support systems for di-
verse students echo the arguments for closer writing classroom and peer tutoring
coordination described in the Introduction (see Corbett "Learning" for more on
this particular case study).

    All participants from Team Six voiced high satisfaction with their experi-
ences together. Overall, Kim described her experiences as highly positive and
rewarding: "I felt that working with the students taught me a lot. It actually
helped me with my own study habits and certainly helped me become more pa-
tient." Reflecting back on their interactions, like Sara, Kim found the experience
of working with Max rewarding. She told me that she would sometimes email
Max when she had questions about an assignment. She went on to say:

114
                                                                                  Tutoring in the Classroom

         When working with Max I remember him being a very
         intelligent young man. He had wonderful thoughts and ideas
         and always put one hundred percent into all of his work. Even
         when doing public speaking projects Max gave his all. He was
         frightened to speak in front of the class but, as his partner, I
         saw him practice over and over until he was confident. Some-
         times Max just needed someone there to repeat or explain the
         assignments as well as a partner who was willing to practice
         with him over and over until he felt comfortable.

    Likewise, the other tutor, Penny, reported an overall positive experience, es-
pecially in relation to her field of study, Elementary Education:

         It helped me jump into being a mentor or teacher of some
         sort. It helped encourage me to dive right in and help stu-
         dents, no matter what age. Working with college age students
         for this project was a new experience, but still had the same
         concept of teaching and helping students. I had to figure
         out the correct way to communicate with them and how to
         approach them. I learned a lot from the experience, mostly
         about myself and how capable I was to help others.

    The instructor, Jake, during our interview talked at length about the project,
highlighting how much he felt all participants benefited from their close collab-
oration. He said, "the key to all of this, in my mind, both for the tutors and me
the instructor, is flexibility and being open to different approaches and different
ways of structuring the class." He said that he thinks it is important not just to
find out how the instructor wants to realize participant roles, but to also consid-
er the peer tutors' desires. (He did express some relief, however, when he saw just
how active and involved, typically shy and quiet, Penny was during small-group
work, compared to her more ostensibly passive performances during whole-class
discussions.) On the benefits of having developmental students who themselves
had just taken the course as peer tutors he said: "It let students know that here
is someone who went through the same struggles as you went through and were
successful in their journey through the course." He went on to say that he felt
that course-based tutors do not even need to be A students to have a positive
effect. He feels there is some benefit in being able to say "Look these are real peo-
ple who worked real hard to work through the writing process to improve their
writing, and they are just here to help." Jake said that he also gained quite a bit
from this experience. He felt that the American Dream project, especially, made
him consider the possibilities for students designing their own group projects.

                                                                                                 115
Chapter Four

He felt that the creativity and care Kim and Penny demonstrated throughout
that project, in their negotiations of what pedagogically might work, "might
encourage me to be more creative. They [the tutors] have the benefit of tapping
into many different professors who are equally or more creative than I am, and I
have no problem stealing from them and learning from them."

    What I believe I saw emerge with Team Six was a heightened level of collab-
orative trust among the participants. This heightened level of trust enabled Kim
and Penny to take active interventions in all phases of the students' writing pro-
cesses--from invention, to revision, to delivery. In "A Non-Coda," Muriel Har-
ris revisits her 1992, "Collaboration Is Not Collaboration Is Not Collaboration,"
where she delineated the boundaries between one-to-one tutoring and peer re-
sponse. In her more recent essay, she argues that peer response groups could
be utilized for pre-writing activities like brainstorming how to approach the
assignment, trading ideas on how to incorporate readings, and initial thoughts
on topics and the narrowing of topics--if instructors are willing and able to
facilitate such activities. This is precisely the sort of generative pre-writing activ-
ities we saw facilitated with such aplomb by Kim and Penny in the "American
Dream" project. While the experienced tutors from the UW case studies were
worried about trying to make sure students were meeting the expectations of the
instructor's assignments, these "novice" tutors were creating their own assign-
ments and doing all they could to assist students in generative inquiry, and all
other phases, in order to succeed and learn something. In short, and even more
than Madeleine, these tutors were vividly enacting and modeling creative and
critical thought and action for the benefit of their peers/mentees--something all
teachers of writing hope and strive to do.

    My research over the years, including these portraits of CBT teachers, stu-
dents, and tutors in action, has persuaded me that the pros of encouraging tutors
to practice at the edge of their expertise, by-and-large, outweigh the cons. Case
studies like the kind presented here could help all stakeholders in peer-to-peer
teaching and learning consider strategies and rationales for what methods might
be characterized as directive or nondirective in various circumstances and how
to try to resist moving too far along the continuum in either direction, in a
variety of situations, in and out of the classroom. Perhaps with the knowledge
gained regarding directive and nondirective pedagogical strategies and methods,
CBT practitioners can continue encouraging colleagues (and their students and
tutors) in writing classrooms and in writing centers to make and map simi-
lar explorations--to take similar complimentary journeys--serving center and
classroom.

116
CHAPTER FIVE

CONCLUSION: TOWARD TEACHER/
STUDENT, CLASSROOM/CENTER
HYBRID CHOICES

Placing students and tutors at the center of classroom prac-
tice, on-location tutoring reforms classroom hierarchical
relations and institutional structures; it shows students (tutors
and the students with whom they work) that their work as
knowledge makers matters and that they have much to con-
tribute to one another, to faculty, and to the institution as a
whole.

                     - Laurie Grobman and Candace Spigelman

The line it is drawn
The curse it is cast
The slow one now
Will later be fast
As the present now
Will later be past
The order is
Rapidly fadin'
And the first one now
Will later be last
For the times they are a-changin'

                                   - Bob Dylan

    In the Introduction and Chapter One I discussed several variables that come
into play as a result of the melding of the various parent instructional genres that
inform the work of CBT. I explored the genealogy of CBT, theoretically locating
it within the context of the classroom/center collaborative debate. I moved on
to describe a taxonomy of the major parent genres that intermingle and hybrid-
ize in CBT--writing center tutoring, writing fellows programs, peer writing
groups, and supplemental instruction--to offer participants an array of instruc-
tional choices and considerations that can at times confuse or overwhelm, and

                                                                                                 117
Chapter Five

at other times liberate and substantially supplement classroom and one-to-one
teaching and tutoring. I then lingered in detail on the critical issues of authority,
role and trust negotiation via the directive/nondirective tutoring continuum,
placing special emphasis on reasons tutors may need to renegotiate the typical
hands-off, nondirective one-to-one philosophy when negotiating the "play of
differences" between one-to-one and one-to-more instructional situations.

    I'd like to begin my concluding thoughts by returning to two questions--
in relation to the directive/nondirective instructional continuum--I asked in
the Introduction: What are teachers, tutors, and student writers getting out of
these experiences, and what effects do these interactions have on participant
instructional choices and identity formations as teachers and learners? And how
soon should developing/developmental student writers, potential writing tutors,
and classroom instructors or teaching assistants get involved in the authorita-
tive, socially and personally complex acts of collaborative peer-to-peer teaching
and learning? I'll begin by framing my tentative answers to these questions in
terms of how the interrelated pedagogical concepts of authority/trust building
and directive/nondirective instructional negotiations played out in all teams. I'll
move on to offer some implications of the studies and stories presented in this
book for one-to-one and small-group tutorials, peer review and response, and
the various choices program leaders can consider in building, strengthening, or
experimenting with CBT.

DIRECTIVE/NONDIRECTIVE TUTORING: IMPLICATIONS
FOR TUTORING ONE-TO-ONE AND IN THE CLASSROOM

    The true value of CBT, and the lessons learned from experiments in pushing
the limits of pedagogical peer authority and expertise, lies in the choices it of-
fers teachers, tutors, student writers, and program leaders and the implications
these choices have on the places we work and the people we work with. When
participants were brought into the closer instructional orbits afforded by CBT,
the biggest adjustments they described as having to make involved negotiations
of instructional authority and roles, which also brought up the gravity of mutual
trust(worthiness). Megan, the tutor from Team Two, worried about being too
teacherly. She expressed relief when she and Laura agreed on less-authoritative
roles for her in the classroom. But, as the interview and questionnaire data illus-
trate, both Megan and the students ended up feeling that Megan did not meet
her full potential as an in-class tutor. Bruffee's double-bind we spoke of in the
Introduction was plainly elucidated in Megan's conflicted desire to be both a
peer--to appear just like one of the students and to be subsequently approach-
able--and to offer as much help and support to these students as possible. In a

118
                                                                                                   Conclusion

sense, the TA Laura trusted in Megan's abilities as an experienced writing center
tutor to be able to balance directive/nondirective and teacherly/studently roles
in the classroom; but Megan perhaps did not trust herself enough to lean a
little more toward an authoritative role in the classroom, even when offered and
encouraged to act-out this role by Laura. As the literature on CBT practice points
to repeatedly, tutors put in closer contact with the expectations of the writing
instructors with whom they are paired will have a difficult time negotiating their
tutoring approach--often times swinging too far toward the extreme ends of the
directive/nondirective instructional continuum. And as Laura described, even
though she and Megan did a lot of planning of the course together, students did
not seem to know that Megan was that involved with the design of the course.
Perhaps if she had embraced her role as a co-designer of the course a bit more
vocally, taken ownership of the course like the tutors from Team Six, students
would have viewed her as, in fact, much more integral to their learning for the
course.

    Yet, I must qualify these statements regarding Megan's engagement with in-
class activities, and the course as a whole, as she did take an active role in peer
review. One interesting consideration for future peer review facilitation efforts is
the idea of the "meta-tutor" (Decker). Recall Julian trying to live up to what he
felt was his role as "reserved advisor," a tutor who does not try to necessarily give
suggestions directly to student papers, but rather tries to provide suggestions to
students on how to tutor each other. This idea becomes problematic in light of
the directive/nondirective continuum. If tutors are trying to be good meta-tu-
tors, and, like Julian, speaking too much about revising in the abstract, then they
may only confuse students. I do not think there is anything wrong--indeed it
might be better in many cases--if the peer review facilitator is willing to play
a role closer to just another student reviewer. Then students in that particular
response group would gain the benefits of direct modeling of things to comment
on. Encouraging the use of a mix of direct suggestions along with the sorts of
open-ended questioning and prompting that lead other members of the response
group to contribute, might be a better way to think about preparing tutors for
peer response facilitation. By the second session I believe Megan had realized a
great mix--one that allowed for substantial conversational momentum between
students--encouraging students to rapidly and energetically uptake each other's
responses and suggestions.

    Madeleine from Team Three felt she was authoritative but not authoritari-
an--an important distinction--in the classroom. Madeleine referred to herself
as a "discussion participant" in the classroom. But she, the instructor Sydney,
and the students clearly intimated that Madeleine was really much more like a
discussion leader. Sydney described how her initial misgivings about Madeleine

                                                                                                 119
Chapter Five

began to transform as she came to realize that what she initially perceived as
Madeleine's weakness actually ended up being her strength--Madeleine's will-
ingness to act as a conversation leader, even antagonist, during class discussions.
Paulo Freire believed this was an important, and often overlooked, aspect of
teaching. In his last book Pedagogy of Freedom, Freire urged

         It is not only of interest to students but extremely important
         to students to perceive the differences that exist among teach-
         ers over the comprehension, interpretation, and appreciation,
         sometimes widely differing, of problems and questions that
         arise in the day-to-day learning situations of the classroom.
         (24)

    I linked Madeleine's instructional style to patterns of AAVE communication
in Chapter Three. It may have been a combination of Madeleine's more natural
AAVE communicative patterns, coupled with her passion for both the topic of
the course and her desire to help these students do well in the course, that all
contributed to her performances in the class. Mutual participant trust was a key
factor in this partnership. Madeleine's willingness to take an active co-teaching
role in the classroom added to the trust she earned from the students she inter-
acted with on a day-to-day basis, and to the eventual trust (albeit qualified) she
earned from Sydney. Yet, for all my conflicted feelings regarding Madeleine's
highly directive style--whether or not her directives were a "good" thing--I
cannot help but wish that she could have played a slightly less directive role
during her one-to-ones. Especially as evidenced in that long session with the
student who kept trying to voice her ideas and opinions, with all the attending
overlaps and even heightened emotion involved, I wish that Madeleine could
have balanced her passion for moving students toward more feasible interpre-
tations of the text with more traditionally nondirective approaches demanding
increased listening and open-ended questioning.

    Going back to Harris's four categories--exploratory talk, acquisition of stra-
tegic knowledge, negotiation of assignment prompts and teacher comments,
and affective concerns--we saw Sam helping students with aspects of all four.
Harris's categories are important and can be linked to--and offer pedagogical
answers to--other categorical conceptions of educational and professional learn-
ing and development. Chris Thaiss and Terry Zawacki, for example, posit that
undergraduate students' conceptions of academic writing involve a complicated
matrix of variables that include generalized standards of academic writing, disci-
plinary conventions, sub-disciplinary conventions, institutional and departmen-
tal cultures and policies, and personal goals and idiosyncratic likes and dislikes
(from both student writers and their instructors). In their four-year study of

120
                                                                                                   Conclusion

teachers and students engaged in writing across the disciplines at George Mason
University, the authors argue that as students move through their undergraduate
educations, negotiating these variables, they experience roughly three develop-
mental stages: in the first stage they use their limited academic experience to
construct a general view of academic writing as "what the teachers expect;" in
the second stage, after encountering a number of different teacher expectations,
students develop a sense of idiosyncrasy or "they all want different things;" and
in the third stage, which not all students reach, "a sense of coherence-within-di-
versity, understanding expectations as a rich mix of many ingredients" (139).

    Sam emerged as what I have come to believe as one of the most sophisticat-
ed and methodologically sound of any tutor I've witnessed during one-to-one
tutorials, moving students perhaps at least toward Thaiss and Zawacki's second
stage. But she may even be helping developmental students, well in advance
of disciplinary courses, toward awareness of the third stage. The authors claim
that the data from the instructors and students they studied point to the notion
that third-stage students experience a mix of personal goals with disciplinary
expectations. Of all the tutors, Sam encouraged the most exploratory talk with
students--students generally spoke much more and were much more invest-
ed in the one-to-one tutorials. As Megan finally realized in facilitating peer re-
sponse groups, Sam realized tremendous conversational momentum with stu-
dents. Sam helped nudge students toward acquisition of strategic knowledge
by focusing primarily on the big picture with each student's paper: she usually
spent much time talking--and getting students to talk about--their claim. She
spent considerable time talking (and listening) about structural issues like topic
sentences and how they should relate to the claim. Her ability not to get too
caught up with the assignment prompts or teacher comments actually seemed
to work in her favor; she appeared focused on the writing and the writer she
was working with rather than worry unnecessarily about the prompt. All of
these moves took into account both the students' purposes and Sam's knowledge
of academic discourse from the disciplines of Biology and English. And, more
implicitly I would argue, Sam tended to students' affective needs largely by just
listening carefully to their concerns, allowing plenty of time for them to think
through ideas. From my experience, she provides a fine model of the sorts of
moves all tutors and teachers can consider: careful note-taking; careful listening;
and a primary concern with HOCs, though with a concurrent sense of when to
pay attention to and when to defer LOCs. Whether tutoring in typical writing
center one-to-one settings, or tutoring in a writing fellows program, or even
facilitating peer response in the classroom, Sam's methods have much to offer.

    The uneasy relationship between all participants from Team One provides
complex, somewhat troubling, and yet equally important implications for this

                                                                                                 121
Chapter Five

study. Julian's sense of himself--even during his limited classroom presence
during peer reviews--as "reserved advisor" and the gross lack of communication
between he and Anne combined to co-construct this cautionary tale of CBT.
Julian did not attend class, or even stay in regular communication, enough to
know the nuances of Anne's expectations very well. Yet in all his interactions with
students, he still tried hard to stay within what he felt were her expectations (pri-
marily via assignment prompts and what students were telling him they thought
Anne wanted). Anne felt that the lack of communication was all her fault and
repeatedly during our interview expressed regret for not interacting more closely
with Julian. But she also intimated that she felt students and Julian did not get
to know each other well enough on an individual basis to enable Julian to move
past his nondirective approach toward a method that might take into account
the more individualistic needs of each student. Still, I find great value in this
cautionary tale, value that points to our growth and development as a (sub)field.
Like Lauren Fitzgerald and Melissa Ianetta, I "take it as a sign of writing center
studies' increasing sense of its own identity, as well as its increasing security as
a field of study, that we can admit such `failures' and then move on to create
productive, important knowledge from these events" (9). In their laudable work
on writing center assessment, Ellen Schendel and William Macauley agree "It is
necessary that we become able to accept mistakes and doubts for ourselves ..."
and add, "yet it is not sufficient. We have a responsibility to others, as well, espe-
cially those for whom we are connections to the field, representatives of how our
field works, leaders in our local centers, regional writing center communities,
and beyond" (173-74). Julian's experiences also have something to contribute
to discussions of writing teachers'/tutors' education and development. His in-
telligence coupled with his desire to help cannot be denied. But some of Julian's
personality traits may make him (and tutors with similar traits) more suitable as
an in-class tutor. (And I would say the same, to some degree, about Madeleine.)
Julian is expressive and loves to engage in stimulating conversation. It was appar-
ent in his one-to-one tutorials that if the students had been as verbose as he, than
the dynamics of the tutorials might have been very different. Especially with this
group of students, Julian might have served a better instructional niche if he had
been an in-class tutor. There his ability to talk with some fluency about the texts,
to offer his opinions and counter-opinions could have been put to better use.

    Taken, in sum, Teams Five and Six from Chapter Four--in stark contrast to
Team One--offer the true promise of CBT. The participants from Team Five
and Six represent what I would classify as organic, home-grown partnerships
that took full advantage of the teaching and learning situations they were en-
gaged in. As one of the leaders of the writing program at SCSU, I was put into
a position of authority and decision-making outside of the writing center. So

122
                                                                                                   Conclusion

instead of recruiting tutors from writing centers, as I did at the UW, I recruited
students directly from the same sort of developmental course they would subse-
quently tutor in. These tutors took the collaborative lessons they learned from
having recently taken the course themselves and paid them forward to fellow
students they mirrored the diversity of--allowing, importantly--for a closer
zone of proximal development and a more truly peer-to-peer learning ecology.
The participants in Team Five and Six illustrate what can occur when trust and
care are taken to the next level.

    Returning to those Framework habits of mind mentioned in the Introduc-
tion, the results from Team Six seem highly promising: Curiosity? Check. Open-
ness? Check. Engagement? Check. Creativity? Check. And so forth ... Two tu-
tors and an instructor who could care less about whether they were being (or
allowing others to be) too directive or nondirective, too controlling or intrusive
in their pedagogical interventions ended up realizing a fruitful balance. As with
Gina from Team Five and Madeleine from Team Three, their only real concern
seemed to be: what can I do to help these students grow and develop confidence
and perhaps some competence in their writing performances for that particular
course? In the process, we saw Team Six (and to some extent Teams Three and
Five) also approaching and pushing the boundaries of their expertise--pushing,
especially, the conceived notions of what their roles and authority can or should
be. We saw what can happen when young developing writers, thinkers and learn-
ers trust in their own authority and take some initiative. The "American Dream
Museum Exhibit" assignment vividly showcases the potential of tutors leading
the charge, blurring the lines between tutor, student, and teacher--pushing
conventional pedagogical boundaries. In collaboratively conceiving of and de-
signing the assignment, Kim and Penny thoughtfully and thought-provoking-
ly scaffolded interactive, problem-posing activities that challenged all students,
while at the same time providing ample instructional support--even when the
structurally-sanctioned authority of the course, Jake, was not physically present.

    In the spirit of "where are they now?" I'd like to briefly report on what I
know about the tutors. From the UW tutors, Sam applied and was accepted
into a Ph.D. program in English with a focus on Composition and Rhetoric at a
major, Midwest research university. For the SCSU tutors, as of April 2013, Gina
is a graduate student at the University of Connecticut School of Social Work,
working on her master's degree. When I asked her if she thought her experience
with CBT has had any lasting effects she wrote:

         Today I have a major role in establishing better policies
         and procedures for an organization that works with abused
         children. With the confidence I gained from course-based

                                                                                                 123
Chapter Five

         tutoring I have done extremely well at my internship. I have
         supervisors and program managers asking for my feedback
         and opinion in changing and establishing new policies.
         During course-based tutoring I gained a voice that I contin-
         ue to use today. I am currently at a point in my life where I
         would have never imagined myself being. I have always been a
         driven person but never a confident person until I participat-
         ed in course-based tutoring.

    Penny is finishing her Elementary Education requirements as a student
teacher. She felt that her experiences with course-based tutoring helped prepare
her for her recent successes and future goals: she was captain of the SCSU field
hockey team; she studied abroad in Brisbane, Australia, and traveled through
the country; and she hoped to return to SCSU in Fall 2013 to get her mas-
ter's and have her own classroom by Fall of 2014. Like Bradley Hughes, Paula
Gillespie, and Harvey Kail, in "What They Take with Them," I believe that
the lessons learned, lessons in responsible leadership and mentorship, clear
communication, and reflective practice will travel far beyond those courses,
for all participants.

CHOICE MATTERS: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CBT DE-
SIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

    This book's central research question asked: How can what we know about
peer tutoring one-to-one and in small groups--especially the implications of
directive and nondirective tutoring strategies and methods brought to light in
these case studies--inform our work with students in writing centers and other
tutoring programs, as well as in classrooms? In answer, this book explored a myr-
iad of ways that tutors in a variety of situations negotiated directive and nondi-
rective strategies while trying to build rapport and trust with fellow students and
instructors. In sum, and with the caveat that context might influence the fea-
sibility of any given choice, I offer the following suggestions involving some of
the strategic choices CBT practitioners have for successful practice with one-to-
one and small-group tutorials, as well other possible classroom activities. These
choices radiate from my suggestions for overall design and planning (Figure 5).
Some suggestions might also be applicable to other related pedagogical practic-
es, for example: teacher-student conferences, both one-to-one and small-group;
writing center tutoring, again both one-to-one and in small groups; or writing
classroom collaborative and group activities. (Note that some suggestions for
one-to-one tutoring also apply to small-group peer response and vice-versa.)

124
                                                                                                   Conclusion

Overall Design and Planning

      · Instructors and tutors should be made aware of different models of
         CBT, both more (tutors like Megan, Madeleine, Gina, Kim, and Pen-
         ny attending class every day) and less (tutors like Sam not attending
         class and/or not doing the readings) collaborative designs. Then they
         should be allowed to choose, as closely as possible, which model they
         feel might best work for them.

      · Have an early meeting between instructor and tutor (and coordinator
         perhaps) during which some tentative roles and expectations are laid
         out in advance. Be sure to let students know what these roles and
         expectations are as early as possible.

      · Participants should talk, plan, and reflect with each other on a regular
         basis, via email, phone, or face-to-face. Frequent meetings, or online
         chat forums (blackboard, Skype, or even Facebook, for example) could
         be used to help facilitate dialogue and communication.

      · Directors and coordinators should consider ongoing development and
         education just as important as initial orientations. Tutors could be
         asked to read current (as in the work of Thompson and colleagues)
         and/or foundational (like Harris's "Talking") articles in writing center
         and composition journals during any down time.

      · As with the Framework and accompanying WPA Outcomes State-
         ment, CBT practitioners, in relation to their respective programs,
         could develop learning outcomes or goals. I would suggest starting
         with Harris's four aspects for how tutors can assist writers, mentioned
         repeatedly throughout this book, that she gleaned from hundreds of
         student responses and years of ground-breaking research and prac-
         tice. These goals could incorporate the Framework habits of mind
         more generally, and other teaching/learning needs of tutors, tutees,
         and centers/institutions more specifically. Participant attitudes and
         other "incipient actions" (Burke Philosophy 1, 10-11, 168-9, 379-82;
         Grammar 235-47, 294; Rhetoric 50, 90-5) could thereby be coordi-
         nated with desired teaching and learning outcomes. These goals can
         then help guide tutor education courses, and continuing director/tutor
         development.

One-to-One Tutoring

      · Whether tutors attend class every day or sometimes or not at all--if
         tutors will be conducting one-to-one tutorials outside of class--have

                                                                                                 125
Chapter Five

         students sign up for one-to-ones early in the term so that students and
         tutor get to know each other as early as possible and so that dialogue
         about students and the curriculum can start ASAP.
      · Students can be offered shorter 25-minute, or longer 50-minute appoint-
         ments, or their choice of either given the situation.
      · Tutors should read a student writer's entire paper before making de-
         finitive comments. While reading (whether or not the tutor or tutee
         reads aloud), tutors can take detailed notes--a descriptive outline
         could be especially helpful--and ask students to either take notes
         as well or follow along and help construct notes with the tutor (and
         perhaps audio-record the session on their smartphone). We saw all
         of these moves showcased in detail by Sam during her tutorials in
         Chapter Three.
      · Tutors should be familiar with the intricacies of the directive/nondi-
         rective continuum in relation to one-to-one tutoring--and develop
         strategies for negotiating when to be more directive and when to be
         more facilitative.

Peer Response Facilitation

      · If tutors and students are unfamiliar with each other, tutors might
         allow for some light-hearted banter or casual conversation so par-
         ticipants might warm up to one another before getting to the task
         at hand as we saw happening especially with Teams Five and Six in
         Chapter Four.

      · Tutors should practice a mix of directive suggestions and modeling with
         nondirective open-ended questions and follow-up questions (as we vividly
         saw with Megan in Chapter Four) so that student writers receive the
         benefits of specific modeling and so they can also take ownership of
         their own and their peer group members' learning.

      · Tutors should allow for plenty of wait-time and pauses during peer re-
         sponse sessions, in order to allow enough time for students to process
         information and formulate a response (similar to how Sam allowed for
         during one-to-one tutorials).

      · Instructors can experiment with various elements of peer response
         including: having students balance between how much writing versus
         how much conversation they engage in, and how much and in what
         ways instructors and tutors intervene and interact with each group in
         and out of the classroom (see Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker; Corbett
         and LaFrance Student; Corbett "Great").

126
                                                                                                   Conclusion

Figure 5: CBT choices.
Other Classroom Activities

      · Tutors do not necessarily need to be in class on a day-to-day basis.
         What's more important is that when they are there, all participants
         have a role to play and everyone knows what they are.

      · Tutor personalities can be utilized on their own terms, but instructors
         can also foster interpersonal opportunities that might expand tu-
         tor approaches to interacting with fellow students. Shyer tutors (or
         students holding back, like Megan), for example, could be gently
         encouraged to speak up in class if they feel they have something im-
         portant to contribute. More talkative students (like Madeleine) could
         be nudged to balance their comments with questions and prompts
         that might encourage other students in class to participate or take
         intellectual risks.
                                                                                                 127
Chapter Five

      · Tutors can be encouraged to take some authority and ownership in the
         design and orchestration of the class: they can help design and lead the
         implementation of lesson plans and assignments as we saw with Team
         Six; and they can share their own writing and learning experiences,
         strategies and processes liberally with their peers as we saw especially
         with Teams Five and Six.

LOOKING BACK WHILE LOOKING FORWARD: DIVERSITY
AND CHOICE IN RECRUITMENT, RESEARCH QUESTIONS,
AND ASSESSMENT

    This study has also made me question how, where, and why we recruit peer
tutors. I believe--like Nelson--that we should seriously consider concerted ef-
forts toward recruiting for more diversity in centers and programs that have
been staffed predominantly by mainstream students. Though the data clearly
show that a white, mainstream tutor can identify and assist nonmainstream and
diverse students, as in the case of Megan and especially Sam and Penny, we
clearly saw the benefits of having a tutor like Madeleine, a tutor who did indeed
mirror the UW EOP students' diversity, or a tutor like Gina, who struggles with
an LD like the student Max, working closely with their peers. Students like
Madeleine, Gina, Kim, and Penny--students who themselves took the develop-
mental course, who learned lessons in how to navigate that course successfully--
offer an exceptionally promising model of mirroring peer diversity that takes
Vygotsky's ZPD closely to heart. The cover image of this book--the Roman god
Janus on a priceless coin--symbolizes the value of that promise. Double-faced
Janus, looking simultaneously forward and backward in time, was the god of
transitions, journeys, doors, gates, boundaries, endings, and beginnings. This
book has offered intimate gazes into the developmental transitions of students,
tutors, instructors, and researcher. Readers might look back on what this book
has to offer as they look forward in their programmatic and pedagogical decision
making: boundary-pushing between writing centers/peer tutoring programs and
classrooms, between directive/nondirective instruction, between what it means
to be a teacher/student. A student like Gina who works closely under an in-
structor like Mya with students/future tutors like Kim and Penny provides an
example of interpersonal continuity from course to course and student/tutor to
student/tutor. Further, this model can provide insights into how diverse students
transition from high school to college writing and learning environments, espe-
cially if we listen closely to their stories. Yet we might consider a more advanced
student like Sam as a diverse tutor herself due to the fact that she was a double
major. When Sam originally applied and interviewed to be a peer tutor for the

128
                                                                                                   Conclusion

English Department Writing Center, she was not hired by the director. Later,
while recruiting course-based tutors, I re-interviewed Sam. Despite feeling that
her personality was a bit too "low key," I brought her aboard anyway. Perhaps
her multifarious experiences in navigating writing course boundaries and in-
tersections between the humanities and natural sciences aided in her salutary
tutoring strategies (see Thaiss and Zawacki 106). Maybe her low-key demean-
or contributed to her commendable listening skills. If diverse students in their
many guises do not apply to be tutors, then we should search them out--ac-
tively recruiting for talent and cultural and academic diversity--for our diverse
writing programs, centers, and classrooms.

    Once we've recruited for as much diversity and talent as possible, we can then
make relevant choices on where and how to focus our research and assessment.
I have advocated for a multi-method approach whenever possible, one that, if
you will, methodologically mirrors the diversity of the participants involved in
CBT-inspired research and practices. I want to see some researchers continue
to focus on the sorts of pragmatic questions of tutoring style and method that
have generated RAD case-study research from Spigelman, Thompson and col-
leagues, White-Farnham, Dyehouse and Finer, me, and others. I also want us
to continue to build usable, authentic means of assessment that can help CBT
practitioners successfully close the assessment loop, uniting learning outcomes
with the habits of mind that undergird and can open the doors to successful,
satisfying teaching and writing performances (see Schendel and Macauley; John-
son). But I hope others will continue to stay open and curious when they begin
to hear boundary-pushing stories that warrant following up on. And when the
chance arises to do both, I want our field(s) to embrace the multi-perspectives
that multi-method research can deliver. By staying open, curious, and persistent
in our efforts toward more hybrid, multi-method research, we can provide for
more of the types of authentic assessment that can link creative processes and
performances, habits of mind, identity formations, and student, teacher, and
instructor success and satisfaction.

    We have choices in our quests for synergistic teaching, learning, and trust.
And we should welcome all colleagues, at all levels--slow and fast--ready and
willing to accompany us in our journeys.

                                                                                                 129
WORKS CITED

Anderson, Julie Aipperspach, and Susan Wolff Murphy. "Bringing the Writing
   Center into the Classroom: A Case Study of Writing Groups." Moss, High-
   berg, and Nicolas 47-62. Print.

Babcock, Rebecca Day, and Terese Thonus. Researching the Writing Center: To-
   wards an Evidence-Based Practice. New York: Peter Lang, 2012. Print.

Barber-Fendley, Kimber, and Chris Hamel. "A New Visibility: An Argument
   for Alternative Assistance Programs for Students with Learning Disabilities."
   College Composition and Communication 55.3 (2004): 504-35. Print.

Barnett, Robert W., and Jacob S. Blumner, eds. The Allyn and Bacon Guide to
   Writing Center Theory and Practice. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon,
   2001. Print.

Beaufort, Anne. College Writing and Beyond: A New Framework for University
   Writing Instruction. Logan, UT: Utah State UP, 2007. Print.

Bishop, Wendy. "Helping Peer Writing Groups Succeed." Teaching English in the
   Two-Year College 15 (1988): 120-25. Print.

Black, Laurel Johnson. Between Talk and Teaching: Reconsidering the Writing
   Conference. Logan: Utah State UP, 1998. Print.

Blum-Kulka, Shoshana. "Discourse Pragmatics." Discourse as Social Interaction.
   Ed. Teun A. Van Dijk. London: Sage, 1997. 38-63. Print.

Boquet, Elizabeth H. "Intellectual Tug-of-War: Snapshots of Life in the Center."
   Stories from the Center: Connecting Narrative and Theory in the Writing Center.
   Ed. Briggs Lynne Craigue, and Meg Woolbright. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 2000.
   17-30. Print.

---. Noise from the Writing Center. Logan: Utah State UP, 2002. Print.
Boquet, Elizabeth H. and Neal Lerner. "Reconsiderations: After `The Idea of a

   Writing Center.'" College English 71.2 (Nov. 2008): 170-89. Print.
Brooke, Robert, Ruth Mirtz, and Rick Evans. Small Groups in Writing Work-

   shops: Invitations to a Writer's Life. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1994. Print.
Brooks, Jeff. "Minimalist Tutoring: Making the Students Do All the Work." The

   Writing Lab Newsletter 15.6 (1991): 1-4. Print.
Bruffee, Kenneth A. Collaborative Learning: Higher Education, Interdependence,

   and the Authority of Knowledge. 2nd ed. Baltimore: The John Hopkins UP,
   1999. Print.
---. A Short Course in Writing: Composition, Collaborative Learning, and Con-
   structive Reading 4th ed. New York: Pearson, 2007. Print.
Bruland, Holly Huff. "`Accomplishing Intellectual Work': An Investigation of
Works Cited

   the Re-Locations Enacted through On-Location Tutoring." Praxis: A Writing
   Center Journal 4.2 (Spring 2007). Web. 1 Jan. 2015.
Buranen, Lise, and Alice M. Roy, eds. Perspectives on Plagiarism and Intellectual
   Property in a Postmodern World. SUNY UP, 1999. Print.
Burke, Kenneth. A Grammar of Motives. New York: Prentice Hall, 1945. Print.
---. The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in Symbolic Action. Berkeley: U of
   California P, 1973 (Orig. pub. 1941). Print.
---. A Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley: U of California P, 1969 (Orig. pub. 1950).
   Print.
Cairns, Rhoda, and Paul V. Anderson. "The Protean Shape of the Writing As-
   sociate's Role: An Empirical Study and Conceptual Model." Across the Disci-
   plines 5 (March 29, 2008). Web. 1 Jan. 2015.
Carillo, Ellen "Teaching Academic Integrity and Critical Thinking through Col-
   laboration." Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker 65-76. Print.
Carino, Peter. "Power and Authority in Peer Tutoring." The Center Will Hold:
   Critical Perspectives on Writing Center Scholarship. Ed. Michael A. Pemberton,
   and Joyce Kinkead. Logan: Utah State UP, 2003. 96-116. Print.
Carroll, Lee Ann. Rehearsing New Roles: How College Students Develop as Writers.
   Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2002. Print.
Cazden, Courtney B. Classroom Discourse: The Language of Teaching and Learn-
   ing 2nd ed. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2001. Print.
Chig, Cory Lawson. "The Instructor-Led Peer Conference: Teachers as Partici-
   pants in Peer Response." Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker 15-28. Print.
Clark, Irene Lurkis. "Collaboration and Ethics in Writing Center Pedagogy." The
   Writing Center Journal 9.1 (1988): 3-12. Print.
---. "Perspectives on the Directive/Non-Directive Continuum in the Writing
   Center." The Writing Center Journal 22.1 (2001): 33-58. Print.
---. "Writing Centers and Plagiarism." Buranen and Roy 155-167. Print.
Clark, Irene Lurkis, and Dave Healy. "Are Writing Centers Ethical?" Barnett and
   Blumner 242-59. Orig. published in WPA: Writing Program Administration
   20 (1996): 32-38. Print.
Cogie, Jane, Dawn Janke, Teresa Joy Kramer, and Chad Simpson. "Risks in Col-
   laboration: Accountability as We Move beyond the Center's Walls." Marginal
   Words, Marginal Work? Tutoring the Academy in the Work of Writing Centers.
   Ed. William J Macauley Jr., and Nicholas Mauriello. Cresskill, NJ: Hamp-
   ton, 2007. 105-34. Print.
Cooper, Marilyn M. "Really Useful Knowledge: A Cultural Studies Agenda for
   Writing Centers." The Writing Center Journal 14.2 (1994): 97-111. Print.
Corbett, Steven J. "Bringing the Noise: Peer Power and Authority, On Loca-
   tion." Spigelman and Grobman 101-111. Print.

132
                                                                                                  Works Cited

---. "Great Debating: Combining Ancient and Contemporary Methods of Peer
   Critique." PraxisWiki. Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy
   (October 8, 2014). Web. 1 Jan. 2015.

---. "Learning Disability and Response-Ability: Reciprocal Caring in Devel-
   opmental Peer Response Writing Groups and Beyond." Pedagogy: Critical
   Approaches to Teaching Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture. 15.3
   (Spring 2015): 61-85.

---."Negotiating Pedagogical Authority: The Rhetoric of Writing Center Tutor-
   ing Styles and Methods." Rhetoric Review 32.1 (2013): 81-98. Print.

---. "The Role of the Emissary: Helping to Bridge the Communication Canyon
   between Instructors and Students." The Writing Lab Newsletter 27.2 (Oct.
   2002): 10-11. Print.

---."Tutoring Style, Tutoring Ethics: The Continuing Relevance of the Direc-
   tive/Nondirective Instructional Debate." Praxis: A Writing Center Journal 5.2
   (Spring 2008)Web. 1 Jan. 2015. Rpt. in the St. Martin's Sourcebook for Writ-
   ing Tutors 4th ed. Ed. Christina Murphy, and Steve Sherwood. Boston: Bed-
   ford/St Martin's, 2011. 148-155. Print.

---."Using Case Study Multi-Methods to Investigate Close(r) Collaboration:
   Course-Based Tutoring and the Directive/Nondirective Instructional Con-
   tinuum." The Writing Center Journal 31.1 (2011): 55-81. Print.

---. "Writing Center Research in the Making: Questioning Hierarchies of Au-
   thority across the Curriculum." Paper Presented at the 2nd International Con-
   ference on Writing Research. Santa Barbara, CA. February, 2005.

Corbett, Steven J., and Juan C. Guerra. "Collaboration and Play in the Writing
   Classroom." Academic Exchange Quarterly 9.4 (Winter 2005): 106-11. Print.

Corbett, Steven J., and Michelle LaFrance. "From Grammatical to Global: The
   WAC/Writing Center Connection." Praxis: A Writing Center Journal 6.2
   (Spring 2009). Web. 1 Jan. 2015.

 ---, eds. Student Peer Review and Response: A Critical Sourcebook. New York/
   Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, Forthcoming.

Corbett, Steven J., Michelle LaFrance, and Teagan Decker, eds. Peer Pressure,
   Peer Power: Theory and Practice in Peer Review and Response for the Writing
   Classroom. Southlake, TX: Fountainhead Press, 2014. Print.

Corbett, Steven J., Sydney F. Lewis, and Madeleine M. Clifford. "Diversity
   Matters in Individualized Instruction: The Pros and Cons of Team Teaching
   and Talkin' that Talk." Diversity in the Composition Classroom. Ed. Gwendo-
   lyn Hale, Mike Mutschelknaus, and Thomas Alan Holmes. Southlake, TX:
   Fountainhead Press, 2010. 85-96. Print.

Corroy, Jennifer. "Institutional Change and the University of Wisconsin--Mad-
   ison Writing Fellows Program." Spigelman and Grobman 205-18. Print.

                                                                                                 133
Works Cited

Daiker, Donald A. "Learning to Praise." Writing and Response: Theory, Practice,
   and Research. Ed. Chris M. Anson. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1989. 103-13. Print.

Decker, Teagan. "Academic (Un)Seriousness: How Tutor Talk Plays with Aca-
   demic Discourse" The Writing Lab Newsletter 30.4 (Dec. 2005): 11-13. Print.

---."Diplomatic Relations: Peer Tutors in the Writing Classroom." Spigelman
   and Grobman 17-30. Print.

Delpit, Lisa. Other People's Children: Cultural Conflict in the Classroom 2nd ed.
   New York: The New Press, 2006. Print.

---."The Silenced Dialogue: Power and Pedagogy in Educating Other People's
   Children." Harvard Educational Review 58.3 (Aug. 1988): 280-97. Print.

Denny, Harry C. Facing the Center: Toward an Identity Politics of One-to-One
   Mentoring. Logan: Utah State UP, 2010. Print.

DiPardo, Anne. "`Whispers of Coming and Going': Lessons from Fannie." The
   Writing Center Journal 12.2 (1992): 125-44. Print.

Driscoll, Dana, and Sherry Wynn Perdue. "Theory, Lore, and More: An Analysis
   of RAD Research in The Writing Center Journal, 1980-2009." The Writing
   Center Journal 32.1 (2012): 11-39.

Dylan, Bob. "The Times They Are A-Changin.'" The Times They Are A-Changin.'
   Columbia, 1964. CD.

Ender, Steven C., and Fred B. Newton. Students Helping Students: A Guide for
   Peer Educators on College Campuses. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2000.
   Print.

Fitzgerald, Lauren. "Writing Center Scholarship: A `Big Cross-Disciplinary
   Tent.'" Exploring Composition Studies: Sites, Issues, and Perspectives. Ed. Kelly
   Ritter, and Paul Kei Matsuda. Logan, UT: Utah State UP, 2012. 73-88. Print.

Fitzgerald, Lauren, and Melissa Ianetta. "From the Editors." The Writing Center
   Journal 32.2 (2012): 9-10. Print.

Framework for Success in Postsecondary Writing. Developed jointly by the Council
   of Writing Program Administrators, the National Council of Teachers of En-
   glish, and the National Writing Project, 2011. Web. 1 Jan. 2015.

Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of Freedom: Ethics, Democracy, and Civic Courage. Ox-
   ford: Rowman and Littlefield, 1998. Print.

Geller, Anne Ellen, Michele Eodice, Frankie Condon, Meg Carroll, and Eliza-
   beth H. Boquet. The Everyday Writing Center: A Community of Practice. Lo-
   gan: Utah State UP, 2007. Print.

Gerben, Chris. "Make it Work: Project Runway as Model and Metaphor of Au-
   thority and Expertise." Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker 29-42. Print.

Gere, Anne Ruggles, and Ralph Stevens. "The Language of Writing Groups:
   How Oral Response Shapes Revision." The Acquisition of Written Language:
   Response and Revision. Ed. Sarah Warshauer Freedman. Norwood, NJ: Ablex,

134
                                                                                                  Works Cited

   1985. 85-105.
Gilewicz, Magdalena. "Sponsoring Student Response in Writing Center Group

   Tutorials." Moss, Highberg, and Nicolas 63-78. Print.
Gilewicz, Magdalena, and Terese Thonus. "Close Vertical Transcription in Writ-

   ing Center Training and Research." The Writing Center Journal 24.1 (2003):
   25-49. Print.
Gillespie, Paula, and Neal Lerner. The Allyn and Bacon Guide to Peer Tutoring 2nd
   ed. New York: Pearson, 2004. Print.
Goffman, Erving. Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 1981. Print.
Greenfield, Laura and Karen Rowan, eds. Writing Centers and the New Racism: A
   Call for Sustainable Dialogue and Change. Logan: Utah State UP, 2011. Print.
Grimm, Nancy Maloney. Good Intentions: Writing Center Work for Postmodern
   Times. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 1999. Print.
Grutsch McKinney, Jackie. Peripheral Visions for Writing Centers. Logan: Utah
   State UP, 2013. Print.
Hafer, Gary R. "Ideas in Practice: Supplemental Instruction in Freshman Com-
   position." The Journal of Developmental Education 24 (2001): 30-37. Print.
Hall, Emily, and Bradley Hughes. "Preparing Faculty, Professionalizing Fellows:
   Keys to Success with Undergraduate Writing Fellows in WAC." The WAC
   Journal 22 (2011): 21-40. Print.
Haring-Smith, Tori. "Changing Students' Attitudes: Writing Fellows Programs."
   Writing Across the Curriculum: A Guide to Developing Programs. Ed. Susan
   McLeod, and Margot Soven. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1992. 175-88. Print.
Harris, Muriel. "Centering in on Professional Choices." College Composition and
   Communication 52.3 (Feb. 2001): 429-40. Print.
---. "Collaboration Is Not Collaboration Is Not Collaboration: Writing Cen-
   ter vs. Peer-Response Groups." College Composition and Communication 43
   (1992): 369-83. Print.
---. "A Non-Coda: Including Writing Centered Student Perspectives for Peer
   Review." Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker 277-88. Print.
---. "Talking in the Middle: Why Writers Need Writing Tutors." College English
   57.1 (Jan. 1995): 27-42. Print.
---. Teaching One-to-One: The Writing Conference. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1986.
   Print.
Haswell, Richard H. "NCTE/CCCC's Recent War of Scholarship." Written
   Communication 22.2 (2005): 198-223. Print.
Healy, Dave. "A Defense of Dualism: The Writing Center and the Classroom."
   The Writing Center Journal 14.1 (1993): 16-29. Print.
Hemmeter, Thomas. "The `Smack of Difference': The Language of Writing Cen-
   ter Discourse." The Writing Center Journal 11.1 (1990): 35-48. Print.

                                                                                                 135
Works Cited

Hughes, Bradley, Paula Gillespie, and Harvey Kail. "What They Take with
   Them: Findings from the Peer Tutor Alumni Research Project." The Writing
   Center Journal 30.2 (2010): 12-46. Print.

Hurley, Maureen, Glen Jacobs, and Melinda Gilbert. "The Basic SI Model."
   Supplemental Instruction: New Visions for Empowering Student Learning. Ed.
   Marion E. Stone and Glen Jacobs. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2006. 11-
   22. Print.

Johnson, Kristine. "Beyond Standards: Disciplinary and National Perspectives
   on Habits of Mind." College Composition and Communication 64.3 (Feb.
   2013): 517-41. Print.

Kail, Harvey, and John Trimbur. "The Politics of Peer Tutoring." The Writing
   Center Journal 11.1-2 (1987): 5-12. Print.

Kilborn, Judith. "Cultural Diversity in the Writing Center: Defining Ourselves
   and Our Challenges." Barnett and Blumner 391-400. Orig. published in The
   Writing Lab Newsletter 19.1 (1994): 7-10. Print.

Launspach, Sonja. "The Role of Talk in Small Writing Groups: Building Declar-
   ative and Procedural Knowledge for Basic Writers." Journal of Basic Writing
   27.2 (2008): 56-78. Print.

Lawfer, Laura. "Writing Fellows: An Innovative Approach to Tutoring." The
   Writing Lab Newsletter 29.9 (2005): 12-13, 10. Print.

Lee, Carol D. "Double Voiced Discourse: African American Vernacular English
   as Resource in Cultural Modeling Classrooms." Bakhtinian Perspectives on
   Language, Literacy, and Learning. Ed. Arentha F. Ball, and Sarah Warshauer
   Freedman. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 129-47. Print.

Lerner, Neal. The Idea of a Writing Laboratory. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP,
   2009. Print.

---. "The Teacher-Student Writing Conference and the Desire for Intimacy."
   College English 68.2 (Nov. 2005): 186-208. Print.

Liggett, Sarah, Kerri Jordan, and Steve Price. "Mapping Knowledge-Making in
   Writing Center Research: A Taxonomy of Methodologies." The Writing Cen-
   ter Journal 31.2 (2011): 50-88. Print.

Liu, Barbara Little, and Holly Mandes. "The Idea of a Writing Center Meets
   the Reality of Classroom-Based Tutoring." Spigelman and Grobman 87-100.
   Print.

Lutes, Jean Marie. "Why Feminists Make Better Tutors: Gender and Disci-
   plinary Expertise in a Curriculum-Based Tutoring Program." Writing Center
   Research: Extending the Conversation. Ed. Paula Gillespie, Alice Gillam, Lady
   Falls Brown, and Byron Stay. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
   2002. 235-57. Print.

Mackiewicz, Jo, and Isabelle Kramer Thompson. Talk about Writing: The Tu-

136
                                                                                                  Works Cited

   toring Strategies of Experienced Writing Center Tutors. New York: Routledge,
   2015. Print.
Mann, April. "Structure and Accommodation: Autism and the Writing Cen-
   ter." Autism Spectrum Disorders in the College Composition Classroom: Making
   Writing Instruction More Accessible for All Students. Ed. Val Gerstle, and Lynda
   Walsh. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette UP, 2011. 43-74. Print.
Miller, Judith E., James E. Groccia, and Marilyn S. Miller, eds. Student-Assisted
   Teaching: A Guide to Faculty-Student Teamwork. Bolton, MA: Anker, 2001.
   Print.
Moss, Beverly J., Nels P. Highberg, and Melissa Nicolas, eds. Writing Groups In-
   side and Outside the Classroom. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
   2004. Print.
Murphy, Susan Wolff. "`Just Check It: I Mean, Don't Get Fixed on It': Self
   Presentation in Writing Center Discourse." The Writing Center Journal 26.1
   (2006): 62-82. Print.
Neff, Julie. "Learning Disabilities and the Writing Center." Intersections: Theo-
   ry-Practice in the Writing Center. Ed. Joan A. Mullin and Ray Wallace. Urba-
   na, IL: NCTE, 1994. 81-95. Print.
Nelson, Marie Wilson. At the Point of Need: Teaching Basic and ESL Writers.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 1991. Print.
Nelson, Jane, and Margaret Garner. "Horizontal Structures for Learning." Be-
   fore and After the Tutorial: Writing Centers and Institutional Relationships. Ed.
   Nicholas Mauriello, William J. Macauley, Jr., and Robert T. Koch, Jr. New
   York: Hampton, 2011. 7-27. Print.
Nicolas, Melissa. "A Cautionary Tale about `Tutoring' Peer Response Groups."
   Spigelman and Grobman 112-25. Print.
North, Stephen M. "The Idea of a Writing Center." College English 46.5 (1984):
   433-46. Print.
---. "Revisiting `The Idea of a Writing Center.'" Writing Center Journal 15.1
   (1994): 7-19. Print.
Paulson, Eric J., Jonathan Alexander, and Sonya Armstrong. "Peer Review
   Re-Reviewed: Investigating the Juxtaposition of Composition Students' Eye
   Movements and Peer-Review Processes." Research in the Teaching of English
   41.3 (Feb. 2007): 304-35. Print.
Pemberton, Michael A. "Introduction to `The Function of Talk in the Writing
   Conference: A Study of Tutorial Conversation.'" The Writing Center Journal
   30.1 (2010): 23-26. Print.
Raines, Helon Howell. "Tutoring and Teaching: Continuum, Dichotomy, or
   Dialectic?" The Writing Center Journal 14.2 (1994): 150-62. Print.
Reid, E. Shelley. "Peer Review for Peer Review's Sake: Resituating Peer Review

                                                                                                 137
Works Cited

   Pedagogy." Corbett, LaFrance, and Decker 217-31. Print.
Robinson, Heather M., and Jonathan Hall. "Connecting WID and the Writing

   Center: Tools for Collaboration." The WAC Journal 24 (2013): 29-47.
Schendel, Ellen, and William J. Macauley, Jr. Building Writing Center Assessments

   that Matter. Logan: Utah State UP, 2012. Print.
Schunk, Dale H. Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective 4th ed. Columbus,

   OH: Pearson/Merrill Prentice Hall, 2004. Print.
Severino, Carol. "Rhetorically Analyzing Collaborations." The Writing Center

   Journal 13 (1992): 53-64. Print.
Severino, Carol, and Mary Trachsel. "Theories of Specialized Discourses and

   Writing Fellows Programs." Across the Disciplines 5 (March 29, 2008).Web.
   1 Jan. 2015.
Shamoon, Linda K., and Deborah H. Burns. "A Critique of Pure Tutoring." The
   Writing Center Journal 15.2 (1995): 134-52. Print.
Shaparenko, Bithyah. "Focus on Focus: How to Facilitate Discussion in a Peer
   Group." The Writing Lab Newsletter 29.8 (2005): 11-12. Print.
Smith, Louise Z. "Independence and Collaboration: Why We Should Decen-
   tralize Writing Centers." The Writing Center Journal 23.2 (2003): 15-23.
   Orig. pub. in 7.1 (1986): 3-10. Print.
Smitherman, Geneva. Talkin and Testifyin: The Language of Black America. De-
   troit, MI: Wayne State UP, 1977. Print.
Smulyan, Lisa, and Kristen Bolton. "Classroom and Writing Center Collabo-
   rations: Peers as Authorities." The Writing Center Journal 9.2 (1989): 43-49.
   Print.
Soliday, Mary. Everyday Genres: Writing Assignments across the Disciplines. Car-
   bondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois UP, 2011. Print.
---. "Shifting Roles in Classroom Tutoring: Cultivating the Art of Boundary
   Crossing." The Writing Center Journal 16.1 (1995): 59-73. Print.
Soven, Margot Iris. "Curriculum-Based Peer Tutoring Programs: A Survey."
   Writing Program Administration 17.1-2 (1993): 58-74. Print.
Spigelman, Candace. "Reconstructing Authority: Negotiating Power in Demo-
   cratic Learning Sites." Spigelman and Grobman 185-204. Print.
---. "`Species' of Rhetoric: Deliberative and Epideictic Models in Writing Center
   Settings." Moss, Highberg, and Nicolas 133-50. Print.
---. "The Ethics of Appropriation in Peer Writing Groups." Buranen and Roy
   231-40. Print.
Spigelman, Candace and Laurie Grobman, eds. On Location: Theory and Practice
   in Classroom-Based Writing Tutoring. Logan: Utah State UP, 2005. Print.
Spigelman, Candace, and Laurie Grobman. "Introduction: On Location in
   Classroom-Based Writing Tutoring." Spigelman and Grobman 1-13. Print.

138
                                                                                                  Works Cited

Spilman, Isabel B. "Tutoring Five on Five." The Writing Lab Newsletter 13.10
   (1989): 9-10. Print.

Stewart, Donald C. "Collaborative Learning: Boon or Bane? Rhetoric Review 7
   (1988): 58-83. Print.

Thaiss, Chris, and Terry Myers Zawacki. Engaged Writers and Dynamic Disci-
   plines: Research on the Academic Writing Life. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
   Cook, 2006. Print.

Thompson, Isabelle. "Scaffolding in the Writing Center: A Microanalysis of an
   Experienced Tutor's Verbal and Nonverbal Tutoring Strategies." Written Com-
   munication 26 (2009): 417-53. Print.

Thompson, Isabelle, Alyson Whyte, David Shannon, Amanda Muse, Kristen
   Miller, MillaChappell, and Abby Whigham. "Examining Our Lore: A Survey
   of Students' and Tutors' Satisfaction with Writing Center Conferences." The
   Writing Center Journal 29.1 (2009): 78-105. Print.

Thompson, Isabelle, and Jo Mackiewicz. "Questioning in Writing Center Con-
   ferences." The Writing Center Journal 33.2 (2014): 37-70. Print.

Trimbur, John. "Peer Tutoring: A Contradiction in Terms?" The Writing Center
   Journal 7.2 (1987): 21-28. Print.

Trimbur, John, and Harvey Kail. "Foreword." Bruffee, A Short Course xix-xxix.
   Print.

Vidali, Amy. "Discourses of Disability and Basic Writing." Disability and the
   Teaching of Writing: A Critical Sourcebook. Ed. Cynthia Lewiecki-Wilson, and
   Brenda Jo Brueggemann. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2008. 40-55. Print.

Walker, Carolyn, and David Elias. "Writing Conference Talk: Factors Associated
   with High- and Low-Rated Writing Conferences." Research in the Teaching of
   English 21.3 (1987): 226-85. Print.

White-Farnham, Jamie, Jeremiah Dyehouse, and Bryna Siegel Finer. "Mapping
   Tutorial Interactions: A Report on Results and Implications." Praxis: A Writ-
   ing Center Journal 9.2 (2012). Web. 1 Jan. 2015.

Zawacki, Terry Myers. "Writing Fellows as WAC Change Agents: Changing
   What? Changing Whom? Changing How?" Across the Disciplines 5 (March
   29, 2008).Web. 1 Jan. 2015.

                                                                                                 139
APPENDIX

APPENDIX A: INTERVIEW QUESTIONS FOR INSTRUCTORS
AND TUTORS

Instructors

   1. Could you tell me just a little about yourself: where you're at in the pro-
       gram, what your area of focus is, how long you've been teaching?

   2. So how did it go? What are your overall impressions of your experience
       with course-based tutoring?

   3. What worked well?
   4. What were the students' impressions? The tutors?
   5. What roles(s) did the course-based tutor play: e.g., instruction partner,

       conversation participant, discussion leader?
   6. Did you require visits to the tutor?
   7. How did it compare/contrast to not having a tutor directly attached to

       the EOP classroom?
   8. What might have worked better? What suggestions might you offer other

       tutors or TAs interested in participating in this project?
   9. How did this experience affect your relationship to the Instructional Cen-

       ter or other writing centers?
   10.Would you collaborate with a course-based tutor again? Would you make

       any changes in the way you employed the tutor, to your syllabus or as-
       signments, or in any other way?
   11.Did this experience change or add to your overall view of what it means
       to tutor, teach, or learn writing?

Tutors

   1. Could you tell me just a little about yourself: where you're at in your
       studies, grade level; what your major is; how long you've been tutoring?

   2. How did it go? What are your overall impressions of your experience with
       course-based tutoring?

   3. What worked well?
   4. What were the students' impressions of your involvement with the class?

       The TAs?

                                                                                                 141
Appendix

   5. What role(s) did you play: e.g., instruction partner, conversation partici-
       pant, discussion leader?

   6. How did your in-class experience compare/contrast to your experiences
       as a tutor one-to-one in the Center?

   7. What might have worked better? What suggestions might you offer other
       tutors or TAs interested in participating in this project?

   8. Did your tutor training and experience as a one-to-one tutor prepare you
       for this role?

   9. Would you be willing to be a course-based tutor again? What changes, if
       any would you make, or want to see made?

142
                                                                                                     Appendix

APPENDIX B: STUDENT QUESTIONNAIRES

    This questionnaire asks general questions about your perspectives on interacting
with an in-class tutor for this course. Participation is voluntary. You may skip any ques-
tions that you do not wish to answer. Your responses will be used to better understand
the effects and potential value added by having an in-class tutor. The information you
provide here is confidential. Based on your responses, we may contact you in the future
to ask if you'd like to participate in a follow-up interview.

   1. Before this class, how often would you say you've used peer writing tutors
       in the past? (check one):
               Often______ Occasionally_____ Rarely______ Never_____
        Comment:

   2. What are your overall impressions of having a course-based tutor?
   3. What did you like best about having a course-based tutor?
   4. Were there any problems with having a course-based tutor?
   5. How did this compare to not having a course-based tutor in English 104?

       [Only for UW case studies]
   6. Do you feel that you saw or visited a tutor more or less often than in

       English 104? [Only for UW case studies]
   7. Did you visit your tutor for a one-to-one tutorial? How did this compare

       to your in-class interactions?
   8. Do you think that you will continue to talk to writing tutors in the fu-

       ture?

                                                                                                 143
Appendix

APPENDIX C: LINGUISTIC FEATURES AND CUES OF ONE-
TO-ONE TUTORIALS FOR TEAMS ONE-FOUR

Ling. Feat. and Cues                  Julian         Students    Megan        Students
                                      Team One                   Team Two
# of Sessions                                            5,835                    2,150
Average Length (minutes)                          6          27          8/7      2,444
Total Words Spoken                              36                    11/18       24/19
                                           15,049            13       8,986
Average # of Words Spoken per Minute                          1     11,675           2/6
Content-clarifying Questions                    70                  102/93           0/0
Open-ended Questions                            20                    15/18
Directive Questions                             93                     12/8
References to TA                                  8                    5/12
References to Assignment Prompt                 14                     7/17
                                                12
                                                                         1/1

Interruptions                         28             13          8/17 26/20
Main Channel Overlaps
Joint Productions                     1              4           1/8          5/22

Ling. Feat. and Cues                  4              9           3/8 17/23

# of Sessions                         Madeleine      Students    Sam          Students
Average Length (minutes)              Team Three                 Team Four      11,292
Total Words Spoken                                       1,919                       41
                                                3/1      2,997            11
Average # of Words Spoken per Minute         50/59      13/51             25           3
Content-clarifying Questions               12,115                   18,181
Open-ended Questions                         7,614          0/2
Directive Questions                        81/129                         66
References to TA                                                          20
                                                5/4                     137
References to Assignment Prompt               23/2                        21
Interruptions                                 23/5                         1
Main Channel Overlaps                           7/4
Joint Productions
                                         1/0            0/1      1            0
                                      21/44          10/50
                                                      7/25       12           37
                                         3/6          24/6
                                         3/5                     7            12

                                                                 9            49

144
                                                                                                     Appendix

APPENDIX D: AMERICAN DREAM MUSEUM EXHIBIT AS-
SIGNMENT

The American Dream Museum Exhibit

    Your team has been asked to create an exhibition that communicates the essence of
the American Dream.

    Your job is to collect artifacts--images, music, literature, poems, or other items that
represent or symbolize the idea behind the American Dream. Use your imagination and
have fun!

    Each team member must collect ten items and bring them in for discussion with the
other team members. You should be able to make an argument about why you believe
each artifact should be in the exhibition. Then, the team should choose five objects
from each person's collection. Take notes about why those items were selected as
representatives of the American Dream.

    The format of your exhibit is limitless--your team (if everyone can agree) can have
an overarching theme such as "Unrealistic Expectations? Women and the American
Dream" or "His Way and the American Way: Music and Images of Frank Sinatra" or
you can have a hodge-podge collection of items. The important thing to remember is
that you must be able to make the argument that your exhibition says something about
some aspect of the American Dream.

   1. At some point before the exhibit, decide on a title of your exhibition--be
       creative!

   2. Each individual team member will write a one to two page argument
       about each of their (5) artifacts and why they are important represen-
       tations of the American Dream. For example, if you are writing about
       an image, you might do a textual analysis of the image--the subject,
       composition of the elements, colors, etc. If you selected a song or other
       music, you might show how the music or lyrics represent the American
       Dream. Try to make connections and/or cite some of the material we've
       covered in class.

   3. Each team member will also write a one or two page introduction to the
       exhibit. Be sure to define the "American Dream." (We created a defini-
       tion in class and our reading materials also defined it.) This introduction
       should provide an overview of the exhibit and why the audience should
       be interested in it. Look over all our material from this semester--the
       founding documents, speeches, and essays. Again, try to connect and/or
       cite some of the material we've covered in class.

                                                                                                 145
Appendix

   4. Finally, each team will give a tour of their exhibit and provide informa-
       tion about their artifacts.

    Due Dates:
    Thurs--04/15 Each person brings in ten artifacts--Teams discuss and narrow down
each person to 5
    Thurs--04/22 Each team member brings in and reads their arguments about each of
their artifacts
    Thurs--04/29 Teams work on the design and order of their artifacts and presentation
    Tues--05/04 Group Project Presentations
    Thur--05/06 Group Project Presentations

146
INDEX

A                                             E

AAVE 83, 122                                  ESL 50, 51, 139
African American Vernacular English
                                              F
        138
Assignments 6, 140                            Framework for Success in Postsecond-
Authority 5, 27, 133, 134, 135, 136, 140              ary Writing 10, 136
Autism 8, 130, 139
                                              G
B
                                              Gilewicz 37, 52, 54, 55, 137
Babcock 5, 16, 72, 87, 133                    Gillespie 5, 27, 29, 52, 54, 57, 84, 126,
Bawarshi 12
Black 30, 31, 39, 52, 54, 55, 57, 83, 108,            137, 138
                                              Goffman 33, 55, 83, 137
        133, 140                              Grimm 19, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 35, 38, 137
Boquet 5, 6, 11, 25, 26, 27, 36, 133, 136     Grobman 7, 9, 12, 13, 21, 119, 134, 135,
Bruffee 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 110, 120, 133,
                                                      136, 138, 139, 140
        141
Burke 22, 39, 43, 128, 134                    H

C                                             Habits 138
                                              Harris 6, 11, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 26, 28,
Carino 27, 28, 29, 33, 34, 40, 134
Clark 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 40, 46, 108,            30, 52, 53, 54, 55, 65, 81, 82, 84,
                                                      110, 116, 122, 128, 137
        134
Conferences 9, 30, 31, 33, 34, 43, 53, 54,    L

        55, 57, 66, 81, 92, 108, 126, 133,    LaFrance 6, 19, 46, 129, 134, 135, 136,
        134, 137, 138, 139, 141                       137, 140
Corbett 5, 7, 9, 16, 19, 27, 37, 39, 43, 46,
        83, 102, 114, 129, 134, 135, 136,     Lerner 5, 6, 11, 26, 27, 29, 52, 54, 57, 84,
        137, 140                                      133, 137, 138

D                                             Lunsford 19, 32

Decker 6, 11, 19, 37, 46, 55, 108, 121,       M
        129, 134, 135, 136, 137, 140
                                              Modeling 30, 138
Delpit 32, 38, 83, 112, 136
Denny 6, 26, 83, 87, 108, 109, 136

                                              147
Index

N

Narrative 133
Nelson 11, 17, 27, 72, 101, 103, 110,

        113, 130, 139
North 5, 6, 11, 14, 26, 139

R

Rhetoric 10, 22, 25, 48, 49, 62, 107, 125,
        128, 134, 135, 140, 141

S

Severino 16, 32, 35, 38, 58, 140
Soliday 6, 11, 16, 140
Soven 7, 11, 16, 137, 140
Spigelman 7, 9, 12, 13, 19, 21, 82, 119,

        131, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140

T

Thompson 9, 17, 20, 27, 28, 34, 35, 43,
        44, 53, 54, 58, 84, 128, 131, 138,
        141

Thonus 5, 16, 52, 54, 55, 72, 87, 133, 137
Trimbur 11, 138, 141
Trust 102

V

Vidali 114, 141

W

WAC 10, 12, 15, 17, 135, 137, 140, 141
Writing Centers 27, 134, 137, 139, 140
Writing Fellows 15, 135, 137, 138, 140,

        141

Z

Zawacki 7, 10, 16, 122, 123, 131, 141

148
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
    Steven J. Corbett is Assistant Professor of English

at George Mason University. He received his Ph.D. in
English Language and Rhetoric from the University of
Washington-Seattle in 2008, and he was assistant pro-
fessor of English and co-coordinator of composition
at Southern Connecticut State University-New Hav-
en from 2008-2013. He is co-editor (with Michelle
LaFrance and Teagan Decker) of the collection Peer
Pressure, Peer Power: Theory and Practice in Peer Review
and Response for the Writing Classroom (Fountainhead
Press, 2014). His essays on teaching, writing, and
rhetoric have appeared in The Writing Center Journal, Rhetoric Review, Pedagogy,
Kairos, The Writing Lab Newsletter, Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and En-
vironment, The St. Martin's Sourcebook for Writing Tutors 4th ed., On Location,
Diversity in the Composition Classroom, ePortfolio Performance Support Systems,
Inside Higher Ed, The Chronicle of Higher Education, and elsewhere. He is cur-
rently co-editing (with Michelle LaFrance) a forthcoming critical sourcebook
on student peer review and response for Bedford/St. Martin's, co-editing (with
Betsy Cooper) a special multimodal issue of the journal Across the Disciplines on
writing in the performing and visual arts, and co-authoring a monograph (with
Paul Rogers) on listening and responding to writers and writing.

                                                                                                 149
BEYOND DICHOTOMY

How closely can or should writing centers and writing classrooms collabo-
rate? Beyond Dichotomy explores how research on peer tutoring one-to-one
and in small groups can inform our work with students in writing centers
and other tutoring programs, as well as in writing courses and classrooms.
These multi-method (including rhetorical and discourse analyses and ethno-
graphic and case-study) investigations center on several course-based tutor-
ing (CBT) partnerships at two universities. Rather than practice separately
in the center or in the classroom, rather than seeing teacher here and tutor
there and student over there, CBT asks all participants in the dynamic drama
of teaching and learning to consider the many possible means of connecting
synergistically.

Steven J. Corbett is Assistant Professor of English at George Mason Uni-
versity. He is co-editor (with Michelle LaFrance and Teagan Decker) of
the collection Peer Pressure, Peer Power: Theory and Practice in Peer Re-
view and Response for the Writing Classroom (Fountainhead Press, 2014).
His essays on teaching, writing, and rhetoric have appeared in The Writ-
ing Center Journal, Rhetoric Review, Pedagogy, Kairos, The Writing Lab
Newsletter, Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment, Inside
Higher Ed, The Chronicle of Higher Education, and elsewhere.

Perspectives on Writing         W
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse

Fort Collins, CO 80523-1052
wac.colostate.ed

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 29621
w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-1-64215-059-9
