Cataloging with MARC,
RDA, and Classification

          Systems
CATALOGING WITH
MARC, RDA, AND
CLASSIFICATION
SYSTEMS

REED HEPLER AND DAVID HORALEK

College of Southern Idaho
Twin Falls, Idaho
Cataloging with MARC, RDA, and Classification Systems Copyright © 2023
by College of Southern Idaho is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
CONTENTS

Introduction and Acknowledgements        1

H5P Information                          4

Part I. Overview of Cataloging
and Copy Cataloging

1. Cataloging Overview                   9

Part II. Cataloging Schema

2. MARC Records: Information, Examples,  27

and Most Common Entries

3. FRBR, WEMI and their Impact on MARC   43

4. RDA Basics and Implications for MARC  54

5. MARC 336, 337, and 338 Fields in RDA  58
Part III. Call Numbers

6. Understanding DDC Call Numbers             73

7. Understanding LC Call (Catalog)            78

Numbers

8. Creating Call Numbers using Dewey          87

Decimal Classification

9. Creating Cutters using the Library of      92

Congress Classification System

Part IV. Classification Website
Aids

10. Using OCLC Connexion                      103

11. Using WebDewey                            111

12. Using Classification Web                  124

13. Library of Congress Authorities: Subject  136

Headings and Names
Part V. Shelving

14. Shelving, Shelflisting, and Work and  149

Author Orders

Part VI. Conclusion

15. Conclusion                            159

Appendix A: RDA to MARC 21 maps and       161

workflows

Appendix B: RDF and the Semantic Web      175

Glossary                                  179
                         INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS | 1

INTRODUCTION AND
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This book is the product of a desire to combine elements of the
most important knowledge found in high-quality textbooks
on the subject of Cataloging. Reed Hepler, the Digital
Initiatives Librarian and Archivist at the College of Southern
Idaho, used his knowledge along with that of the other
librarians at CSI and combined it with information found
throughout OER, Public Domain, and Open Access
resources. The result is this publication on the details of
efficient and accurate cataloging.

   Special acknowledgement goes to Dave Horalek, the
Reference Librarian at the College of Southern Idaho, and
Miranda Buren, the Cataloger and Interlibrary Loan Specialist
at the same institution, for sharing their expertise and
viewpoints. Also, thanks to Teri Fattig, the former director of
the CSI Library, for creating effective and thorough quizzes
and other assessments.

   Trainings created by the Library of Congress have been
immensely helpful in creating exercises and adding more
expertise than was had by the professionals at CSI. The reader
is strongly encouraged to go through the trainings in the
Catalogers Learning Workshop of the Library of Congress.
2 | INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

As facilitators of the training on the Library of Congress
Classification system, Janis L. Young of the Library of
Congress and Daniel L. Joudrey of Simmons University merit
boundless thanks for their concise, thorough, and accurate
description of the system and the Classification Web program.

   Special thanks and acknowledgement to OCLC for their
support of the WebDewey and Connexion products and
services. Connexion is the gold standard for MARC record
searching, viewing, interpretation, and retention. WebDewey
is the easiest service to use to access and navigate the Dewey
Decimal System. It is also helpful in creating unique Dewey
numbers when necessary. Not only have they created and
maintained these products and services, OCLC also allowed
me to include screenshots/screen captures in this book. All
rights for these images are reserved by them. These images
will allow you to visualize the processes you need to use when
creating and interpreting MARC records and Dewey Decimal
Numbers. They will also help you somewhat in your work
with Library of Congress Call Numbers. Thanks to Michael
Campbell and Heather Carlisle specifically for helping me
navigate the permissions process for these images.

   Connexion®, DDC®, Dewey®, Dewey Decimal
Classification®, OCLC®, and WebDewey® are registered
trademarks/service
marks of OCLC. All rights are reserved by them.

   Every time that you use this textbook, please contact Reed
Hepler at rhepler@csi.edu and provide the course title and
                        INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS | 3

the number of students involved. If you are using it for
professional development, please give the institution and
approximately how many people are going to use it at your
institution. If you are a lone researcher, worker, or student,
feel free to reach out and contact Reed with any revisions,
questions, or other comments. This allows him to monitor the
impact of the textbook and its associated assessments.
4 | H5P INFORMATION

H5P INFORMATION

This textbook and course includes interactive activities made
possible through H5P (HTML 5 Package), which is a
learning system created with the HTTP5 language. You will be
able to interact with the knowledge you have gained in a variety
of ways, including drag-and-drop, fill-in-the-blank, multiple
choice, and other varieties. The goal of these activities is to help
you internalize your knowledge. Depending on the results of
your trials, you will receive certain feedback. You will only be
graded upon your final score and you will always be allowed to
retry these activities unless your instructor decides to disable
that option. There are a few guidelines you should know about
typing and interacting with these activities:

 1. Spelling is important. This is good training for
      cataloging in general. There are options to allow for
      imperfect spelling. I have disabled these options. As a
      cataloger, you will be expected to be precise when
      entering information in a catalog record and searching
      for information and data. Spell things accurately

 2. When you come across an entry that has a long dash, put
      it in a blank as two short dashes.

 3. When you see an ampersand, write it out as "and."
                                                           H5P INFORMATION | 5

4. Don't give up! Use the feedback that comes with your
    answers to improve your score.

5. If you are confused about an assignment or believe that
    you got a wrong answer in error, click the "Confused"
    button on the bottom right corner of the H5P window.
6 | H5P INFORMATION
             OVERVIEW OF CATALOGING AND COPY CATALOGING | 7

PART I

OVERVIEW OF
CATALOGING AND
COPY CATALOGING
8 | OVERVIEW OF CATALOGING AND COPY CATALOGING
                                                      CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 9

1.

CATALOGING OVERVIEW

Cataloging is perhaps the most exciting subject you could
read about. You probably howled with delight when you
found you could register for this course, right? Just kidding. I
know that even the mention of cataloging and tools used in the
process are probably coma-inducing to most people. However,
the specifics of cataloging are necessary for librarians,
educators, and others to learn. If we know the details of how
to catalog, we will know how to help others find the specific
items they are looking for. If they are looking for groups of
resources, we can help them find several options that fulfill
certain criteria.

   The goal of this textbook is to explain the details of
cataloging in a concise, thorough manner. Interspersed with
these explanations will be interactive assessments and
experiences in which you can test and demonstrate your
knowledge. The average textbook is around 50,000 to 100,000
words. This textbook is around 25,000 words. Even when I
update it or add sections, I want to remain in that range. At
the most, I will change it to be 30,000 words. There is nothing
more pointless than including excessive detail. This is an
10 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

introductory textbook, and it provides links to more detailed
sources of information if you would like to browse those.

   Describing, categorizing, and classifying information
resources is a detailed process that can involve up to three
or four schemata at once. Essential to the best practices of
cataloging is the use of controlled entries when creating
records. This concept is called controlled vocabulary, and it
influences virtually every decision of the cataloger.

Use of Controlled Vocabularies

One way to encourage good names for a given resource domain
is to establish a controlled vocabulary. This is like a fixed
or closed dictionary that includes the terms that can be used
in a particular domain. A controlled vocabulary shrinks the
number of words used and leaves behind a set of words with
precisely defined meanings and rules governing their use. The
results of using a set of specified terms include the elimination
of undesirable associations and the removal of synonyms and
homonyms. In other words, the possible entries in a field are
streamlined to be as precise and thorough as possible while also
avoiding any confusion.

A controlled vocabulary is not simply a set of allowed words;
it also includes their definitions and often specifies rules by
which the vocabulary terms can be used and combined.
Different domains can create specific controlled vocabularies
                                                     CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 11

for their own purposes, but the important thing is that the
vocabulary be used consistently throughout that domain.

For bibliographic resources important aspects of vocabulary
control include determining the authoritative forms for author
names, uniform titles of works, and the set of terms by which a
particular subject will be known. In library science, the process
of creating and maintaining these standard names and terms is
known as authority control.

When evaluating what name to use for an author, librarians
typically look for the name form that is used most commonly
across that author's body of work while conforming to rules
for handling prefixes, suffixes and other name parts that often
cause name variations. For example, a name like that
of Johann Wolfgang von Goëthe might be alphabetized as
both a "G" name and a "V" name, but using "G" is the
authoritative way. "See" and "see also" references then map the
variations to the authoritative name. The Library of Congress
has specific names and formats used for the majority of
authors. These are called Name Authorities and will be
discussed later.

Controlled Vocabularies and Content
Rules

Content rules are similar to controlled vocabularies because
they also limit the possible values that can be used in
12 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

descriptions. Instead of specifying a fixed set of values, content
rules typically restrict descriptions by requiring them to be
of a particular data type (integer, Boolean, Date, and so
on). Possible values are constrained by logical expressions (e.g.,
a value must be between 0 and 99) or regular expressions (e.g.,
must be a string of length 5 that must begin with a number).
Content rules like these are used to ensure valid descriptions
when people enter them in web forms or other applications.

Vocabulary Control as Dimensionality
Reduction

In most cases a controlled vocabulary is a subset of the natural
or "uncontrolled" vocabulary, but sometimes it is a new set
of invented terms. The goal of a controlled vocabulary is to
reduce the number of descriptive terms assignable to a
resource. Thus, controlled vocabulary and content rules bring
about a phenomenon called "dimensionality reduction." In
other words, they are used to help catalogers in reducing the
number of components in a description. These facets of
catalog records are driven by a plethora of pretentious-
sounding processes, theories, and paradigms.

These terms, and the processes of using them, might sound
imposing. Indeed, they are computationally complex, but they
all have the same simple concept at their core: the features or
properties that describe a resource are often highly correlated.
                                                     CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 13

For example, a document that contains the word "religion"
is more likely to contain the words "faith" and "ritual" than
a document that does not. Similar correlations exist among
the visual features used to describe images and the acoustic
features that describe music. Dimensionality reduction
techniques analyze the correlations between resource
descriptions to transform a large set of descriptions into a
much smaller set of uncorrelated ones.

Here is an oversimplified example that illustrates the idea.
Suppose we have a collection of resources, and every resource
described as "big" is also described as "red," and every "small"
resource is also "green." This perfect correlation between color
and size means that either of these properties is sufficient to
distinguish "big red" things from "small green" ones, and we
do not need clever algorithms to figure that out. But if we have
thousands of properties and the correlations are only partial,
we need the sophisticated statistical approaches to choose the
optimal set of description properties and terms, and in some
techniques the dimensions that remain are called "latent" or
"synthetic" ones because they are statistically optimal but do
not map directly to resource properties.

Creating Resource Descriptions

Resource descriptions can be created by professionals, by the
  14 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

  authors or creators of resources, by users, or by computational
  or automated means.

  From the traditional perspective of library and information
  science with its emphasis on bibliographic description, these
  modes of creation imply different levels of description
  complexity and sophistication; Taylor and Joudrey, in their
  classic book The Organization of Information, suggest that
  professionals create rich descriptions, untrained users at best
  create structured ones, and automated processes
  create simple ones.1

  This classification reflects a disciplinary and historical bias
  more than reality. "Simple" resource descriptions are "no more
  than data extracted from the resource itself... the search engine
  approach to organizing the web through automated indexing
  techniques."2

  A better notion of levels of resource description is one based
  on the amount of interpretation imposed by the description,
  an approach that focuses on the descriptions themselves rather
  than on their methods of creation.

1. Joudrey, D. N., Taylor, A. G., & Wisser, K. M. (2018). The Organization of
  Information (4th ed.), Libraries Unlimited, 184-186.

2. Joudrey, D. N., Taylor, A. G., & Wisser, K. M. (2018). The Organization of
  Information (4th ed.), Libraries Unlimited, 184.
                                                     CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 15

Professionally-created resource descriptions, author- or user-
created descriptions, and computational or automated
descriptions each have strengths and limitations that impose
tradeoffs. A natural solution is to try to combine desirable
aspects from each in hybrid approaches. For example, the
vocabulary for a new resource domain may arise from tagging
by end users but then be refined by professionals, lay classifiers
may create descriptions with help from software tools that
suggest possible terms, or software that creates descriptions
can be improved by training it with human-generated
descriptions.

Resource Description by Professionals

Before the web made it possible for almost anyone to create,
publish, and describe their own resources and to describe those
created and published by others, resource description was
generally done by professionals in institutional
contexts. Professional indexers and catalogers described
bibliographic and museum resources after having been trained
to learn the concepts, controlled descriptive vocabularies, and
the relevant standards. In information systems domains
professional data and process analysts, technical writers, and
others created similarly rigorous descriptions after receiving
analogous training. We have called these types of resource
descriptions institutional ones to highlight the contrast
between those created according to standards and those
16 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

created informally in ad hoc ways, especially by untrained or
undisciplined individuals.

Resource Description by Authors or
Creators

The author or creator of a resource can be presumed to
understand the reasons why and the purposes for which the
resource can be used. And, presumably, most authors want to
be read, so they will describe their resources in ways that will
appeal to and be useful to their intended users. However, these
descriptions are unlikely to use the controlled vocabularies and
standards that professional catalogers would use.

Resource Description by Users

Today's web contains a staggering number of resources, most
of which are primary information resources published as web
content, but many others are resources that stand for "in the
world" physical resources. Most of these resources are being
described by their users rather than by professionals or by their
authors. These "at large" users are most often creating
descriptions for their own benefit when they assign tags or
ratings to web resources, and they are unlikely to use standard
or controlled descriptors when they do so. The resulting
variability can be a problem if creating the description requires
judgment on the tagger's part. Most people can agree on the
                                                     CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 17

length of a particular music file but they may differ wildly
when it comes to determining to which musical genre that
file belongs. Fortunately most web users implicitly recognize
that the potential value in these "Web 2.0" or "user-generated
content" applications will be greater if they avoid egocentric
descriptions. In addition, the statistics of large sample sizes
inevitably leads to some agreement in descriptions on the most
popular applications because idiosyncratic descriptions are
dominated in the frequency distribution by the more
conventional ones.

We are not suggesting that professional descriptions are always
of high quality and utility, and socially produced ones are
always of low quality and utility. Rather, it is important to
understand the limitations and qualifications of descriptions
produced in each way. Tagging lowers the barrier to entry for
description, making organizing more accessible and creating
descriptions that reflects a variety of viewpoints. However,
when many tags are associated with a resource, it
increases recall while decreasing precision. This causes
immense problems when catalogers and other professionals
seek to categorize and classify resources. Ofttimes, socially-
produced tags are simply ignored and replaced with
standardized, controlled metadata terms.
18 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

Evaluating Resource Descriptions

When professionals create resource descriptions in a
centralized manner, which has long been the standard practice
for many resources in libraries, there is a natural focus
on quality at the point of creation to ensure that the
appropriate controlled vocabularies and standards have been
used. However, the need for resource description generalizes to
resource domains outside of the traditional bibliographic one,
and other quality considerations emerge in those contexts.

Resource descriptions in private sector firms are essential to
running the business and in interacting efficiently with
suppliers, partners, and customers. Compared to the public
sector, there is much greater emphasis on the economics and
strategy of resource description. What is the value of resource
description? Who will bear the costs of producing them?
Which of the competing industry standards will be
followed? Some of these decisions are not free choices as much
as they are constraints imposed as a condition of doing
business with a dominant economic partner, which is
sometimes a governmental entity.

For example, a firm like Wal-Mart with enormous market
power can dictate terms and standards to its suppliers because
the long-term benefits of a Wal-Mart contract usually make
the initial accommodation worthwhile. Likewise, governments
                                                    CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 19

often require their suppliers to conform to open standards to
avoid lock-in to proprietary technologies.

In both the public and private sectors there is increased use of
computational techniques for creating resource descriptions
because the number of resources to be described is simply too
great to allow for professional description.

A great deal of work in text data mining, web page
classification, semantic enrichment, and other similar research
areas is already under way and is significantly lowering the cost
of producing useful resource descriptions. Some museums
have embraced approaches that automatically create user-
oriented resource descriptions and new user interfaces for
searching and browsing by transforming the professional
descriptions in their internal collections management systems.
Google's ambitious project to digitize millions of books has
been criticized for the quality of its algorithmically extracted
resource descriptions, but we can expect that computer
scientists will put the Google book corpus to good use as a
research test bed to improve the techniques.

Web 2.0 applications that derive their value from the
aggregation and interpretation of user-generated content can
be viewed as voluntarily ceding their authority to describe and
organize resources to their users, who then tag or rate them
as they see fit. In this context the consistency of resource
description, or the lack of it, becomes an important issue, and
20 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

many sites are using technology or incentives to guide users to
create better descriptions.

Copy Cataloging

Evaluating and improving upon existing descriptions and
catalog records may seem to be a waste of time. However, it is
a large part of modern cataloging operations. Copy cataloging
is the practice of creating a new cataloging record based on a
preexisting catalog record. This could be a record created by
someone at your own institution or a record obtained form
someone else. This is contrasted with original
cataloging, which occurs when a cataloger creates a completely
new record for an item. Copy cataloging has become
increasingly mainstream as libraries develop networks and
consortiums. The proliferation of services by OCLC has also
affected this trend. OCLC provides access to preexisting
catalog records, from catalogers can choose one that best meets
their needs. Copy cataloging is a major boon to library workers
as they will not have to fill all of the MARC records out
manually. Ofttimes, only a few tweaks are needed to make
the preexisting record compatible with the item in one's own
library holdings. For example, the format, edition number, and
call number may have to be changed in a MARC record, but
that may be the only changes necessary.
                                                     CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 21

Test Your Knowledge

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=5#h5p-2

Types of Catalogs and Databases

Before we explore the intricacies of cataloging schemata and
tools, we must first understand why we need specialized
controlled vocabulary and authority records. After all,
couldn't we just put all this information on a website so that
a search on a search engine or database will turn it up? Well,
yes and no. Search engines occasionally pick up library catalog
listings, especially if those have been created based on
standardized practices. However, for use in the library system,
a record must be placed into a specific type of database.

   Another major difference between search engines and
databases and catalogs is that the latter two have a wide range
of delimiters, whereas a search engine may only have
delimiters regarding the format of a result, time of publication,
or author metadata. Boolean operators, (AND, OR, NOT,
etc.) are even more important when using search engines,
22 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

although they are also occasionally useful in databases and
catalogs.

   The major types of catalogs, databases and related services
include:

   *Integrated Library System: An ILS, also called a Library
Management System (LMS), is a service that combines an
Open Public Access Catalog (OPAC) with circulation and
patron information as well as financial information when
necessary. There are multiple facets of this system, and each
of these services may be provided by individual providers or
multiple vendors. ILS systems can also provide connections to
other services, such as databases and links to consortia. While
Card Catalogs only had three search options, the ILS adds a
fourth option: specific metadata such as whole or partial call
numbers can be used to search for books.

   *Union Catalog: This type of catalog is exemplified by
OCLC's WorldCat. A union catalog is simply an OPAC that is
used by multiple libraries who are functioning as a consortium
and have fluid collections that can be loaned to each other.
This type of catalog facilitates loaning items from one library
to another, such as OCLC's Inter-Library Loan service.

   *Discovery System: This system is a combination of a
catalog and a search engine. CSI Library uses a Discovery
System that interfaces with our catalog for multiple resources.
For our library holdings we have a Discovery System hosted by
EbscoHost. For our Open Access materials, we have a system
provided by SirsiDynix.
                                                    CATALOGING OVERVIEW | 23

   *Standard Database: A regular database holds items with
copious amounts of data, including creation, title, author,
subject, and other metadata. This database may or may not be
open. It does not include information about anything other
than the data it holds, although site traffic data may be
recorded by third parties. Often, the collections in these
databases have not been curated. This means they have not
been specifically selected, standardized and/or evaluated.

   *Card Catalog: This was the initial iteration of a database. It
was completely physical with no digital facets. There were only
three types of searches one could perform using a card catalog.
A user could search for works by Title, by Author, and by
Subject. For a time, this was all information that was necessary
for a thorough and accurate library search. However, in the
increasingly modernizing world, a new iteration of catalog was
necessary. This type of catalog was often accompanied by a
shelf list, which listed all books in a library by order of their call
number.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=5#h5p-3
24 | CATALOGING OVERVIEW

This work was adapted from the sections "Naming Resources"
and "The Process of Describing Resources" from The
Discipline of Organizing by Robert J. Glushko. This work
has a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0
International License.
                                                       CATALOGING SCHEMA | 25

PART II

CATALOGING
SCHEMA
26 | CATALOGING SCHEMA
              MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                            COMMON ENTRIES | 27

2.

MARC RECORDS:
INFORMATION,
EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

MARC Overview

One of the main schemata for describing information items
is called MAchine-Readable (Bibliographic) Catalog
Records (MARC). This system was created in the 1960s and
has been continuously revised since that time to fit the
metadata needs of a continuously modernizing world. The
current iteration of MARC, MARC 21, was created in 1999.
This version has been subject to continuous smaller changes
so as to remain more or less evergreen. Trimming and pruning
are performed instead of planting an entirely new tree.

   Integral to one's understanding of the complexity of
MARC records is a knowledge of the discrete types of data
contained in the symbols present. One symbol can refer to
  28 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
  COMMON ENTRIES

  multiple types of metadata depending on its presence in the
  MARC record.

 Sections of a MARC Record1

     There are three main sections of a MARC Record:

   1. Leader: This is the shortest section in a MARC record.
        It consists of 24 sequential symbols or characters.
        Individual symbols or groups of symbols show different
        types of data in the record. This is the first part of the
        record.

   2. Directory: This record states the location of each
        variable field in the MARC record. It also states the
        length of the record. The directory entry for every
        variable is only 12 character positions. All directories end
        with the presence of RS, which signifies the end of the
        record.

   3. Variable fields: This is what most people think when
        they consider MARC records. In fact, it is the most
        important element of the MARC record. There are

1. Library of Congress. (2008, April 22). Marc 21 bibliographic introduction.
  Retrieved December 5, 2022, from https://www.loc.gov/marc/bibliographic/
  bdintro.html.
                 MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                               COMMON ENTRIES | 29

        three main types of Variable fields, which will be
        examined later.

 MARC Elements2

     There are three types of metadata variable fields in the
  Variable field Section of a MARC record:

   1. Tags (also occasionally called the Field Code): Every tag
        consists of three digits. This is the broadest variable field,
        and there is only one tag per section of a MARC record.
        They can only be followed by indicators and subfield
        codes. Every three-digit number stands for a certain
        aspect of an item's metadata. For example, a field marked
        600 would contain items related to a personal name
        related to the item, whereas the 610 field is reserved for
        corporate or entity names. Furthermore, 650 signifies
        that the following information is related to a topic
        discussed in the item and 651 indicates a geographic
        place. As an item can have more than one subject or
        author, these tags are repeatable in an item.

2. Library of Congress. (2009, October 17). Marc 21 reference materials.
  Understanding MARC Bibliographic: Parts 7 to 10. Retrieved December 5, 2022,
  from https://www.loc.gov/marc/umb/um07to10.html.
30 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

 2. Indicators: These are optional clarifiers that follow tags.
      They have only one digit. There are two spaces for
      indicators. This may cause some to assume that an
      indicator is two digits, but each digit stands for a
      different clarification. Some fields use only the first or
      second indicator while others use both indicator fields. If
      an indicator field is not used, it is filled by the number
      sign (#).

 3. Subfield Codes: Immediately following the indicators
      are subfield codes. These are also called "delimiters"
      occasionally. There are two symbols in a subfield code.
      The first is the subfield symbol, which is represented in
      this textbook by a dollar sign ($). The second is a
      lowercase letter of the alphabet or a number. After the
      subfield, or delimiter, code, the data entry of the subfield
      is given. In theory, the first subfield would be signified by
      "$a." However, sometimes this subfield indicator is
      omitted as a given. The other subfield indicators are
      always used.

Examples of MARC fields

Let us look at some examples of MARC fields, their tags, and
their indicators and delimiters. The following fields would be
some of those present in an entry for an omnibus edition of the
first three (published) books in the Foundation trilogy of Isaac
Asimov.
              MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                             COMMON ENTRIES | 31

   020##$a9780380001019$c119.14USD
   040##$aOCLC
   08200$a813/.5/4
   1001#$aAsimov, Isaac$d1920-1992
   1304#$aThe Foundation trilogy: three classics of Science
Fiction.$pFoundation.$pFoundation and Empire.$pSecond
Foundation.$lEnglish.$f1974.
   24514$aThe Foundation trilogy :$bthree classics of Science
Fiction./$c Asimov, Isaac 1920-1992
   650#0$aScience fiction.
   650#$aFuture, The, in literature.
   650#$aPsychohistory-fiction.
   This example is given without spaces to show you how
MARC records might appear on your computer screen. Some
systems, such as Connexion, have options to have spaces
between field codes, indicators, and subfield indicators. Future
examples and your assignments will have spaces, but I wanted
to show you the default and traditional appearance of a
MARC record.
   Pay attention to the 245 field for this next exercise, and
perhaps look at the MARC 21 Bibliographic Page for this field.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
  32 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
  COMMON ENTRIES

          can view it online here:
          https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=41#h5p-15

 Digits in Variable Fields3

     Now that we know the format, order, and importance of
  each of the types of MARC fields, what are the most
  ubiquitous and necessary entries in these fields? The Library
  of Congress has made an excellent page that describes the
  attributes above and lists the most common MARC fields
  used in bibliographic records, along with all indicators and the
  most common delimiters.

 First digits in Variable Fields

  There are ten general categories of MARC fields:
     0XX: Identification symbols (Library of Congress control

  numbers, International Standard Book Number)

3. Library of Congress. (2008, April 22). Marc 21 bibliographic introduction.
  Retrieved December 5, 2022, from https://www.loc.gov/marc/bibliographic/
  bdintro.html.
              MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                            COMMON ENTRIES | 33

   1XX: Main entries (author name, title of the book)
   2XX: Titles and related information
   3XX: Physical description
   4XX: Indicators of whether or not an item is in a series
   5XX: Notes
   6XX: Subject access fields (including names of individuals)
   7XX: Entries other than subjects or series information
   8XX: Entries to series and other related works
   9XX: A category created to allow local institutions to
record their own relevant metadata

Second and Third digits in Variable Fields

These digits act as subdivisions for the first-digit categories.
Each of the categories below, when applied to the 1XX, 5XX,
6XX, and 7XX categories, describe when certain people,
institutions, or works are subjects of the current work in
question.

   X00: Personal names
   X10: Corporate names
   X11: Meeting names
   X30: Uniform titles
   X40: Bibliographic titles
   X50: Topical terms
   X51: Geographic names
   Occasionally, changes have to be made in the MARC
record. These changes are often performed by local
institutions. They are followed by the symbol | .
34 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

   The author field for the Foundation trilogy is
   100 1# $a Asimov, Isaac $d 1920-1992.
   The "100" field is designated as the indicator for the name
of the author. The first indicator of this field states that the
surname is the first name in the entry.
   In the above example for the Foundation trilogy, there were
three subject fields.
   650 #0 $a Science fiction.
   650 #0 $a Future, The, in literature.
   650 $0 $a Psychohistory-fiction.
   The first digit is 6, so we know that the field will be related
to a subject in the work. the second and third digits are 5
and 0. This means that the subject of the work is topical, not
a person, group, corporation, or geographical area. "Science
fiction." is the authorized heading of the Library of Congress
for all works of science fiction. "Future, The, in literature." is
the authorized heading of the Library of Congress for all works
that discuss the future. "Psychohistory" is the name of both
a historical theory in reality and a fictional algorithm created
by Hari Seldon, a major character in the Foundation series.
In order to ensure that readers of this record know that the
psychohistory referred to is the fictional construct, hyphens
and the word "fiction" are added. We will discuss Library of
Congress Authority Records later in this book.
                 MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                               COMMON ENTRIES | 35

 Most Ubiquitous/Important
 MARC Fields4

     Here are the most common MARC fields, some of which
  will be discussed in greater detail in later sections:

     010: Library of Congress Control Number: This is possibly
  the most simple field in a MARC record. Both indicators are
  not used. The only indicator is $a and is followed by the LOC
  control number. Each work has a unique LOC control
  number to identify it.

     020: International Standard Book Number: This is another
  identification number. Usually, there are only ten or thirteen
  digits in an ISBN.

     040: Cataloging Source: This is the LOC or the OCLC
  or another institution. It is the source from which the entire
  MARC record was obtained. Like the first two fields,
  indicators are undefined.

     082: Dewey Decimal classification number of the item. The
  indicators show whether the DDC number of an item is from
  the full or abridged edition and which organization assigned
  the Dewey Decimal Classification number. Subfields other

4. Library of Congress. (2022, July 7). Marc 21 format for bibliographic data.
  Retrieved December 5, 2022, from https://www.loc.gov/marc/bibliographic/.
36 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

than $a give context to the number, including repeating the
assignation information.

   100: Personal name of the author of the work: The first
indicator of the field states the first name (personal, surname,
or family) that is used in the entry. The second indicator is
undefined. Subfields include designations for surnames,
personal names, numbers, titles, and birth and death dates.
The types and order of data in this field are governed by the
LOC Authority Record for the author, if one exists. If the
author does not have an Authority Record, institutional policy
should be followed. Often, this means using the surname and
first name of the author, followed by birth and death dates.

   130/240: These fields contain the uniform title (or the
main title) of the item being described in the MARC Record.
The 130 field is the most common iteration of the Title Field.
240, however, is useful when a work can have multiple titles
given to it, either colloquially or through multiple publications
of the same work over time. While delimiters $a, $l, and $f
have the same meaning in both fields, those three delimiters
subfield indicators are the only ones present in Field 240. Only
with Field 130 can a cataloger record the names of individual
sections and the version of the work that has been used to
create a certain item.

   245: This field repeats the title of the item and other
information about the work. This field is known as the "Title
Proper" field of the MARC record. If the title in this field is
the same as the preferred title of the field, 130 or 240 fields are
              MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                            COMMON ENTRIES | 37

not needed. At the very least, the title proper does not needed
to be included in these fields if it is recorded in Field 245.

   250: If a work is a new edition of a previous work, this field
contains information about the current edition.

   260, 264: Publishing and distribution information,
including data about the organization, place, and date of the
item, are included in this record. The first and only indicator
describes the certainty of the cataloger in reference to the
publication information provided. Subfields describe name
and location of the publisher, as well as the date of publication,
the date of manufacture, and the materials used to create the
item.

   300: This field is designated as the record of the physical,
tangible aspects of the item. Things like the number of pages,
descriptions of the illustrations on the book, or ancillary
material are located in the 300 field. Each of these have their
own subfields. For example, the number of pages is under $a
while the description of the illustration on the back cover of a
book would be contained in subfield $b.

   336, 337, 338: These are the Content, Media, and Carrier
Type fields. These fields, like other fields that have entries from
other institutions, are subject to a controlled vocabulary. This
means that the entries in these fields can only contain certain
entries. The vocabulary assigned to these fields is determined
by corresponding data in the Resource Description and
Access (RDA) schema. These fields will be discussed in a later
page.
38 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

   490: This field places the item and its work in a series with
other items. It simply states the name of the series in which the
work is placed. It may also add the place of the work in that
series through assigning a volume number.

   500: This field is only used if a cataloger needs to include
information about the source of any information in the record,
related items, or a description of the main subjects in the item.

   520: This field is a summary of the information in the item.
This should be an extremely short entry. The summary can be
designated as a standard book summary, a review, a scope and
content note (for archival cataloging), or an abstract.

   521: Target audience of the item. Indicators can specify
whether the range used in this field is reading grade, age range,
grade, and motivation. Subfields impart more information
about the target audience and the source that assigned a target
audience to the manifestation that has been incorporated into
the item.

   600: This field contains information about the human
subjects of a work. The entries in this field are most often
copied from the Library of Congress Authorities. The first
indicator of the field is the same as the first in the 130 field. The
second indicator gives the source for the subject statement.
Subfields include information regarding the personal name,
titles, birth and death dates, and other information.

   610: This field designates corporate and institution
organizations as the subjects of a particular work. The first
indicator in this field indicates whether or not the name is
              MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                            COMMON ENTRIES | 39

inverted or if the name belongs to a government jurisdiction
rather than a private group. The second indicator is the same
as the second indicator for Field 600. Subfields include places
for the name, the time period associated with the organization,
and the geographic area affected by the group.

   650: This subject, as stated above, is reserved for topics that
are not groups or individuals. Thematic subjects can include
many topics, from arts to science to literature, to activist
movements. The first indicator is the level of the subject. The
second indicator is the source of the subject heading. For
example, if the second indicator is a 0, the term was retrieved
from the Library of Congress Subject Headings. If that
indicator is a 1, the term was taken from the LC Subject
Headings for children's literature. Of particular importance in
this field are the subfields $0, $v, $x, and $y.

   651: This field holds only geographic names and places.
The first indicator of this field is undefined. The second
indicator is the same as the second indicator for all other 6XX
fields mentioned on this page. Subfields describe the formal
name of an area, the chronological period of the area covered in
the item, and the control number associated with the authority
record of the term.

   655: This field examines the genre of the item. Subfields
examine the history, provenance, and materials common to
this genre and the justification for placing the item in this
genre. As with many fields, a 7 in the second indicator space
means that the term is found in an external place that is not a
40 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

common source for data. Using this indicator means that the
cataloger will have to justify using a particular source for their
genre term. It may also require a $7 subfield, which examines
the provenance process through which a cataloger determined
particular data entries.

   700 and 710: Fields for additional personal and corporate
names. The 700s in general are additional names. Entries in
this field include personal names of coauthors, compilers, and
contributors. Translators and arrangers are also listed in this
field range.

   852: Physical location of the item in the Library's holdings.
The first indicator exposes the system used to classify all
objects in the library's holdings. The second indicates whether
or not the classification strategy is the primary scheme.

   856: Electronic location of the item and instructions for
how to access it. The first indicator is the method through
which a user can access the item. The next indicator says
whether the item that will be accessed is the resource itself,
a conversion of the resource, or a combination of both.
Subfields contain URLs, database host names, provenance of
the item, and copyright and other terms regulating access and
use of the item.

   883: This field contains the provenance of the metadata
contained in this record. Metadata is much more than the
pithy and trite "data about data" definition bandied about for
decades. It is essential information that puts the data (in this
case, the library item) in the proper context. Only through
              MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
                                                             COMMON ENTRIES | 41

analyzing the item in the context of the metadata can the user
fully appreciate the work that has been manifested.

   For information about using Connexion to look at MARC
record data, go to the Using OCLC Connexion page. A login
to Connexion will be necessary to complete the activity below,
but this will talk you through getting to the required MARC
record. Later on, we will discover more about using
Connexion to a fuller extent.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=41#h5p-17

Additional Information

There are multiple standards used to identify the proper way
to create entries in the fields and subfields of MARC records.
All of these standards are maintained by the Library of
Congress and include the MARC Format for Authority Data,
MARC 21 Format for Classification Data, and the MARC 21
Format for Bibliographic Data. It is highly recommended that
you bookmark these sources for information, especially the
Bibliographic page. This will come in handy later in this book
as well as throughout your librarianship. It is free, easy to use,
42 | MARC RECORDS: INFORMATION, EXAMPLES, AND MOST
COMMON ENTRIES

and thorough. The other pages in the MARC LOC website,
the Holdings, Classification, and Community pages, are also
useful but will not be accessed as much during cataloging.
                           FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC | 43

3.

FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR
IMPACT ON MARC

MARC records are not the only configuration for describing,
categorizing, and classifying items. MARC 21 records have
been influenced by Functional Requirements for
Bibliographic Records (FRBR). This system is a theoretical
one that categorizes and describes items according to their
relationship to the information contained inside them.

   It is important to understand the difference between various
tools used or referred to in the cataloging community. FRBR is
an ideology, a conceptual model. It is not tangible. There is no
FRBR software. It simply guides how catalogers think about
items, subjects, and people so that cataloging makes intuitive
sense. RDA is a content standard. This regulates how certain
metadata are expressed to ensure standardization. MARC, on
the other hand, is the format in which most cataloging records
are generated. MARC uses RDA to express metadata in a way
that aligns with FRBR. The relationships between these three
items, and the fact that they are not the same type of tool, are
important to know before you begin to work with them.

   MARC and RDA possess information about the physical
44 | FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC

characteristics, author, title, and number of pages of a
particular item. FRBR describes the items by exploring their
relationships, typically using the original iteration of its
information as provided by the author. This information is
combined with the other metadata provided by MARC and
RDA to give a thorough, complex description of each item in
the library's holdings. Additionally, the relationship between
one item and the others in the library's holdings is also made
manifest. In order to complete this, catalogers use a system
called WEMI.

WEMI Hierarchy

There are four main steps in the entity hierarchy of WEMI:

 1. Work: A work is the broadest level of the hierarchy. It is
      the original iteration of an idea created by an author. For
      example, Second Foundation in The Foundation trilogy
      was published by Isaac Asimov in 1952. While there was
      a first edition of the book, that first edition is not the
      work. Instead, the words and ideas within that edition
      constitute the work. A work is represented by a title and
      an author. Works can be related to each other if one is
      derived from the other. Some of the fields of the MARC
      record that deal with the Work hierarchy are 100, 130,
      240, 245, and 380.

 2. Expression: The level below a work is an expression.
                        FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC | 45

    This is a particular format in which the work has been
    presented. For example, a play based on Second
    Foundation would be a different expression than the text
    version in the book. Alternate translations of the work
    may also be considered discrete expressions. A sign of
    this is the fact that many library systems have different
    call numbers for different translations of the same work.
    For example, the CSI Library has a different LOC call
    number for works in Spanish than for those in English.
    For example, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, the
    American manifestation of Harry Potter and the
    Philosopher's Stone, has a LOC call number at the CSI
    Library of FIC .R69 H371 1998. The Spanish
    translation, Harry Potter y la piedra filosofal, has a call
    number of SPA FIC .R69 H371 2001. Some of the
    Expression-level MARC fields include 130, 240, 255,
    336, 507, 520, and 546.
3. Manifestation: Yet another level in this system is the
    manifestation. This is often confused for an item, but
    these two things are not the same. An edition may be
    considered a manifestation of a particular expression.
    Multiple items of the same edition can all be considered
    individual parts of a particular manifestation. For
    example, if a library buys two copies of the same edition
    of a book due to high circulation, these may be
    considered to be iterations of the same manifestation. If,
    on the other hand, they are different editions, then they
46 | FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC

      are different manifestations. There are many
      manifestation-level MARC fields, including 245, 250,
      264, 300, 319, 337, 338, 347, 490, 500, and 856.
 4. Item: The item is the individual copy of a book. Each
      item has its own MARC and FRBR record. An item is
      represented by a call number, whether that number is
      part of the Library of Congress Classification System or
      the Dewey Decimal System. Item-specific parts of the
      MARC record include the item identifier, which can be
      included in multiple fields, and fields in the 5XX range
      which are related to restrictions.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=43#h5p-26

Trinity of FRBR

There are three elements in the FRBR system. The parts of
the WEMI hierarchy are called entities. Specifically, these are
called Group 1 entities. Group 2 entities are people and
organizations or corporate bodies. Group 3 entities are the
subjects that can be discussed by works. Group 1 and Group
                           FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC | 47

2 entities can be Group 3 entities if there are works written
about them. Group 2 entities are described by multiple
MARC fields in different contexts. Individuals can be
described by MARC fields 100, multiple fields in the 37X
range, 670, and 700. Families are described by 100, 376, and
670. Corporate organizations are described by 110, 111, 368,
370, and 670.

   The second aspect of FRBR is the relationship between
multiple entities. For example, in the sentence "William
Shakespeare wrote a play about Macbeth," the phrase "wrote a
play" is the relationship.

   The third relationship in the FRBR triangle is
the attributes of the item. This is where the rest of the
MARC or RDA record comes in. The metadata regarding
editions, text font, page numbers, subjects, and authors are
all considered attributes of an item. Relationships between an
item and its author can also form connections between other
works created by that author. Attributes function as a way to
build less direct connections and imply relationships. On the
front page recto (front side) of the item are usually the title,
author, and publisher. On the verso, or back side, are also the
title, author, and publisher information. Additionally, subject,
publication information, language, and many other attributes
are listed.
48 | FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=43#h5p-5

Content relationships

The major relationship regarding works in the above trifecta
is those regarding works and their subjects. Content
relationships explain how works are related to each other.
Some are different manifestations or expressions of the same
work. The information in two items that are the same work
are essentially the same, barring any information lost by
versioning, translation, or the creation of a new edition. These
items may be said to be equivalent.

   Some are derivations of other works. Therefore, the
information in the derivation is only part of the information
in the original work. New information may be added to this
derivation. Examples of derivations include dramatizations,
subtle changes to the themes, perspective changes, and other
modifications.

   Another relationship occurs when one work is descriptive
of another work. These include commentaries, annotated and
edited anthologies, and reviews. The information in the
                          FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC | 49

original work is analyzed and may or may not be fully dealt
with in the descriptive work.

User Tasks

One may ask, "other than facilitating cataloger understanding
of the need for schemata like MARC and RDA, what does
FRBR do?" This system actually does more for users than
may be immediately apparent. It facilitates five actions that all
users perform when they engage with items. These user actions
replace the three "Objects of Catalogs" that Charles Ammi
Cutter, one of the major pioneers of cataloging, theorized.
According to him, there were three major finding goals of users
that a catalog should facilitate: finding a specific book, finding
groups of books by author, subject, or genre, and finding a
book that specifically suits their needs. FRBR expanded upon
these functions to create their new "user tasks."

 1. Find: A user encounters multiple possible answers to a
      query through examining the attributes and
      relationships of works. To facilitate this task the
      information system needs to support searching by
      offering appropriate search elements or functionality.

 2. Identify: If a user is looking for specific attributes and/or
      relationships, they can locate the exact copy or
      manifestation they are looking for. If they are looking for
      a wider range of possible answers to their query, they can
50 | FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC

      also identify any item of several that fulfills their needs.
      To facilitate this task the information system seeks to
      clearly describe the resources it covers. The description
      should be recognizable to the user and easily interpreted.
 3. Select: A user can view or examine only those items that
      fulfill their criteria. To facilitate this task the information
      system needs to allow/support relevance judgments by
      providing sufficient appropriate information about the
      resources found to allow the user to make this
      determination.
 4. Obtain: As long as restrictions allow, a user can obtain
      the item, or access to it or a version of it, through the
      machinations facilitated by the catalog. To fulfill this
      task the information system needs to either provide
      direct links to online information or location
      information for physical resources. It also needs to give
      any instructions required to complete the transaction or
      any restrictions on access.
 5. Explore: The explore task is the most open-ended of the
      user tasks. The user may be browsing, relating one
      resource to another, making unexpected connections, or
      getting familiar with the information resources available
      for future use. The explore task acknowledges the
      importance of serendipity in information seeking. To
      facilitate this task the information system seeks to
      support discovery by making relationships explicit and
      by providing contextual information and navigation
                           FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC | 51

      functionality.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=43#h5p-1

If these ideas seem difficult to understand, you are not the only
one confused by this. View this diagram of the relationship
between the English translation of War and Peace and its
translator, the author, and the original work, which was
written in Russian.
52 | FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC

                                          This
                                          diagram
                                          shows
                                          the
                                          entities
                                          and
                                          relations
                                          hips
                                          involved
                                          in the
                                          creating
                                          the
                                          English
                                          translatio
                                          n of the
                                          novel
                                          WAR
                                          AND
                                          PEACE.

In order to fully explore and delineate the relationships and
attributes of entities to fulfill user tasks, some have stated that a
new way of recording metadata must be made. For this reason,
the Resource Description Framework (RDF) was invented.
This was also partially a response to the need for controlled
vocabulary. For more information about this framework and
changes in schemata, visit Appendix B.

   For a much more thorough and complex, yet
understandable, explanation of this system read the FRBR
Library Resource Model document created by the
International Federation of Library Associations and
                           FRBR, WEMI AND THEIR IMPACT ON MARC | 53

Institutions. Another simple resource was created by Dr.
Pamela Thomas of the Illinois Heartland Library System.

This chapter is a remix of several works, including:
   FRBR and RDA: What they are and how they may affect

the future of libraries by C.R. Croissant. This work is licensed
with a Creative Commons Non-Commercial 4.0
International License.

   FRBR-Library Reference Model, by Pat Riva, Patrick Le
Boeuf, and Maja Zumer, licensed with a Creative Commons
Attribution License.
54 | RDA BASICS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MARC

4.

RDA BASICS AND
IMPLICATIONS FOR
MARC

Another schema is called Resource Description and Access,
or RDA. It was created in the 2010s to replace an outdated
schema called AACR2. Initially, this schema was utilized
museums. However, it become more prominent in libraries
as it was developed to become ubiquitous. It was apparent
as early as 2007 that there would be no way for RDA and
MARC21 to coexist and not have some connection between
the two schemata. In fact, the overseers of MARC deliberately
altered MARC21 to become more compatible with RDA.

   The focus of RDA is to provide users, and catalogers, with
an object-oriented way of describing a resource. In other
words, RDA wants to establish a clear relationship between
one item and other items within a collection. It also wants to
describe relationships between items and authors and between
multiple editions of the same work. In this way, RDA is similar
to FRBR.

   For example, RDA does not initially categorize an
                         RDA BASICS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MARC | 55

information resource based on its physical type. Instead, it
categorizes all physical items based on the rate or status of
information publication and updating. The three main types
of format are serials, which are published at regular or
irregular intervals as discrete items that are all related
(newspapers, magazines, etc.), monographs, which are single-
volume or multiple-volume items that are considered a
complete work, or integrated resources, which are items that
are continuously updated with new editions. The new
information is integrated into the original resource and
republished.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=45#h5p-4

Intrinsic in the object-based orientation of RDA is the
separation between the many elements of an item. For
example, separate pieces of metadata describe the format of
the information in an item and the format of the item itself.
According to a report by the Library of Congress, this aspect
of RDA is especially useful if preservationists or users want to
convert data on an item into another format. To designate that
a MARC record has been created through the RDA system,
56 | RDA BASICS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MARC

Field 040 subfield $e has "rda" as an entry. There are various
rules regarding cataloging processes in RDA. For example,
abbreviations should never be used. Nor should filler terms
such as "etc.," or "et al.," unless these are used in a title. Author
names should be written according to their natural order in
Field 245, but according to the appropriate Authorities in
Fields 100, 600, and so on.

   RDA can be extremely complicated to understand. At
times, it is necessary to view RDA in its historical context and
in comparison to other schemata. FRBR was the forerunner
to the RDA, and RDA and MARC are used together. The
Library of Congress has created a training complete with
PowerPoint slides, a training manual, and exercises, on these
three schemata. FRBR, RDA, and MARC helps catalogers
see the connections between these three systems. Many other
trainings, including a six-module training on RDA specifically,
exist on the RDA Training Materials page of the LOC website.

   For maps and other resources that explain the connections
between RDA and MARC21, see Appendix A.

Apply Your Knowledge

Let's combine your knowledge of MARC with knowledge of
RDA. You have learned about the MARC fields, indicators,
subfield symbols, and the data that are affiliated with these
aspects of item records. Now see how you would write and
interpret MARC records with MARC field and subfield
                         RDA BASICS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MARC | 57

symbols according to the RDA schema. You will only have
to work with fields 100, 130, 240, and 245. Like on previous
pages, it would be helpful to have the MARC 21 Bibliographic
and Authority Data Library of Congress pages handy.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=45#h5p-27

A simpler overview video that lasts around an hour has also
been created by LOC. It was released in 2008, and is therefore
dated, but serves as an excellent overview of the principles of
RDA.
58 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA

5.

MARC 336, 337, AND 338
FIELDS IN RDA

As stated in the first chapter of this section, RDA is the
determining factor in the data contained in MARC fields 336,
337, and 338.

   RDA was created, as was said in the last chapter, to replace
AACR2. MARC21 was created to replace all previous
iterations of MARC. They were not created for the same
purpose, but many of their fields (through certainly not all)
overlap. For our purposes in this chapter, we will only consider
the overlapping data pertaining to the MARC fields in the
chapter heading.

   In each field, the RDA term for the content, media, or
carrier is in the $a subfield of the field. the MARC code, if
needed, for the item is recorded in the $b subfield. The Leader
symbol is recorded as part of the Leader of the entire record.

Field 336

This field pertains to the content of the item. In the MARC
                                  MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA | 59

  field, there are only three characters that can be put in the
  subfield. In the Leader, the first part of the MARC record,
  the content is defined by a single letter. RDA, on the other
  hand, can contain whole phrases, mostly two or three words,
  to describe the content in a resource. MARC allows for the
  integration of RDA data by allowing catalogers to put the
  RDA category of an item into a subfield.

     Below is a reproduction of a map created by the Library of
  Congress:1

1. Library of Congress (2011, April 5). "Term and code list for RDA content types."
  Retrieved on December 6, 2022, from https://www.loc.gov/standards/valuelist/
  rdacontent.html.
60 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA

RDA content term - 336 $a            MARC codes for      MARC
                                     RDA terms - 336 $b  code(s)
cartographic dataset                 crd                 e or f
cartographic image                   cri                 e or f
cartographic moving image            crm                 e or f
cartographic tactile image           crt                 e or f
cartographic tactile
three-dimensional form               crn                 e or f
cartographic three-dimensional form
computer dataset                     crf                 e or f
computer program                     cod                 m
notated movement                     cop                 m
notated music                        ntv                 a or t
performed music                      ntm                 c or d
sounds                               prm                 j
spoken word                          snd                 i
still image                          spw                 i
tactile image                        sti                 k
tactile notated music                tci                 k
tactile notated movement             tcm                 c or d
tactile text                         tcn                 a or t
tactile three-dimensional form       tct                 a or t
                                     tcf                 r
             MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA | 61

text                            txt                                                a or t
                                                                                   r
three-dimensional form          tdf                                                g
                                                                                   g
three-dimensional moving image  tdm                                                o or p

two-dimensional moving image    tdi

other                           xxx

unspecified                     zzz

Field 337

This field contains metadata about the type of media, or the
format, in which the information is presented to the user. This
is not a record of the type of information container, or the
item, but rather about the format (text, audio, spoken word,
etc.). Again, RDA has more flexibility and descriptive
restrictions than MARC.2

2. Library of Congress (2011, April 5). "Term and code list for RDA media types."
  Retrieved on December 6, 2022, from https://www.loc.gov/standards/valuelist/
  rdamedia.html.
62 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA

RDA media terms -337 $a  MARC codes for RDA                         MARC
                         terms - 337 $b                             s - soun
audio                    s                                          c - elect
computer                 c                                          h - micr
microform                h
microscopic              p                                          g - proje
                                                                    m - mo
projected                g
                                                                    t - text
stereographic            e                                          k - non-
                                                                    v - video
unmediated               n                                          z - unsp
                                                                    z - unsp
video                    v

other                    x

unspecified              z

Field 338

This field contains information about the format of the item
that contains, or carries, the information. For this reason, Field
338 is referred to as the Carrier Field. RDA Carrier types are
extremely specific. Each format of the information (text,
audio, unmediated information, etc.) requires specific types
of carriers. For example, you cannot put an audio music file
on a flipchart or a book. Therefore, information or data is
carried on items that will accurately and consistently impart
                               MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA | 63

that information to a user. The tables below have again been
taken from the Library of Congress. 3

   Unlike the other two 33X fields, 338 only allows two
characters for an entry. Still, it incorporates the RDA data to
allow humans to read the record.

   This table includes all carriers of information that is
presented in an audio format.

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for RDA                                       MARC
                            terms - 338 $b                                           007/01
audio cartridge             sg                                                       g - 007
audio belt                  sb                                                       b - 007
audio cylinder              se                                                       e - 007/
audio disc                  sd                                                       d - 007
sound track reel            si                                                       i - 007/
audio roll                  sq                                                       q - 007
audio wire reel             sw                                                       w - 007
audiocassette               ss                                                       s - 007/
audiotape reel              st                                                       t - 007/
other                       sz                                                       z - 007/

3. Library of Congress (2019, July 11). "Term and code list for RDA carrier types."
  Retrieved on December 6, 2022, from https://www.loc.gov/standards/valuelist/
  rdacarrier.html.
64 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA

These carriers are all an iteration of a computer, whether it is a
resource found online, a cartridge, or a compact or floppy disk.

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                          MARC
                            RDA terms - 338 $b                      007/01
computer card               ck                                      k - 007
computer chip cartridge     cb                                      b - 007
computer disc               cd                                      d - 007
computer disc cartridge     ce                                      e - 007/
computer tape cartridge     ca                                      a - 007
computer tape cassette      cf                                      f - 007/
computer tape reel          ch                                      h - 007
online resource             cr                                      r - 007/
other                       cz                                      z - 007/

You may notice that the carriers in the table below mostly
have the prefix "micro-". These carriers are formats that were
recorded on a film so small that it could hold thousands of
documents. Microfiche and microfilm are the most popular
carriers of this category, but there are many others, as you can
see below.
MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA | 65

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                    MARC
                            RDA terms - 338 $b                007/01
aperture card               ha                                a - 007
microfiche                  he                                e - 007/
microfiche cassette         hf                                f - 007/
microfilm cartridge         hb                                b - 007
microfilm cassette          hc                                c - 007
microfilm reel              hd                                d - 007
microfilm roll              hj                                j - 007/
microfilm slip              hh                                h - 007
microopaque                 hg                                g - 007
other                       hz                                z - 007/

A separate category exists for microscope slides and other
visual material created in a scientific lab.

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for RDA                MARC
microscope slide            terms - 338 $b                    - Biblio
other
                            pp                                p - 008

                            pz                                no code

Yet another category contains only those data carriers that
project their data onto another material for proper viewing.
66 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                        MARC
                            RDA terms - 338 $b                    codes -
film cartridge              mc                                    c - 007
film cassette               mf                                    f - 007/
film reel                   mr                                    r - 007/
film roll                   mo                                    o - 007
filmslip                    gd                                    d - 007
filmstrip                   gf                                    f - 007/
filmstrip cartridge         gc                                    c - 007
overhead transparency       gt                                    t - 007/
slide                       gs                                    s - 007/
                                                                  z - 007/
other                       mz                                    007/01

What exactly is a stereograph? This is an image that was made
in duplicate for special viewing in a stereoscope. An individual
looks through the stereoscope at two nearly-identical images.
The result is that both eyes combine the image and create
a more crisp picture than if both eyes had only viewed one
image. The resulting image is almost three-dimensional in
quality.
MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA | 67

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                          MARC
                            RDA terms - 338 $b                      codes -
stereograph card
stereograph disc            eh                                      h - 007
other
                            es                                      s - 007/

                            ez                                      no code

A user who works with items in this category, unmediated
carriers, needs no external tools to be able to access their data.
These carriers, especially $avolume$bnc, are the most common
item sought after in a library.

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                          MARC
                            RDA terms - 338 $b
card                        no                                      no code
flipchart                   nn                                      no code
roll                        na                                      no code
sheet                       nb                                      no code
volume                      nc                                      no code
object                      nr                                      r - Bibl
other                       nz                                      no code

While volumes and other unmediated carriers are the
predominant resource sought after in a library, video carriers
have become more sought after since the 1970s. Videocassettes
68 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA

(VHS or Betamax), video cartridges, and videodiscs (LaserDisc
or DVD) are all examples of video carriers.

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                       MARC
                            RDA terms - 338 $b                   01
video cartridge             vc                                   c - 007
videocassette               vf                                   f - 007/
videodisc                   vd                                   d - 007
videotape reel              vr                                   r - 007/
other                       vz                                   z - 007/

Our final category of carriers has only one entry: unspecified.
This is most frequently used in archives or other repositories
who have no way of determining the type of item they are
recording. Even by archival standards, this would be grounds
for refusing to accession an item (if it is donated) or
deaccessioning (if the item has previously been in the
collection).

RDA carrier terms - 338 $a  MARC codes for                       MARC
unspecified                 RDA terms - 338 $b                   - 007/0

                            zu                                   u - 007

Apply Your Knowledge

Use your newfound knowledge and love for RDA and all its
                               MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA | 69

complications to examine the differences between carriers,
content, and media.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=47#h5p-10
70 | MARC 336, 337, AND 338 FIELDS IN RDA
                                                                 CALL NUMBERS | 71

PART III

CALL NUMBERS
72 | CALL NUMBERS
                              UNDERSTANDING DDC CALL NUMBERS | 73

6.

UNDERSTANDING DDC
CALL NUMBERS

The Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) was created by
Melvil Dewey in 1873 and is still used by libraries today to
organize their collections. The DDC strives to assign all the
knowledge in the world to 10 different topical areas organized
by number so that each range of numbers (starting with
000-099) is assigned a broad topic area. Below is an outline of
these topics.

Dewey Decimal Classification System: Topics

000-099: Computer Science, Information and General Works
   100-199: Philosophy and Psychology
   200-299: Religion
   300-399: Social Sciences
   400-499: Languages
   500-599: Science
   600-699: Technology
   700-799: Arts & Recreation
   800-899: Literature
74 | UNDERSTANDING DDC CALL NUMBERS

   900-999: History & Geography
   These 10 broad topics are then subdivided into 10 more
specific topics. As an example, the 900s-History & Geography
is divided below.
   900-909: History
   910-919: Geography & Travel
   920-929: Biography & Genealogy
   930-939: History of the Ancient World (to ca. 499)
   940-949: History of Europe
   950-959: History of Asia
   960-969: History of Africa
   970-979: History of North America
   980-989: History of South America
   990-999: History of Other Areas
   And then these get broken down even further! Let's look at
the 970s.
   970: History of North America
   971: Canada
   972: Mexico, Central America, West Indies
   973: United States
   974: Northeastern United States
   975: Southeastern United States
   976: South Central United States
   977: North Central United States
   978: Western United States
   979: Great Basin & Pacific Slope region
   Occasionally, these ranges are referenced by Xs. For
                              UNDERSTANDING DDC CALL NUMBERS | 75

example, if one were going to look at the whole category of
Technology, it would be referred to as "6XX". Sometimes
asteriks are used in place of Xs.

   We've examined in relative detail the History and
Geography section of the Dewey Decimal System, so we are
not going to use that for our example. When looking at the
Foundation trilogy book we can see that its Dewey number is in
the 800s. That means it is a piece of literature. It is specifically
in the 813, which means it is a piece of literature from North
America that deals with a fictional subject. The decimal point
is .54. This means that the book was written in the twentieth
century, specifically from 1945 to 1999. Further scrutiny can
show that the Dewey Decimal System is somewhat flexible
when it comes to local institutions or consortiums. However,
the first five or six numerals are determined by these broader
categories.

   After the numbers following the decimal point, many books
have Cutter numbers. These numbers may follow another
decimal point, but usually they follow a space. The first
symbols in the Cutter number are one to three letters from
the author's last name. The next symbols are one to three
numbers. These numbers correspond to the particular author
and place the item in a particular place in the context of their
works. For example, The Foundation trilogy may have a final
number of 5, while Foundation's Edge, the next work in the
series, could have a final number of 6. Cutter numbers are
present in both LOC and Dewey Classifications.
76 | UNDERSTANDING DDC CALL NUMBERS

   Another feature of the Dewey Decimal System, and other
cataloging systems, is the ability to segment certain portions
of a call number. This means that similar call numbers can
be used for the same book if one repository has a need for a
longer call number than another one. Usually this is done with
a forward slash mark (/). This means that if a library does not
need a call number with fourteen places, they can use the call
number the precedes the slash mark after five places.

   In this exercise, you will need to know your institution's
login for WebDewey, Connexion, and potentially the LC
Classification Web site. We will explore this site in more detail
in future exercises, but basic navigation skills can help you
complete these tasks. If you do not have access to WebDewey,
try to use the Open Access provided by LibraryThing on their
Melvil Decimal System page. You may not be able to answer all
of the questions, but try to do the best you can.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=49#h5p-11

The above tasks helped you find and interpret Dewey Decimal
Numbers according to subject, but there are more features
such as Cutter numbers that have to be understood to make
                              UNDERSTANDING DDC CALL NUMBERS | 77

a completely accurate number. We will explore these features
when we create DDNs.

   Sometimes, genre, language, or format are a factor in
creating a call number. These rules can be adapted and
combined with other schemata to create a system that fits the
needs of every library. For information about designating
format, language, or other facets of an item before the rest of
the call number, see the page on Shelving.

   Additional Information:
   DDC 23 Summaries, by OCLC, the corporation that
controls many services related to Dewey.
   Introduction to the Dewey Decimal Classification, also by
OCLC
   Technical Introduction to the DDC, which explains the
DDC in much more detail. This presentation even goes so
far as to state the OCLC's preferences regarding subjects of a
certain age.

This chapter is adapted from a LibreTexts page titled 8.8:
Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC), which was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Walter D. Butler; Aloha Sargent;
and Kelsey Smith and is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license.
  78 | UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS

 7.

 UNDERSTANDING LC
 CALL (CATALOG)
 NUMBERS

  In contrast to the DDC, the Library of Congress Classification
  system (LCC) strives to divide all the world's knowledge into
  21 topical areas and groups them alphanumerically. That is,
  they first assign a topic area to a letter, and then divide that
  topic up by numbers. Created by the U.S. Library of Congress
  to meet the needs of its collection, the first outline of the LCC
  was released in 1904.1

     When learning about the Library of Congress Classification
  System and rules, you will be tempted to throw your hands up
  in the air and ask "Why?" Do not do this, for your own sanity.
  As my colleague Miranda says, "When it comes to the LCC

1. "Library of Congress Classification." (2020, June 23). Librarianship Studies &
  Information Technology, R23. Retrieved on December 6, 2022, from
  https://www.librarianshipstudies.com/2017/11/library-of-congress-
  classification.html.
                 UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS | 79

system, we catalogers should not ask questions. We should
just do what we are told by the schedules, tables, and rules.
If we ask questions, we will quickly lose our sanity." This is
sage advice and should, again, be followed for preservation of
your mental health. Writing this section of the textbook was
difficult enough. Don't do mental work that I have already
done on your behalf.

   When it comes to the subject headings and captions used,
however, we can and must ask questions. Some headings and
captions are inherently imbued with the perspectives and
biases of past catalogers and librarians. For example, members
and aspects of the LGBTQ+ community were previously
classed under a variety of diseases and disorders, or "sexual
deviations," until this was rectified in the 2020 edition of the
Library of Congress Classification Schedules. Now, these
groups are classified under "Sexual practices outside of social
norms" and "Sexual minorities," which are more apt
characterizations.

Library of Congress Classification

A: General Works
   B: Philosophy, Psychology, Religion
   C: Auxiliary Sciences of History
   D: World History
   E: History of the Americas
   F: History of the Americas
   G: Geography, Anthropology, Recreation
80 | UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS

   H: Social Sciences
   J: Political Science
   K: Law
   L: Education
   M: Music
   N: Fine Arts
   P: Language and Literature
   Q: Science
   R: Medicine
   S: Agriculture
   T: Technology
   U: Military Science
   V: Naval Science
   Z: Bibliography, Library Science, Information Resources
   The LCC then adds more letter and numbers after each
letter to get more specific within each topic area. Some classes,
or "schedules," use more than one letter while others only use
one letter followed by numbers. The main difference between
the Dewey Decimal System and the Library of Congress is
that this system classifies knowledge according to disciplines
rather than subject matter. Therefore, both railroads and the
economic and agricultural economy are classified under H
(Economy) rather than Technology (T) or Agriculture (S).
   Other numbers in the main subject number deal with the
years covered in a particular work. Sometimes, subject and year
numbers are so complex that they are divided by periods as
well. Thus, there could be three or four Cutter numbers before
                 UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS | 81

the space that precedes an author or year Cutter number. The
author and/or year number are considered a joint number
called the "Item Number." This is why we say that there is only
one Cutter number in the LCC system. Technically, there is
only a base number with zero, one, or more decimal places, and
a second number made up of a symbol for the author, the title,
the format, and/or the year of publication.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=51#h5p-18

Arrangement of Schedule
Sections

There is a particular order that is usually utilized to create and
order subdivisions in schedules.

 1. Usually, the first divisions of the subdivision are different
      forms, such as periodicals and dictionaries.

 2. Second, study and teaching elements, such as textbooks,
      methodology works, and research publications, are given
      their own subclasses.
82 | UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS

 3. General works about a subject follow in the third
      subdivision.

 4. Special topics are next, and may have multiple
      subdivisions.

 5. Subjects that have divisions by geographic area usually
      have these divisions last in their subclass division schema.

Forms are the last resort of captions and classifying. Thus, the
general label of periodicals and serials should only be used if
the work covers a general topic in a serial form. For example, if
a serial publication examines Communities, Classes, and Races
from a broad perspective then it should have the call number
of HT1501. If a work is specifically about cancer and is a
periodical, it should be published under the periodical
designation regarding cancer, RC251.A1, instead of the
General Periodicals and Serials call number for Internal
medicine. Cancer, it may be argued, is also a broad category.
However, in the context of internal diseases, which is
designated by the RC schedule symbol, cancer is only one
specific disease.

The "P" Schedule: Language and
Literature

Literature, which is primarily poetry or prose fiction, is a
unique schedule that has necessarily broad geographic and
chronological subclasses. The first division of literature in the
                 UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS | 83

"P" schedule is by language. Then, the works are divided by
time period of the work. These time periods do not designate
the life of the author but the time period in which they were
creatively active. Then, the geographic location or citizenship
of the author is used to further subdivide. If that is not relevant
or apparent, the country with which the author was associated
throughout their writing career can be used.

   Next, each individual author has their own Cutter number.
Some authors have a Cutter number that has been specially
assigned by the Library of Congress. Isaac Asimov's is
PS3551.S5. Samuel "Mark Twain" Clemens' is PS1300-1348,
which means that call numbers between 1300 and 1348 are
all reserved for various works and groups of works created by
Samuel Clemens.

   Nonfiction works by authors should be classified by their
topic rather than in the literature section with the fictional
works of the author. This may be confusing but can allow
users to differentiate between information and entertainment.

   If authors have written works in more than one language,
each language will have its own call number for that author.

   If an author does not have a Cutter number, one can be
created in the section for that language's and geographical
division's "Individual authors, A-Z" range. You must pay
attention to the schedule, the catalog, and the Names
Authority catalog.

   Sometimes, genre, language, or format are a factor in
creating a call number. these rules can be adapted and
84 | UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS

combined with other schemata to create a system that fits the
needs of every library. For information about designating
format, language, or other facets of an item before the rest of
the call number, see the page on Shelving.

How to Find a Book on the Shelf

Please watch this video explanation, which demonstrates the
different elements of LCC call numbers and how they are
ordered on a library shelf:

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=51#oembed-1

This tutorial will teach you how to read a call number. A call
number is found taped to the front or side of a library item to
help you locate it on the shelf. This tutorial will show you how
to read a call number using this book, "Nursing Management
for the Elderly." Its catalog entry shows the call number in a
straight line. Looking at the spine, here is the call number.

   On the book, the call number is divided into four parts. The
                 UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS | 85

first part, "RC," will be found between "RB" and "RD." The
next part, RC954 will be found between RC953 and RC955.
The third part of the call number, the letter and number
combination, is read as a decimal.

   Any letter and number combinations should be read as
decimals. Therefore, in decimals, 0.89 is greater than 0.884.

   Our book is found between this book, "Nursing Care for
the Older Adult," RC954.N884, and this book, "Nursing
Older People," RC954.N893.

   Finally, the last part of the call number is the year that the
book was published. At this point, you've probably got the
book in hand.

   If you have any more questions, contact the librarian by
phone, chat, email, or in person at the reference desk.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=51#h5p-21

To explore the Library of Congress Classification System, use
the LCC Library Tool that is similar to that created by the
LibraryThing for the Dewey Decimal System. This tool is not
as intuitive as the other one, but the LCC is not as intuitive as
the Dewey Decimal System.
86 | UNDERSTANDING LC CALL (CATALOG) NUMBERS

Parts of this chapter were adapted from a LibreTexts page titled
8.10: Library of Congress Classification (LCC), which was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by Walter D. Butler; Aloha
Sargent; and Kelsey Smith and is shared under a CC BY 4.0
license.

   Parts of this page were adapted from the Library of
Congress Classification Online Training created by Janis L.
Young and Daniel N. Joudrey on behalf of the Library of
Congress. As an official government publication, this training
is in the public domain.
                    CREATING CALL NUMBERS USING DEWEY DECIMAL
                                                                CLASSIFICATION | 87

8.

CREATING CALL
NUMBERS USING
DEWEY DECIMAL
CLASSIFICATION

Creation, Adoption, or Formation?

Technically, catalogers today rarely "create" a Dewey Decimal
Number for an item out of whole cloth. Instead, they use
multiple tools to find what other catalogers have done. OCLC
Connexion is one service that provides this connection.
Catalogers search for a work on that site and are given multiple
records to choose from. Then, they select the most appropriate
MARC record and base the record for their institution on
their selection, altering it as necessary. If they do not agree with
the MARC record, for example the subject headings or the
Dewey Decimal number, they can change elements if needed.

   At times, however, research behind the Dewey Decimal
Number is needed, whether this is to verify the subject of the
work or to create one's own Dewey Decimal Number. This
88 | CREATING CALL NUMBERS USING DEWEY DECIMAL
CLASSIFICATION

is where WebDewey or an open source alternative is useful.
These tools can help researchers examine the details of coming
up with a specific DDN for a work. There are a plethora of
rules and guidelines to using these tools, so we will come back
to this subject later.

Dewey Decimal Number
Formation

After the numbers following the decimal point, many books
have Cutter numbers. These numbers may follow another
decimal point, but usually they follow a space. The first
symbols in the Cutter number are one to three letters from
the author's last name. The next symbols are one to three
numbers. These numbers correspond to the particular author
and place the item in a particular place in the context of their
works. For example, The Foundation trilogy may have a final
number of 5, while Foundation's Edge, the next work in the
series, could have a final number of 6. Cutter numbers are
present in both LOC and Dewey Classifications.

   We have already discussed how Dewey Decimal Call
Numbers are created using general categories on the left of the
number. More numbers means that a work has been placed in
an increasingly specific category. The first five or six numbers
of the Dewey Decimal Call Number place an item in its
categories. After this first batch of characters comes the Cutter
number.
                    CREATING CALL NUMBERS USING DEWEY DECIMAL
                                                               CLASSIFICATION | 89

   The Cutter number for any work by Asimov when
described in the Dewey Decimal System is AS832. So, if we add
the "5" theoretical end number, the complete Dewey Decimal
Call Number is 813.54 As8325.

   How did I get the call number initial digits for The
Foundation trilogy? Well, there are several resources one can
examine to determine the most appropriate category. For
example, the most specific category represented in the Dewey
Decimal Call Number was the year range from 1945 to 1999.
This was found on the publishing page. The country, and the
fact that the item is a work of fiction, can also be found on the
table of contents. Obviously the work is a piece of literature, so
that places it is the broadest category of 800.

   The themes of the books can also be major helps to those
who are trying to determine the category in which an item
should be placed. Useful elements include:

 1. Item Title
 2. Chapter titles
 3. Introduction
 4. Subject headings on the publishing page
 5. Records made by other institutions, such as OCLC or a

      Library Consortium.

Look Up Dewey Decimal Numbers

There are multiple methods one can use for free to access the
90 | CREATING CALL NUMBERS USING DEWEY DECIMAL
CLASSIFICATION

Dewey Decimal Classification System. If you do not have
access to WebDewey, we will use the Open Access provided
by LibraryThing on their Melvil Decimal System page. If you
have a WebDewey account, you can also use this account to
search for DDC categories. Access to OCLC Connexion is
imperative, as that program will help you find the most
accurate MARC records for each item. There is no reliable
Open Access counterpart to this system.

   Let us try to look up some Dewey Decimal Call Numbers
for some other items.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=53#h5p-12

These tools will get you access to the first few numbers. To
generate a Dewey Decimal Cutter number, use the tool
provided by ALT at http://cutternumber.com/. Some Cutter
numbers are a combination of this process and the Library of
Congress classification system.

   After the subject number and Cutter number, be sure to
place a year. This will further differentiate each item that has
a similar subject and same author. If two books have the same
subject and author and were published in the same year, there
                    CREATING CALL NUMBERS USING DEWEY DECIMAL
                                                                CLASSIFICATION | 91

are multiple methods to differentiate. One can either have a
more specific Dewey Decimal Number on one of the books or
add a letter after the year. The latter option is preferred.
92 | CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

9.

CREATING CUTTERS
USING THE LIBRARY OF
CONGRESS
CLASSIFICATION
SYSTEM

The last LCC chapter examined the essentials of the LCC
system. Now, we will put that to work and create an LCC
number for a book. Most of this effort will be put toward
creating Cutter numbers.

   In the Library of Congress classification system, The
Foundation trilogy has the call number PS3551.S5 A6 1982.
This call number falls within the subclass PS, which includes
all American literature. The number range after the subclass
designation is 3500-3549. This number range consists of all
American literature created between 1900 to 1960.

   While the Cutter number is A6, another Cutter number,
and perhaps the most thorough one, is A85668. The A6
Cutter number is not an author number but a "type of work"
Cutter number generated for fiction. A6 states that the item in
                CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
                                                      CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM | 93

  question is a selected work. The year 1982 is the year that the
  omnibus edition was published.

     This is the guide table for the creation of LCC Cutter
  numbers:1

1. Library of Congress. Cutter Table. Retrieved on December 6, 2022 from
  https://www.loc.gov/aba/pcc/053/table.html.
94 | CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

1. After initial vowel

for the second letter: b d l-m n p r s-t u-y
use number: 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

2. After initial letter S

for the second letter: a ch e h-i m-p t u w-z
use number: 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

3. After initial letters Qu

for the third     aei o r            t y
letter:

use number: 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

For initial letters Qa-Qt, use 2-29

4. After other initial consonants

for the second letter: a e i o r u y
use number: 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

5. For expansion

for the letter: a-d e-h i-l m-o p-s t-v w-z

use number: 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

If you are creating a Cutter number based on a title that begins
with numbers, use .A12-.A29 as your Cutter number, using
             CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
                                                   CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM | 95

.A12 for extremely low points of the number range in your
holdings and .A29 as the high point.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=55#h5p-22

Remember that if a letter comes up that is not in the table for
some reason (for example, if you are making a Cutter for the
surname Thomasin, the letter "h" will not appear in the table).
In this instance, use the number for the letter in the table that
most immediately precedes it. Below is an edited version of the
table along these lines.
96 | CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

                                                                  This
                                                                  version
                                                                  of the
                                                                  Cutter
                                                                  table
                                                                  above
                                                                  adds a
                                                                  letter
                                                                  range
                                                                  that
                                                                  should be
                                                                  used if
                                                                  secondar
                                                                  y letters
                                                                  are not
                                                                  included
                                                                  in the
                                                                  original
                                                                  version.

Sometimes, in the case of authors especially, the cutter number

refers to a name. According to the Classification Schedule,

in some instances the letter of the first cutter number is the

second letter of the author's last name. The numbers following

it are generated by the table above. For example, the "S5" in the

Cutter number above is a Cutter number that refers to "s-i"

from the last name "Asimov."

   Occasionally, you will need to make a Cutter number for

the book or author that is not from the Cutter Table. In fact,

you should create Cutter numbers primarily based on

availability of the Cutter. The number directed by the table

may already be taken for one reason or another. The Cutter
             CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
                                                   CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM | 97

Table should be used only if the appropriate Table number has
not been taken by another item or author in the catalog. The
general rule is to avoid 0s, 1s, or 2s in your Cutter number.
You should ensure that Cutter numbers are as short as possible
and fit within the alphabetic listings already in the library. For
example, if the Cutter Number for Strong is .S77 but there
is already another author with Strong as a surname whose
first name comes before the new author's in the alphabet, the
Cutter number might need to be .S78 or .S773 or .S774.

   Author Cutter numbers are the second, and most common,
cutter numbers. However, there are also topical cutter
numbers. For instance, the cutter number for Acorns is A3.
Bananas, on the other hand, are B3. If you cannot find a
Cutter number, fit the number alphabetically between the
other entries in the "A-Z" list according to the rules for author
surnames in the paragraph above.

   When creating Cutter numbers for works by corporate
entities or societies, the same Cutter number should be used
for all works. Years or work numbers (lowercase letters) should
differentiate between parts of monographs and discrete
resources.

   When assigning a Cutter number based on a corporate or
government-associated group, the broadest corporate name
should be used to assign a Cutter number. For example, if
the American Historical Association has a Cutter number of
.A46, then the Utah chapter of that organization should also
have a Cutter number of .A46. Jurisdiction areas for
98 | CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

corporations, government-associated institutions, and
government departments should be ignored unless they are in
the title or the first subheading.

   If departments of a government are responsible for a specific
work, the name of the parent department should be used, not
any of its subgroups. In a comparable fashion, only the first
subheading of a government department or group that has
multiple subheadings should be considered.

   Editions and abridgments should have similar but distinct
Cutter numbers. Translations of works should have the same
Cutter number as the original work or edition, being
distinguished by a year and/or another Cutter number.

   When corporations are the subject of a work, that work
should be assigned the same Cutter number as a work that
was created by that corporation. This Cutter number should
be accompanied by another Cutter number that specifies the
author or the date. This will ensure that those who are paying
attention to cataloging rules will know that the work is about
a corporation rather than by a corporation.

   The same thing is true if a person is the subject of a
biography. If they are an expert on a particular subject and have
created a work on that subject, a biography about them should
be entered on that subject, with the same subject Cutter
number. The person's cutter number may be recorded but can
also be replaced by that of the author of the biography.
             CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
                                                   CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM | 99

Apply your Knowledge

Now let's try to make some LCC Cutter numbers. Check out
the LCC Outline, including PDFs that go into more detail
than the list on the other LCC page. This will give you the first
block of letters and numbers that should be included in the call
number. Remember to be as specific as you reasonably can to
give a unique cutter number to the item.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=55#h5p-23

In order to create an LOC Cutter number, use the table above
or go to https://calculate.alptown.com/. Use the website by
clicking on "LC Cutter" (which should be the default
selection anyhow) and typing in at least the first three letters
of the last name of the author. In either case, be prepared to
defend your answer using the table.

General Principles of Classification have been prepared by the
Library of Congress to guide catalogers in assigning books to
100 | CREATING CUTTERS USING THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

particular subjects in the LCC. For example, this document
reviews whether or not to emphasize the geographic setting of
the work over its subject. Catalogers are encouraged once again
to be as specific as possible.

   Expansion upon these principles is often necessary to be
able to classify works and create call numbers for specific items.
Catalogers often also need to be able to view entire classes as
a group and organize them. To enable catalogers to handle the
minutiae of their daily tasks, the Library of Congress created
an Online Training on the LCC.

   Sometimes it is best to learn about these things through
reading, and obviously it is impossible to give guidance on
every situation in a textbook such as this, even though it is
online. The Library of Congress Classification and Shelflisting
Manual will help you with any questions regarding best
practices and tricky cataloging decisions.
                                         CLASSIFICATION WEBSITE AIDS | 101

PART IV

CLASSIFICATION
WEBSITE AIDS
102 | CLASSIFICATION WEBSITE AIDS
            USING OCLC CONNEXION | 103

10.

USING OCLC
CONNEXION

OCLC Connexion is a service that has proliferated across the
world. Its purpose is to allow libraries to share MARC records
and profit from each other's work. There are multiple benefits
to this tool, including standardization, learning from others'
perspectives and work, and saving time that would otherwise
have been spent creating detailed MARC records.

   Mostly, Connexion is used to perform searches for work
catalog records that can be adopted by a local institution for
metadata recording. Once you have signed into OCLC
Connexion, go to the Cataloging page and ensure that you
are searching through WorldCat's records. WorldCat is the
worldwide catalog created through the collaboration of all
libraries that are part of the OCLC network.
104 | USING OCLC CONNEXION

                            The
                            search
                            page has
                            two main
                            options:
                            Comman
                            d Line
                            Search
                            and
                            Keyword
                            Search.

The most frequent search you will do in Connexion will be
the "Keyword/Numeric Search." You can search for a work's
title, the name of the author, the publisher, the language, the
medium in which the work was presented, and the years of
publication. Many other aspects of a work or item can be
searched. Searches that are too broad or too specific may not
result in any satisfactory results. For example, a broad search
for "second foundation" in the title field, "asimov, isaac" in
the author field and English as the language yielded over five
hundred results.
                                                 USING OCLC CONNEXION | 105

                                                                  Over five
                                                                  hundred
                                                                  results
                                                                  appear
                                                                  after a
                                                                  search
                                                                  containin
                                                                  g two
                                                                  title
                                                                  words,
                                                                  the
                                                                  author
                                                                  name,
                                                                  and work
                                                                  language.

Once we included the year of publication, 1953, results were
decreased to only thirty.

                                                                  Thirty
                                                                  results
                                                                  appeared
                                                                  after a
                                                                  search
                                                                  containin
                                                                  g title,
                                                                  author,
                                                                  and year
                                                                  informati
                                                                  on.

Including the publisher, Gnome Press, yielded three results.
106 | USING OCLC CONNEXION

We were easily able to select the most accurate record from
these three.

                                                                  Title,
                                                                  author,
                                                                  language,
                                                                  publicatio
                                                                  n year,
                                                                  and
                                                                  publisher
                                                                  name
                                                                  searches
                                                                  can result
                                                                  in very
                                                                  limited
                                                                  search
                                                                  results,
                                                                  as seen
                                                                  here.

There are a myriad of searches one can perform on Connexion,
including Title, Title Phrase, and Author. Title searches for
keywords in the title, while Title Phrase looks for an exact
phrase as typed in the search box. Remember that you should
search for items with all lowercase letters, even if they are
capitalized in the title or in a name. Titles in MARC records
only have their first letter capitalized, and sometimes not even
that. Also remember to search for people with their last name
first, a comma, and then their given name.
                                                 USING OCLC CONNEXION | 107

                                                                  This
                                                                  screensh
                                                                  ot shows
                                                                  the
                                                                  search
                                                                  terms
                                                                  used to
                                                                  get the
                                                                  results in
                                                                  the last
                                                                  image. It
                                                                  also
                                                                  models
                                                                  the most
                                                                  effective
                                                                  methodol
                                                                  ogy for
                                                                  searching
                                                                  in OCLC
                                                                  Connexio
                                                                  n.

While it is less intuitive, you can search for items through the

Command Line Search. Usually, this is beneficial if you know

an ISBN to search for an item. However, you can also use a

limiter in this search by using the symbol at the beginning of a

Field designation in the Keyword/Numerical Search box. For

example, if you are searching for a title word, type "ti:" and

then the title keywords.
108 | USING OCLC CONNEXION

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=62#h5p-16

Usually, there are two informal ways to determine which
record has the most accurate. The first is through the
preponderance of use instances of the record. In other words,
the record with the highest number after the label "Holdings"
at the end of its summary in the results page is frequently
the most accurate and thorough record. Another way is to
examine whether or not the record has a blue label near its end.
For example, a blue label of "DLC" is a sign that that record
is the official catalog record used by the Library of Congress
in its holdings. Results can be limited to DLC or other "blue
box records" by selecting DLC in the Source section of the
Keyword/Numeric Search.
                                                 USING OCLC CONNEXION | 109

                                                                  This
                                                                  search
                                                                  results
                                                                  page
                                                                  contains
                                                                  only
                                                                  "blue
                                                                  box"
                                                                  results,
                                                                  which
                                                                  indicates
                                                                  that they
                                                                  are
                                                                  preferred
                                                                  records.
                                                                  DLC
                                                                  records in
                                                                  particular
                                                                  are
                                                                  preferred,
                                                                  as they
                                                                  have
                                                                  been
                                                                  created
                                                                  by the
                                                                  Library of
                                                                  Congress.

Click the number at the right of the catalog record in the

results page that you want to use. You will be taken directly to

a large MARC record for the work. You can see all pertinent

fields and even print or export the record for your own uses.
110 | USING OCLC CONNEXION

                            This is a
                            Library of
                            Congress
                            MARC
                            record for
                            the novel
                            MEXICA
                            N
                            GOTHIC.

How do you access these files, though? One way is through
Exporting. In the middle menu, click "Export Record in
MARC." Then, click on "Express" and "Download Export."
Click on the most recent record and you will have the record
on your server. Other options for use include creating a local
holdings record with your institution and viewing other local
holdings on Connexion to request an Inter-Library Loan.
These are other facets of library cataloging that will not be
discussed in this course. They will be discussed, however, in
the Introduction to Library Science course.

   One can also search for Authority records on this system,
but the Library of Congress official Subject and Name
Authorities list is more... authoritative. Clicking on the Dewey
Services link will take one to WebDewey.
                                                           USING WEBDEWEY | 111

11.

USING WEBDEWEY

Connexion and WebDewey are designed to be used together
with ease, which makes sense because they were created by the
same organization, OCLC. We will explore how to navigate
WebDewey in a more detailed way than you have had to do for
earlier exercises.

Home Page

Once you have signed in with your institutional login
information, you will be taken to the standard home page of
WebDewey.
112 | USING WEBDEWEY

                      This is
                      the page
                      you see
                      once you
                      log in to
                      WebDew
                      ey.

On the home page of WebDewey, there is a standard search bar
with a button. This is useful for some searches, but there are
also many other tools available on the home page that may be
more immediately useful.

   The top bar that has orange buttons has various ways of
looking at the information contained with WebDewey. Aside
from a regular Search option, there are also Advanced search
and Browse options, as well as links to Comments and
Updates. The Advanced Search and Browse options will be
much more helpful than a regular search, as you will see
through this description.

   The bottom left of the home page has a table with three
rows. These represent all of the information contained in the
23rd edition of the Dewey Decimal Classification System. The
                                                           USING WEBDEWEY | 113

top row contains links to all main classes of the Dewey system,
from 000 to 900 (or 0XX to 9XX). The second row contains
the Nine Tables, from T1 to T6 (T3 has three subtables,
named A, B, and C), that help catalogers append numbers
based on subject, publisher motivation and publication type.
The third row holds the Dewey Decimal Manual, and
Introduction to the system, a Glossary of terms, and
Relocations and Discontinuations information for past
editions.

   On the right side of the home page is an abridged edition
of the Dewey Decimal System. This type of system is only
on its 15th edition and has four tables instead of nine. The
same resources for the unabridged edition are available for the
abridged edition.

Navigating Forward

Now we will explore what happens when you decide to move
forward in your investigation by clicking on one of the
multiple options provided for finding a Dewey Decimal call
number. Whatever you decide, you will eventually come to the
same type of page that has standardized features and options.

Selecting a Main Class

If you proceed by selecting a main class from either one of the
Dewey Decimal tables at the bottom of the home page, you
114 | USING WEBDEWEY

will be taken to a page that has that class' subclasses listed out.
Some of these will be individualized and some will be in lists.
For example, the range of 220 to 290 is listed as "Bible and
specific religions."

                                                                  This page
                                                                  appears
                                                                  when
                                                                  you click
                                                                  on the
                                                                  200
                                                                  range on
                                                                  WebDew
                                                                  ey.

When you select one of these subclasses, or click on a range
and get to a specific subclass, you will to taken to yet another
subclass list, sometimes within the same page. Eventually, you
will be taken to a page that lists the decimal points down to
a degree of some specificity. As you progress further, your
decimal numbers will have more places until you reach a point
at which you cannot add any more subject levels. This is where
you would go to a Table for additional numbers if needed.
                                                           USING WEBDEWEY | 115

                                                                  Selecting
                                                                  increasin
                                                                  gly
                                                                  longer
                                                                  numbers
                                                                  will lead
                                                                  to
                                                                  captions
                                                                  and
                                                                  categorie
                                                                  s of
                                                                  increasin
                                                                  g
                                                                  specificity
                                                                  .

Selecting a Table

If you select a table, you will be taken to a page that has a large
section of notes. These paragraphs will guide you as to how
you should use that specific table. The most common Table
used is Table 1. Links to specific numbers, the most common
numbers, are given with definitions for those numbers. In a
box with the Table Number followed by "Standard
Subdivisions," you can browse all numbers of the table
beginning at the broadest categories and proceeding lower.
116 | USING WEBDEWEY

                      Each
                      table
                      page
                      contains
                      notes for
                      how to
                      use it as
                      well as
                      lists of its
                      subdivisi
                      ons.

All table numbers begin with 0. Table numbers should never
be used as as the basis for a Dewey Decimal number. Instead,
they should be tagged on to the base number after the subject
has been thoroughly identified. The "0" at the beginning of
the number should always be included. If the base number
ends with a "0", the two zeros should be combined. For
example, if the base number were 630 and the number from
Table 1 was 03, the result would be "630.3," which stands for
"Agriculture-dictionaries encyclopedias, concordances."
                                                           USING WEBDEWEY | 117

                                                                  This
                                                                  screen,
                                                                  particular
                                                                  ly the
                                                                  "Synthesi
                                                                  zed
                                                                  number
                                                                  compone
                                                                  nts" box,
                                                                  shows
                                                                  how the
                                                                  Dewey
                                                                  Decimal
                                                                  Number
                                                                  630.3
                                                                  was
                                                                  created.

As you click on specific table numbers, you will be guided by
notes that appear at the top of the page. As many of these
notes say, you should not use the subdivisions unless they are
specifically requested in the schedule or unless you have
specific reason to. To prevent miscategorization, sometimes
the notes state that certain types of works that may be
categorized under this table number should be categorized in
a specific subclass number instead. For example, the Table 1
number for biographies is 092, but the biography of an
individual that is not related to a specific topic is reserved for
subclass 920.
118 | USING WEBDEWEY

                      Notes on
                      Table
                      Numbers
                      can also
                      lend
                      insight
                      on how
                      to use
                      Class
                      Numbers.

Proceeding with a Regular Search

The search button can be selected whether or not you have
entered a query into the box. If one has used a search engine
much, their first instinct will be to use this search option.
However, it is only useful if one has patience and a keen eye.
For example, if one searches for 351, the subclass of the Dewey
Decimal System, which is likely what one was searching for,
will be the 23rd results instead of the top result. Instead, the
top 15 rows will be filled with Table numbers.
                                                          USING WEBDEWEY | 119

                                                                  When
                                                                  you
                                                                  search
                                                                  for a
                                                                  class
                                                                  number
                                                                  in the
                                                                  general
                                                                  search,
                                                                  such as a
                                                                  search
                                                                  for 351,
                                                                  you may
                                                                  not easily
                                                                  find what
                                                                  you are
                                                                  looking
                                                                  for.

Clicking on the search bar with no query will lead to a results
page that is empty. This will enable the searcher to browse
through specific fields or search in specific fields. There are
two bubbles next to the new search bar: Search and Browse. If
one selects browse, the default field being searched will be the
Dewey Numbers. Searching for 351 will result in the subfield
by that label occurring in the second entry rather than the
23rd. Other options for browsing include the Relative Index
list (a list of related categories), the Library of Congress Subject
Heading list, and the MeSH and Sears systems, which we will
not look into here.

   Clicking on the Search bubble will allow searches through
120 | USING WEBDEWEY

those options and more, including the Notes, Comments, and
Author fields. Be aware, though, that Searching for Dewey
Numbers rather than Browsing will still delay one's search for
the subclass. On the other hand, this may lead to exploring
new possibilities. Searching for 351 in Dewey Numbers
yielded a comparative result between subclass 351 and Dewey
Decimal Number 352.29. This page contained notes on when
each number was appropriate and less appropriate, as well as
recommendations for similar numbers.

                                                                  Search
                                                                  results
                                                                  with
                                                                  Dewey
                                                                  Numbers
                                                                  can lead
                                                                  to useful
                                                                  comparis
                                                                  on notes.

Proceeding with an Advanced Search

Selecting "Advanced Search" results in a page with five fields,
three preset to search "Relative Index" and two preset to search
                                                           USING WEBDEWEY | 121

the Library of Congress Subject Headings. All are connected
with the "AND" Boolean symbols. The Boolean symbol can
be AND, NOT, or OR. As many fields are needed can be used,
and the others will be ignored. Often, only one or two fields
will be used. This function can be used if one only wants to
search the Relative Index or the Author fields. As far as the
Library of Congress Subject Headings, it is already known
that the most accurate database of these Authorities is the
Authorities page maintained by the Library of Congress itself.

Browsing

Selecting "Browse" will lead to another iteration of the Browse
option presented after an initial search. At this point the
question may have arisen in your mind, "What is the difference
between browsing and searching? Aren't they essentially the
same thing?" They are similar, but searching is more specific
and intentional than browsing. When you browse, including
using this function in WebDewey, you are looking for a general
idea of the contents of a website or item. Searching includes
looking for a specific results or piece of information.

Coming to an Acceptable
Destination

Whatever method you select, you will eventually come to a
122 | USING WEBDEWEY

page that has multiple boxes. Usually, the top will contain
Notes on how to use the selection you have chosen. Below
that will be a box for comments. The last large box will be
the label of your selection, along with a logical record of how
the selection fits within Dewey subclasses and the broad class.
Below your selection will be possible options for more specific
subjects. You can go as specific as the system will allow.

   As you get into more specific numbers, sometimes a small
box containing Table information will be provided. This will
give information as to which tables were used to create a
certain Dewey Decimal number.

   Below the box labelled with your selection will be a box
containing Relative Index Terms for similar subjects, followed
by other sources for subject terms, including the Library of
Congress Subject Headings Authorities page.

   Above your selection will be a box labelled "Create built
number" with your selection listed, along with an option to
"Start." If you need to research how a particular Dewey
number was created, or if you would like to create a new
number, this is how you should proceed.

Apply Your Knowledge: Creating
Dewey Decimal Numbers with
Tables

In these exercises, you will learn how to create Dewey Decimal
                                                          USING WEBDEWEY | 123

Numbers through Tables. You will also demonstrate that
knowledge at the same time. There is no way to learn faster
than to practice!

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=60#h5p-13

As you learned through these processes, when building a
number you should always make sure that you press "ADD"
when creating a number when you have reached the most
specific number in a list. Without that, the system will not
recognize the addition as legitimate. This is a helpful feature
so that categorization is not inappropriate. However, it can be
difficult when you have to create a number and have no way
of knowing where you went wrong. Creating Dewey Decimal
subject class numbers requires both skill and concentration!
124 | USING CLASSIFICATION WEB

12.

USING CLASSIFICATION
WEB

Classification Web is the site used by catalogers who are using
the Library of Congress Classification System. There are
multiple types of searches one can perform on this website,
including through the schedules and tables and through
subject headings. It has a somewhat complicated interface, but
with some training it will be easy to navigate.

   Before we continue let me refer you to the Library of
Congress' Cataloging Workshop Page. This page is helpful
even for librarians who have been in the field for years and
years. The Online Training for the Library of Congress
Classification is a particularly excellent resource.

LCC Enhanced Browser

This is the second-most easy browser in Classification Web to
use. It provides easy access to both schedules and tables of the
Library of Congress Classification system.

   At the top of the page is a standard search box with two
                                             USING CLASSIFICATION WEB | 125

menus. The first menu provides the option to search through
either the schedules of the LCC system or the tables. Until you
get down to more specific categories or forms, you will only
want to use the schedules. The second menu provides searches
through Class Number (the basic part of your call number)
Caption (the subject associated with a call number), and Index
terms or a combination of Index and Caption terms.

   When searching with caption terms, it is important to know
that caption searches are always "left-anchored." This means
that the query will be read from left to right and matched
perfectly with any possible captions. Caption searches are
useful, but are usually only productive if the cataloger already
knows what the first word or first few words of a caption will
be.

   Searching the index can be helpful in some instances, but
there are many problems with this feature of Classification
Web. Only high-level terms are indexed, as well as some special
topics. Geographical terms and corporate bodies are not
indexed. Tables are also not indexed.

   When searching for Index and Caption terms, it is
imperative that you always double-check the schedule to
ensure that the number you have found is appropriate and
unrestricted. The schedules and tables can be tricky!

   When I put "Raelian" in the Search bar and selected
Schedules and Caption search parameters, first search result
was the Raelian Movement, which is what I was looking for.
The class number associated with this topic is BP605.R338. If
126 | USING CLASSIFICATION WEB

I put "Raelian" and search automatically, the default search is
a Class number, which takes me to completely different topics
in the schedules. As with searching in OCLC and WebDewey,
it is important that your parameters, or limiters, are correct
before your search.

   The text immediately below the search bar and above the
schedule lists the hierarchy of your current selection in the
schedules. The hierarchy for the Raelian Movement is "Islam,
Bahai Faith, Theosophy, etc.-Other beliefs and
movements-Works. By movement, A-Z-Raelian
Movement." Each of the levels in this line are hyperlinked to
see how a particular topic fits within the larger groups.

   When you click on the box next to an entry in the schedule,
options appear to view that subject's Dewey correlation,
Bibliographic lookup results, results in the LC class browser,
LC Subject correlation, relevant LCSH entries, and MARC
display of that subject.

   The enhanced browser is more accurate than the standard
browser, which will be discussed in the next section. It also
aligns with the Hierarchy Browser by providing actionable
entries with hierarchy information at the top of the results
page.

LCC Standard Browser

The standard browser is the typical browser that one would
use on a typical search engine. It is not as helpful as an
                                             USING CLASSIFICATION WEB | 127

enhanced browser, but it is the most accurate representation of
the LCC schedules. The main difference between this browser
and the enhanced browser is that this browser does not include
the tables. All table calculations must be performed manually
by the cataloger. Links to the tables are provided, but they
are not integrated into the browser. There is almost no reason
that you should use the standard browser. You may use it if
you already have an idea about the discipline into which a
particular subject has been cataloged, but you might as well
still use the enhanced browser to learn about the subject.

LCC Hierarchy Browser

The hierarchy browser is a further-enhanced browser that
focuses on displaying one hierarchal level at a time. As you
view one level, you can proceed one level down or go multiple
levels up to see how lower hierarchical levels fit within higher
ones.

   Navigating this browser can be confusing, and it is a little
tricky to understand because progression cannot be seen on
every screen. In the Hierarchy Browser, you have to click on
a particular category to see the lower levels. The result of the
search is the highest category to which you can reverse your
browsing, unless you search again with a different number.

   While this browser may not appear to be useful, it can be
particularly handy when you do not know which category an
item should fall into. As long as you know the form of the item
128 | USING CLASSIFICATION WEB

and a general subject, you should have relatively little trouble
finding the base of your call number.

Results Options

Now that we have discussed the options you can use to find
specific topics, it is time to discuss how to understand and
integrate these results with your broader work. It is essentially
useless to know an LC Number if you do not know how to
make it communicate with other systems and functions of the
library. Most of these are self-explanatory, but we will review
each of them anyhow.

Dewey Correlation

The Dewey correlation option leads to a page that includes
a Dewey number associated with that particular subject. For
example, the Dewey number that matches most closely with
BP605.R338 is 299. From that page, as well as from the
original schedule display, you can go to a bibliographic lookup
page.

Bibliographic Lookup

The bibliographic lookup option does exactly what it appears
to do. This function looks for works according to a particular
number. Be aware that if you look for books according to
                                             USING CLASSIFICATION WEB | 129

the Dewey Correlation Number instead of the original LCC
number, the range of topics covered in the book will be much
broader. For example, there were around three hundred works
listed under the 299 Dewey number and only 2 listed under
BP605.R338: mouvement raelien et son prophete: approche
psychologique complexe du charisme and Aliens adored: Rael's
UFO religion.

   Bibliographic Lookup eventually takes one to the
Bibliographic Browse section of the Classification Web site.
In this section, you can look for books by LC Call number,
personal names, titles, subjects, Dewey call numbers, ISBNs,
and record numbers as well as system control numbers. You
can click on parts of the text record of a work, like the title and
the author name. If you click on the title you can see books
that have similar titles. If you click on the author name you can
see other works by the same author. Clicking on the [Record]
link shows a thorough MARC record for the work.

   If you use Bibliographic Lookup to search for a book by
LC Call Number, the books will be arranged by their record
number. At the bottom of the result record are possible
Library of Congress and Dewey Decimal call numbers.

Library of Congress Subject
Correlation

If you click on this option, a Library of Congress Class
Number-led results page will appear with subjects under its
130 | USING CLASSIFICATION WEB

purview indented below each number. This will also be under
the heading of Correlations. Below the number you have
selected will be the next few entries in the schedule with their
subjects.

   The white box near each topic has a potential to lead to the
Bibliographic Browse page, but unless the subject is a given
name results of this action will be skewed.

Library of Congress Subject Heading

When you click on this option, you are taken to the "Subject
Heading Browse" page. On this page, you can search by class
number, subject heading, free-floating subdivisions (including
pattern subject headings and subdivisions), unstructured
headings and subdivisions, class number, and record number.
Descriptions of these subjects, including whether or not a
subject may be subdivided geographically, are also present on
this page. Further indentations include information about
other relevant subjects.

MARC Display of Subject

This page takes you to a page that has the specific MARC
record related to a class number. You cannot progress past this
page, but it is a wealth of information if you know how to
interpret the data contained therein. You can take this record
and put it into MARC records you are creating for items
                                             USING CLASSIFICATION WEB | 131

dealing with a particular subject. Information about the
creation and modification of the record are also included on
this page of the site. Records are downloaded in UTF-8
format.

Correlations Page

The correlations page is a massive search page that allows you
to look for connections between Library of Congress Class
numbers, Library of Congress Subject Headings, Dewey Class
Numbers, Creator names, and NLM (National Library of
Medicine) classification.

Other Options

The main menu that can be accessed by the three bars at the
top left side of the page offers the opportunity to browse all
of the topics above as well as demographic group terms, genre
terms, children's subject headings, and performance medium
terms. Essentially, topics can be approached from a wide
variety of angles.

   If you click "New Search" on the top right corner, you
can search all of these pages at the same time. Boolean
functionality is fulfilled by placing words in multiple search
boxes or putting multiple words with Boolean operators in
one box. Options for a basic search include Class Numbers,
Captions, Keywords, Index terms, and other terms. Filters for
132 | USING CLASSIFICATION WEB

these searches, such as only showing tables or schedules, can be
selected by clicking the "Search options" link.

   At the bottom of the "Search options" section, an option to
limit searches to particular schedules can be used by clicking
the "Subsets" button.

Interpreting Results

Before you examine the results of your Classification Web
browsing or search, you need to understand the hierarchy of
the LCC system. In the schedules and tables, hierarchy is
demonstrated by indentation, not the length of the number
like in the Dewey Decimal System. The numbers are also not
indicative of any particular subject or division. Again, this is a
deviation from the Dewey Decimal System.

   Periods are present in both the Library of Congress Call
Number and the caption. Their presence in Call numbers has
already been explained. In captions, there are multiple
purposes. Periods can either show equivalent terminology for
which other researchers have searched, arrangement
instructions for subcategories, or synonyms or related topics
that are categorized together despite being different iterations
or aspects of the same subject.

   Another important aspect of captions is the notes that may
appear indented below them. One of the most common notes,
which also appears in WebDewey, is the "Class here" phrase.
This note explains the scope of the class. A similar but distinct
                                             USING CLASSIFICATION WEB | 133

type of note is the "Includes" note. This gives examples of
types of works that can be included in a class but is not
exclusive like the "Class here" note. "Subarrange" notes tell
catalogers in which specific category certain types of works
should be placed.

   Other notes explore different topics through cross-
referencing. "See" notes are for captions that do not have a
Library of Congress Classification number assigned to them.
These subjects are categorized under different numbers, and
the "See" cross-reference note lists the caption and number.
The "For ... see" notes state that specific subdivisions of a
subject should be classified under another number. "Cf."
notes are similar to "For ... see" notes but are not as definitive.
They merely suggest that a certain range of numbers may be
more appropriate.

   If a result has parentheses around its number, that number
is not valid anymore. Most of the time, this is accompanied by
a link to an updated number indented under the caption.

   Bracketed numbers are numbers that local libraries can use
in conjunction with the existing designations at the Library of
Congress.

Selecting the Best Number

While the Dewey Decimal System encourages catalogers to
create their own call numbers for works that do not exactly
fit into a particular subject, the Library of Congress explicitly
134 | USING CLASSIFICATION WEB

forbids most librarians from creating or proposing new call
numbers. Instead, librarians should choose the best fit number.
There are several rules you should always remember for
situations in which you must perform original cataloging:

 1. Always catalog the subject of the item before you catalog
      it by its form, unless you are dealing with literature.

 2. Always keep in mind the author's intent when writing
      the work.

 3. Always ensure that the first subject heading is
      incorporated into the call number, and try to include the
      second as well.

 4. Always make sure that the work's author does not have
      their own individual call number.

 5. When dealing with multiple subjects, catalog an item
      based on its broadest subject and/or the first one
      mentioned if a call number does not exist for all subjects.
      If all items are covered equally and there is a call number
      for all subjects, choose a call number that covers a
      broader subject that immediately covers all topics
      discussed in the item.

 6. If there are multiple major topics, assign a call number
      that reflects the topic that fills most of the pages.

 7. At times a work will be about the influence of one
      subject on another. For example, the influence of the
      Chinese government on the development of Buddhism
      in China. In that case, you would classify the work in the
                                             USING CLASSIFICATION WEB | 135

      context of the development of Buddhism in China. The
      influence of Chinese government would be given
      secondary, if any, importance. It would only be included
      in the last part of the item.

Apply Your Knowledge

Yes, now it is time for you to go and learn yourselves about
the inextricable web of headings, class numbers, captions, and
tables known as Classification Web. Good luck!

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=58#h5p-19

Parts of this page were adapted from the Library of Congress
Classification Online Training created by Janis L. Young and
Daniel N. Joudrey on behalf of the Library of Congress. As an
official government publication, this training is in the public
domain.
136 | LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS
AND NAMES

13.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT
HEADINGS AND NAMES

Some metadata can be recorded in a variety of ways. For
example, a summary does not have to include certain keywords
in order for it to be valid. Additionally, a title does not have
to have a certain number of characters to be considered
authoritative. Other metadata, however, is standardized to
avoid confusion. The general cataloging term for these specific
fields of metadata is called controlled vocabulary, as you may
remember.

   The 600 fields that deal with people, works, places, and
subjects have a special type of controlled vocabulary called an
access point. These fields contain information that could be
recorded hundreds of different ways. For example, the term
for fiction related to scientific fields could be written "Science
fiction," "Science Fiction," "science fiction," "sci-fi", "sci fi,"
or any number of other possibilities. In order to ensure
standardization, the Library of Congress has created one access
point to go with each person, subject, or work. Not all works or
  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS AND
                                                                            NAMES | 137

people are represented, but most are. If a person or work is not
represented in these access points, catalogers are encouraged to
follow the general trend that is evidenced in the collection of
access points as a whole.

   The Library of Congress access points are referred to as
Authority Records, or Authorities. This is my favorite part of
cataloging. There is only one Authorized Authority Record
for each entity. This prevents duplication.

   There are multiple tools that someone can use to find
Authority Records. The Library of Congress has provided a
massive Name Authority File in database, also called LC
Names. Users can search the database on the website.

   Subject Headings also have a similar asset available.
However, this resource is in a PDF form divided into multiple
sections for each letter and number, in addition to an
introduction.

   If you are like me, you prefer a joint asset that combines
both of these Authority Record groups. A massive Library
of Congress Authorities Database was created, and users can
search for Subjects, Names, Titles, combined Names and
Titles, and All types of headings. In this case, Names means
names of people as well as those of groups, corporations, and
other organizations. We will use this site in all exercises on this
page. You are encouraged to bookmark this site for your own
use.
138 | LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS
AND NAMES

Navigating the Authorities Site

Searching through this database can be relatively tricky. There
are many tips below the search box that can help you navigate
this site.

   One of the most important tips is to be sure that you are
searching in the relevant category for your topic. If you search
for subjects in the name category, for example, results can be
skewed. Searching for "Asimov, Isaac" in the Subject Heading
category leads to results linked to the Foundation series, which
demonstrates the fact that Names of individuals can be used
as Subject Headings as well. Searching for names of authors in
the Subject Heading will result in a list of their works, which
can be useful if you are searching for particular works as a
subject of another work. You can also search for titles of works
in the Titles section of the Authorities search.

   When searching for names, always search in the "Surname,
Given Name" format. Names in their normal order will not
come up with correct results. This could even result in no
results being returned.

   Another major note is that you should ensure that your
spelling is absolutely correct. While I was writing this page,
I searched for "Asimov, Isacc." This misspelling resulted in
many Asimovs being returned. None of them were the correct
Asimov. When I spelled the query correctly, multiple entries
for Isaac Asimov for returned.

   On that note, it is important that you select the correct
  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS AND
                                                                            NAMES | 139

Authority Heading for an individual. When you look at your
results, there will be one that has a red button next to it. the
third result in the "Asimov, Isaac" search, for instance, has an
Authorized, Refs and Notes" button. Click on that button.
An alternate version of this button says "Authorized
Heading."

   When that red button is clicked, a large list containing the
Authority Record, Scope Note, and alternative entries for the
name and related subjects appear. Click on the Authority
Record entry, which is usually the top item in the list. The
Authority Record will appear at the beginning of that list
again. Click on that, and a large MARC record for that
Authority will be displayed. The Personal Name Heading, or
the text after the MARC Field 100, is the name that should
be used in Field 100 and/or 600. The Personal Name Heading
for this record is "Asimov, Isaac, 1920-1992." The Permalink,
which may be included in a subfield of the 100 or 600 field,
is lccn.loc.gov/n80126289. If you click on this link, more
information will be provided, including the LCC Number
most appropriate for that subject. This is especially useful if
you do not have Classification Web (although you may not
have the most accurate LCC Number if you rely completely
on this method). The LC Classification of the Authority is
also included, which in this case is PS3551.S5. This is the call
number that would be used if an author were create a book
about Isaac Asimov.

   Biographical information of various types, including a list
140 | LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS
AND NAMES

of works, may or may not accompany the Authority Record of
an Author. In the case of a subject, a general description will
accompany the record.

   Another button will show a Labelled display that replaces
the bold field headings with terms.

   Another red button on the original search says
"References." An entry with this button will not be the
Authorized Heading, but it will lead you eventually to an
Authorized Heading for the individual represented by that
entry. Whenever you click on a red button, make sure that
you are clicking on a link for a heading associated with the
Library of Congress Headings and not the Library of Congress
Children's Catalog headings (unless you are a children's
librarian).

   Corporate names are also listed in the Name Authority
database. This data will be displayed in a 110 field. Data in
this field can be in the 410, 610, etc. fields of a work's MARC
record. Authority records and related information for names
of individuals and corporate bodies can be used in similar ways
to subject headings. Therefore, most operations that use or
require subject headings can be adapted to individuals and
corporate bodies.

Subject Headings

As stated above, the data in a 100 field for a person is the
same as a subject heading entry about them. Subject heading
  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS AND
                                                                            NAMES | 141

data that should be used in a MARC record, on the other
hand, is in the 150 field. Often, the Heading entry directly
below the Permalink and above the MARC record is the same
as the 100, 110, or 150 data. However, this is not always the
case. Therefore, Heading entries should not be considered
definitive.

   When assigning subject headings and other authorities,
remember these guidelines:

 1. Subject headings should be assigned with the broadest
      and most accurate subject first. If there are two subjects
      that are equally covered, they can both be included in
      the same heading. Call numbers will be determined
      using the first one and/or two subject headings.

 2. The term "subject heading" means multiple things.
       1. Each "subject" recorded in an entire MARC field is
            referred to as a subject heading.
       2. In a user's perspective, a subject heading is also the
            first topic listed in a subject string, which has
            multiple topics combined with commas and
            hyphens ("Vocal music-France-18th century").
       3. All topics included after the first one in each of
            these strings are deviations from "Subject
            Headings" that are in the Authorities database.
            Since they are not the first topic in the string, they
            are called "subdivisions" or "subheadings."

 3. After the subject matter, time and geographic elements
142 | LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS
AND NAMES

      can be included in the subject heading in that order.
      Geographic subheadings should only follow topic
      subject headings if those subject headings are designated
      MAY SUBD GEOG. If an entry says Not Subd Geog or
      has no decision, do not put a geographic subject heading
      after this category.
 4. See if subdivisions can be combined or if headings
      should be separated into two or more subheadings.
 5. Again, form subheadings should only be used as a last
      resort.
 6. The Authorities list, Classification Web, the Library of
      Congress Subject Headings Manual, and the
      Classification and Shelflisting Manual should always be
      referenced. Check authorities.loc.gov frequently.
 7. If a geographic area is assigned to a subject heading or is
      related to an event or movement that is the subject of a
      work, the corresponding Library of Congress MARC
      Geographic Code should be placed in the 043 field.
 8. If you feel that you should justify your inclusion of a
      particular subject heading or name, provide a 667 field
      with information from the Subject Heading Manual. If
      you would like to give users more information about a
      particular subject, include it in a 680 field.

In essence, subject headings are created of multiple Authority
Record authorized data entries combined into a string of
subjects according to the methods approved by the Subject
  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS AND
                                                                            NAMES | 143

Heading Manual. Always consult this set of documents before
you combine subject headings and apply them to items in your
catalog.

Classification Web and Headings

Although it is not as combined as the actual LOC Authorities
page is, there is a way you can search for Subject Headings and
Authorized Records of Names at Classification Web. Simply
click the Subject Heading or Names button to be taken to a
browser for those subjects. You cannot search for all keywords,
but you can divide each of these two categories into smaller
categories. For example, you can limit your search to only
geographic or corporate names, only titles of works or series,
or personal names, of course. Furthermore, you can search for
Authorities by Class Number, the LOC record number, or by
keywords.

Subject Headings in
Specific Applications

Subject headings and names are virtually useless if they are
not applied to a record for an item. This section is less about
the regulations regarding their use and more about the format
in which they are used. When writing public-facing
documentation, the "Labelled Display" version should be
144 | LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS
AND NAMES

used. When writing a MARC record, the appropriate MARC
field entry should be used from the "MARC Display" version
of the record page. For example, the 100 field of an Authorities
page gives the approved heading with its appropriate subfields
and indicators. For example, the name of a subject is in subfield
"a" and the dates are under the subfield "d." When entering
this data into a MARC field, all that one has to do is to place
the authorized data into an appropriate MARC field,
replacing the "100" with "400", "600," "610," or whatever
field heading is needed. The subdivision symbol in the
Authorities page can be replaced by $ or whatever subfield sign
your institution chooses. When searching in ClassWeb or the
Library of Congress, the subdivision symbols will be replaced
by commas, parentheses, or dashes. Be sure to write the proper
subdivision or subfield symbol before you enter subject and
name data! For example, here are the subfield codes for Field
650:
  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS AND
                                                                            NAMES | 145

Apply Your Knowledge

Let's go the Authorities page of the Library of Congress! See
if you can find the most accurate subject headings for these
items. Then, we will explore combining subject headings in
accordance with the Subject Headings Manual. Good luck!

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=65#h5p-24

If you would like more information about the Library of
Congress Subject Headings, please see the Online Training
created by the Library. This training also examines the idea of
controlled vocabulary, aboutness, and MARC formatting.
146 | LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AUTHORITIES: SUBJECT HEADINGS
AND NAMES
          SHELVING | 147

PART V

SHELVING
148 | SHELVING
     SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
                                                            ORDERS | 149

14.

SHELVING,
SHELFLISTING, AND
WORK AND AUTHOR
ORDERS

After the assignation of the call number and the subject
heading comes the wonderful task of shelving the book. This
may seem to be intuitive, and it usually is for the Dewey
Decimal Classification system. Therefore, we will not spend
time examining that system. You simply place your book
according to numerical order and the alphabetical order.

   The Library of Congress, however, is another story. You
might have already guessed this by the fact that the chapter on
Classification Web is almost three times longer than OCLC
Connexion and four hundred words longer than WebDewey.
Just as coming up with a number in this system is more
difficult, so shelving can be less intuitive. Fortunately, the
Library of Congress has provided guidelines and regulations
for assigning shelf places. An original work is placed first on a
shelf, followed by:
150 | SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
ORDERS

 1. Subsequent editions
 2. Translations, also by editions of the original work
 3. Abridgements of the work, also by edition
 4. Criticisms or analyses of the original work
 5. Related works, whose editions, translations,

      abridgments, and criticisms also follow the same process.
 6. When a corporation or an individual is the subject of a

      work, those works should be given the same Cutter
      number as their own work products. They should be
      placed following the works created by the works' subject.
      In other words, a biography of Boris Yeltsin would
      follow any work by Boris Yeltsin.

                                                                  This
                                                                  graphic,
                                                                  created
                                                                  by the
                                                                  Library of
                                                                  Congress,
                                                                  demonstr
                                                                  ates the
                                                                  proper
                                                                  order for
                                                                  shelving
                                                                  items.

However, where do the original works go? There are a few
rules for shelving that are the same as those for the
Classification system:
                SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
                                                                        ORDERS | 151

1. Nothing comes before something. In other words, works
    with only "V" should come before those that have "VB."
    Additionally, 17 should come before 17.1, which should
    in turn come before 17.13.

2. First Cutter numbers are the same as decimal numbers.
    Alphanumerical order is also followed (A comes before
    C, etc.).

3. Cutter numbers are arranged discretely. Arrange works
    completely by the first Cutter number and then arrange
    works by the second Cutter number within the category
    of the first Cutter number. The second Cutter number
    is also called the first part of the item number.

4. The last Cutter number, which is also called the second
    part of the item number, is the year. This should be
    arranged in the same way that the second Cutter number
    is arranged in categories of the first Cutter numbers.
    Chronological order should always be followed.

5. At times, multiple works will be created by the same
    author in the same year. Some people will create unique
    first-or-second Cutter numbers. Others will follow
    another system which is more consistent. They will place
    lowercase letters for each work after the original one
    (2010, 2010a, 2010 b, etc.). These should be placed in
    alphabetical order.

6. Remember again that nothing comes before something.
    In that spirit, items with one Cutter number should
    placed before those with two. Items with two should be
152 | SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
ORDERS

      placed before those with no year.

If a Cutter number includes both uppercase and lowercase
letters, as some might do with the Dewey Decimal System, best
practice is to file those discretely and alphabetically, word-by-
word and letter-by-letter. Spaces and periods, hyphens, should
be treated the same, and are used to signify yet another discrete
unit in a call number. On the other hand, apostrophes should
be completely ignored. If a word is an abbreviation of a larger
word, such as Mt. or St., that spelling, and not the larger word,
should be used.

   When categorizing works by title, all initial articles in any
language should be completely ignored. They should not be
included in the catalog, or should be included after the rest of
the title, preceded by a comma.

   Compounded surnames, whether or not they have a
hyphen, should be listed in author lists with the first part of
the surname preceding the second. For that matter, surnames
should precede first names, again being separated by a colon.

   Diacritics and punctuation in titles and names should be
completely ignored when creating shelf lists. If a name includes
a character that is not typical, the Library of Congress
Classification and Shelflisting Manual G100 section should be
followed.

   Another factor is the order of numbers and letters in initial
order. Initial numerals should be shelflisted before, not after,
letters. If numerals are after a name, which virtually only
                   SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
                                                                          ORDERS | 153

occurs in years of Authority Control Names, they should be
listed in numerical order as well. If a number is part of a title, it
should be listed before years.

   Yet another factor is the ampersand symbol. When it
appears at the beginning of a title, which is rare, it should be
given precedence over numerals, which means it comes first in
shelflisting order.

   These rules can be helpful for Dewey Decimal Classification
system shelflisting and ordering as well. For example, the
suggestion to ignore diacritics and focus on the letter can help
people who are making Cutter numbers in the DDC with
authors whose first letter of their surname includes a diacritic.

Further Divisions

Dividing items by genre, language, and/or format may be
necessary for ease of access. Whether an item is cataloged
according to the LCC or DCC, these types of subdivisions
may be necessary. This is why the section on these divisions is
here rather than with sections on call number creation. Below
are some rules for Dewey format and fiction division that have
been adapted in some locations for other schema. For example,
even though the College of Southern Idaho Library utilizes
LCC, we still designate our Spanish materials with an "SPA" at
the beginning of the call number for ease of access.

For non-fiction books, the first line is usually the classification
154 | SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
ORDERS

number developed from the DDC schedules. This must have
at least three digits, and may be considerably longer,
depending on the subject and the level of specificity.

Exception: if you choose to shelve certain types of books in
separate areas, then begin those call numbers with a
descriptive word or abbreviation, or example: REFERENCE,
LARGE, or ATLAS.

For fiction books, the first line is usually FICTION or some
abbreviation (FIC., or F). Some libraries use call number
labels to subdivide their fiction collections by genre, such as
ROMANCE or SF, but this can get complicated because of
so many cross-genre titles.

For non-book items, the first line of the call number for both
fiction and non-fiction works may be a term or abbreviation
indicating the format of the item. This could be something
like DVD, or CD for compact discs, or Playaway for a certain
format of audiobook.
There are no widespread standards as to what terminology or
abbreviations should be used for this. If a library is creating
their call numbers in this way, the terms or abbreviations
chosen should be easily understood by the patrons using that
collection.

Online electronic publications are an exception to the call
                   SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
                                                                          ORDERS | 155

number guidelines. An ebook that you read online or an
audiobook that you download from online are not physical
items. They only exist as digital bits and bytes on a computer
server somewhere. You cannot direct a patron to a physical
location for this kind of item, so there is no point is giving it a
call number. How do you tell patrons where to find it? Give
them the URL that is found in the 856 field of the MARC
record.
156 | SHELVING, SHELFLISTING, AND WORK AND AUTHOR
ORDERS
                                                                   CONCLUSION | 157

PART VI

CONCLUSION
158 | CONCLUSION
            CONCLUSION | 159

15.

CONCLUSION

There you go! Now you know the beginnings of all major
cataloging schemata, theories, and systems. You also have had
some experience with websites that are designed to help
catalogers move swiftly through their work. To ensure that you
know all of the major topics covered in this book, here are a few
review exercises.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/cataloging/?p=38#h5p-25

Congratulations! You demonstrated that you know how to
use Connexion, WebDewey, and Classification Web separately
and together. Furthermore, you demonstrated knowledge of
FRBR, RDA, and MARC records. Once again I must
acknowledge my gratitude for OCLC for allowing me to
include visualizations of the processes for Connexion and
160 | CONCLUSION

WebDewey. Using all of these three systems together can make
you a well-rounded and versatile librarian.
       APPENDIX A: RDA TO MARC 21 MAPS AND WORKFLOWS | 161

APPENDIX A: RDA TO
MARC 21 MAPS AND
WORKFLOWS

For more information about RDA and MARC 21, including
obtaining access to "maps," go to
https://www.rdaregistry.info/Maps/. Maps are documents
that essentially act as crosswalks from one schema to another.
We would include both maps for both bibliographic and
authority MARC standards, but they are so immense that we
cannot possibly include them here. Check the "MARC 21
formats" and "MARC Relator Codes" maps.

   If you would like practice recording MARC data that is
pertinent to RDA fields, use this table, which was adapted
from that provided by the Library of Congress in their
Cataloging Workshop page:
Field      Ind. Data
Leader/7               m
Leader/18              i
008/22
008/35-37
Field  Ind. Data
020
040        $a
041
       ##  $a DLC $b eng $c DLC $e rda

           $a
           $h
Field  Ind. Data
100
100        $a
110
       0#

           $q

       1#      $c

               $d

           $a

       3#  $d

               $c

               $g

           $a
           $b
Field  Ind. Data
111
130                $a

                   $n
                      $d
                      $c

                   $a

                   $n
                      $p
                      $k
                      $l
                      $s
                      $f
Field  Ind. Data
240
245        $a
250
       10  $k

               $l

               $f

           $a

           $n
              $p
              $b
              $c

           $a
Field  Ind. Data
264
300    #1 $a
336    #2#3 $b

          #4 $c

                   $a
       ##

                   $c

       ##  $a text $2 rdacontent
Field  Ind. Data
337
338    ##  $a unmediated $2 rdamedia

490    ##  $a volume $2 rdacarrier

           $a

           $x
              $v
              $a
              $x
              $v
Field  Ind. Data
500
       ##  $a

                                           $b

502 ## $c
                                              $d
Field  Ind. Data
504
505    ##  $a
520
           $a

           $a
Field  Ind. Data
521
546                $a

588                $a
       ##

                   $b

       ##  $a
Field  Ind. Data
7__
7__
7__
Field  Ind. Data
775
174 | APPENDIX A: RDA TO MARC 21 MAPS AND WORKFLOWS

This table can be adjusted to fit your institution's preferences
for MARC records, fields, and subfields.

   All documents on the RDA Registry website are licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License. Documents featured in the Library of Congress
Cataloging Workshop are in the public domain as they are
government workproduct.
                        APPENDIX B: RDF AND THE SEMANTIC WEB | 175

APPENDIX B: RDF AND
THE SEMANTIC WEB

The existing cataloging schema are certainly detailed and
thorough, but there are new developments in the world,
specifically in the World Wide Web, that require a new type
of cataloging. The Resource Description Framework is the
solution to issues caused by the World Wide Web. In this
framework, each item and individual is given a unique code.
These codes are arranged in certain positions relative to each
other and to special "relationship" codes. For example, an
individual who is both an author and a subject of a book is
given the same code in both instances. The only difference
is the code's position in the sequence of RDF codes. In one
sequence it occupies the first position. In another sequence it
is in the third place.

   The Resource Description Framework is built upon the
idea of Linked Data. This is a type of data that is used to
connect items throughout the internet. One common way to
explain linked data is to think of a document, say the
Gettysburg Address. In the previous iterations of the Internet,
the entire document was a basic unit of data. Through linked
data, however, each concept and word of the Gettysburg
Address is a discrete unit of data represented by a machine-
176 | APPENDIX B: RDF AND THE SEMANTIC WEB

readable code. The entire document is also represented by its
own machine-readable code. Also, Abraham Lincoln is
represented by a code. Thus, the document, its concepts, and
Abraham Lincoln are all connected to each other. In this way,
Abraham Lincoln can be connected directly with the subjects
of the Gettysburg Address. Furthermore, he can be connected
to others who also discussed the same subjects.

   FRBR focuses on entities, relationships, and attributes. In
a similar way, RDF and linked data focus on the relationships
between entities. Another similarity to FRBR is that both
items and authors are considered entities.

   RDF uses a system called Terse RDF Triple Language, or
Turtle, to organize entities and relationships. This system is
also referred to as Semantic Triples or Semantic Triads. Thus,
the digital structure created by all of these codes and their links
is called the Semantic Web. Semantic triples have a particular
order.

 1. Subject: These codes can be the same as Object codes.
      They stand for an entity. Subjects are the subjects of the
      record, or the item being describe. In a record about an
      item, the item being described is always the subject.

 2. Predicate: These codes provide specific enhancement for
      all code combinations in RDF records. In the case of
      triples, they provide information about the relationships
      between two entities.

 3. Object: These codes can be the same as Subject codes.
                        APPENDIX B: RDF AND THE SEMANTIC WEB | 177

      They stand for an entity. Objects are the topic of
      subjects.

If I were to integrate RDF Semantic Triples into a record
for The Foundation trilogy, I would write (3236412,
http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/creator, http://id.loc.gov/
auames/n8thorities/n0126289). This triple states that The
Foundation trilogy, whose OCLC number is 3236412, was
created by Isaac Asimov, whose URI is https://id.loc.gov/
authorities/names/n80126289.html.

   The predicate URI was obtained from
https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/
dcmi-
terms/#http%3a%2f%2fpurl.org%2fdc%2felements%2f1.1%2f
creator. Dublin Core is an organization in Ohio that created
yet another metadata schema specifically for use in archives
and museums. They have a vested interest in Linked Data.
Therefore, they host a number of initiatives and metadata
specifications documents. The URI for the book was obtained
from WorldCat. The URI for Isaac Asimov was taken from
id.loc.gov, the Linked Data Service of the Library of Congress.
URIs exist for subject headings, authors, formats, and other
data points.

   Linked data and RDF can be combined with RDA and
other elements in MARC records to form a truly connected
web. As MARC records, EAD (encoded archival description)
records, MODS (metadata object description schema) records
178 | APPENDIX B: RDF AND THE SEMANTIC WEB

and other records in various schemata all describe digital and
physical items, linked data can be used to include physical
items in the digital network of information. Thus, a website in
Vietnam can be linked through semantic triples to an artifact
in a museum in Frankfurt. As we learn more about items and
relationships, the connections will become denser and more
complex. Linked data can promote swift communication
between researchers and users all over the world.
          GLOSSARY | 179

GLOSSARY

Cataloging

      The process used by librarians, and other professionals,
      to create records for each specific item in an institution's
      work. Part of this process is classifying, which involves
      determining a position for an item based on a
      predetermined schema. The associated number is put
      into a record that contains a deluge of other metadata
      related to a particular item. The end result of cataloging
      is the creation of a MARC record.

Content rules

      Specifications regarding the format or length of an entry
      in a field. Usually, an item has either content rules or
      controlled vocabulary, but sometimes a field will have
      both. For example, a field may only be filled with
      numbers, letters, or a specific combination of both (like a
      date or a serial number).

controlled vocabulary

      A set of allowed terms for particular fields in a record. For
      example, the word "text" is used for all items that use the
180 | GLOSSARY

      written word. This textbook, blogs, novels, biographies,
      and all other items that are written down are designated
      using this term in MARC Field 336. Use of controlled
      vocabulary ensures standardization and consistency.

delimiters

      Terms or facets used to limit results in a list produced
      by a search engine or database. These are the terms or
      ranges that appear when you click on "Advanced Search"
      on Google or on a library catalog page.

Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records
(FRBR).

      A theoretical system that ensures that an item is described
      as accurately and thoroughly as possible. The two major
      constructs in FRBR are WEMI and the RDA
      framework.

H5P (HTML 5 Package)

      A type of tool created by educational professionals and
      instructional designers to promote interactivity for
      multiple settings. Corporate, government, and
      educational institutions can all use H5P to create
      interactive, formative assessments and assignments.

MAchine-Readable (Bibliographic) Catalog Records
                                       GLOSSARY | 181

(MARC)

The content standard developed by librarians in the
1960s to hold data regarding bibliographic materials.
This standard, also called a schema, has been revised to
hold data and metadata for many types of items.

Resource Description and Access (RDA)

A framework created by an international coalition of
information professionals to replace AACR2. This
framework ensures that description of resources
throughout the world are consistent. For example, the
"text" signifier is an English word. The MARC symbol
associated with this term is "txt." Usually, these two data
points are entered together. Terms and symbols signify
content, media, and carrier (item) type.
