Children, Families, Schools, and
Communities [Revised Edition]
CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND
COMMUNITIES [REVISED EDITION]

JOAN GIOVANNINI

ROTEL (Remixing Open Textbooks with an Equity Lens) Project
Holyoke
Children, Families, Schools, and Communities [Revised Edition] Copyright © 2024 by Joan Giovannini is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

ISBN: 978-1-964276-10-6 Ebook

ISBN: 978-1-964276-11-3 Print
CONTENTS

Introduction                                          1

Land Acknowledgement Statement for the ROTEL Project  5

Part I. What Is A Family?

Diversity of Families                                 9

The Diversity of Today's Families                     20

The Influence of Culture                              26

Bias & Microaggressions                               28

Part II. Theories That Help Us Understand Families

Bioecological Systems Theory                          37

Family Systems Theory                                 42

Functionalism                                         47

Conflict Theory                                       50

Symbolic Interactionism                               54

Part III. A Closer Look at Parenting

Attachment Theory                                     61

Parenting Styles                                      68

The Developing Parent                                 75

Influences on Parenting                               80
Caregivers and the Evolving Definition of Family                            84

Conclusion                                                                  87

Part IV. What Is Gender and Why is it Important?

Sex and Gender                                                              93

Gender as a Socializing Agent                                               97

The Gender Continuum                                                        102

Part V. Building Collaborative Relationships with Families of Children
with Disabilities

Disability and Inequality: Overrepresentation in Special Education          115

Reframing Disability                                                        117

Collaboration with Families                                                 122

Conclusion                                                                  125

Part VI. What is Culture and Why is it Important?

What is Culture?                                                            131

The Role of Culture in Collaboration with Children, Families, Schools, and  135

Communities

Values and Beliefs                                                          141

Joan Giovannini
Part VII. Honoring Linguistic Diversity

Introduction to Honoring Linguistic Diversity                                    149

Descriptive Terms for Diverse Linguistic Backgrounds                             154

Data and Demographics                                                            157

Legal Responsibilities                                                           164

Working with Immigrant, Migrant and Refugee Populations                          172

Strategies to Support Collaboration between Schools, Communities, Children, and  177

Families from Linguistically Diverse Backgrounds

Part VIII. Exploring the Core Competencies of Family Engagement

Exploring the Language of Family Engagement                                      183

Dual Capacity Building Framework                                                 186

Family Engagement Core Competencies                                              194

Part IX. For Instructors: Sample Assignments

Sample Assignments - I. What Is A Family?                                        203

Sample Assignments - II. Theories That Help Us Understand Families               205

Sample Assignments - III. A Closer Look at Parenting                             208

Sample Assignments - IV. What Is Gender and Why is it Important?                 210

Sample Assignments - V. Building Collaborative Relationships with Families of    213

Children with Disabilities

Sample Assignments - VI. What is Culture and Why is it Important?                216

Sample Assignments - VII. Honoring Linguistic Diversity                          218

Sample Assignments - VIII. Exploring the Core Competencies of Family             221

Engagement

References                                                                       225
Advocacy Project: Children, Families, Schools, and Communities  235

Note to Instructors: About The Advocacy Project                 242

Grant Information                                               243

Version History                                                 244
              INTRODUCTION | 1

INTRODUCTION

At Holyoke Community College in Holyoke, MA, I have been fortunate to teach a course entitled EDU
113: Children, Family, Schools, and Community. My students are interested in the field of Child and Family
Studies, often talking about career pathways as a Child Life Specialist, Early Childhood Educator, Out-of-
School-Time Coordinator, School Counselor, or Family Engagement Coordinator. Each semester that I teach
this course, I am reminded about the immediate need to share an understanding of culturally sustaining
collaboration that strips down hierarchies between children, family, schools, and communities and, instead,
centers around a common framework of the whole child.

   Children, Families, Schools, and Communities is introductory text in the field of Child and Family Studies.
It provides a lens for understanding the evolving definition of "family" through socially constructed and
ecological theory frameworks. It promotes strategies for culturally sustaining and deeply collaborative
relationships between families, schools, and communities through the use of home-grown advocacy strategies
based on community-driven data. Children, Families, Schools, and Communities is an adapted OER text
from Rebecca Laff's and Wendy Ruiz's Child, Family, and Community.

About the Author(s)

I am an Educator, Instructional Designer, and Researcher committed to educational equity and strategies of
Universal Design for Learning. I specialize in teaching coursework in education policy, inclusionary practice,
Universal Design for Learning, and culturally responsive pedagogy.

   I began my career as an Americorps VISTA Volunteer, working as a Teacher and Technology Coordinator
at an alternative GED program. From there, I moved into community-based work in the field of out-of-
school time. And, from there, I began my career in the community college system where I worked as an out-
of-school-time coordinator, TRiO Student Support Services Director, Grant Manager, Education Faculty,
and Department Chair of Education. Those early professional experiences provided me with insight about
the role of Youth Development, trauma-informed teaching, and family-school partnerships for effective pre-
service teacher training. I most recently worked as the Associate Director for the Center for Excellence in
Teaching, Learning, and Scholarship at Springfield College where I focused on Instructional Design and digital
2 | INTRODUCTION

pedagogy. I currently work at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst as an Educational Developer with
Instructional Design, Engagement, and Support.

   I am thankful for chapter contributors, including Dr. Sara Scribner, Assistant Professor of Special
Education at Plymouth State University, and Brianna Dickens, Associate Director of the Academic Success
Center: Disability and Accessibility Services at Springfield College for lending their voices and expertise. Dr.
Sara Scribner holds a PhD in Special Education, Disability Studies from the Syracuse University School of
Education. She works extensively as an advocate for families of children with exceptionalities and is considered
an expert in training teachers on inclusive practices. Brianna Dickens is finishing up a doctorate in Special
Education.

   I am excited for contributions from EDU 113 students at Holyoke Community College from Summer
2023, Fall 2023, and Summer 2024! Students piloted Version 1 of this text, offering me substantial feedback
for improvements and additions. They also wrote case studies and new Pause & Reflect questions. Their
contributions are included in this version of the text:

  · Owen Aptekar-Cassell
  · Arlene Berrios
  · Michelle Combs
  · Olivia Hinkley
  · Casey Magas
  · Stephanie Rafferty
  · Nelly Salgado
  · Heather Strong
  · Theresa Sutton
  · Jessica Urzedowski

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to the Remixing Open Textbooks through an Equity Lens (ROTEL) grant initiative through the
Massachusetts Department of Higher Education that supports OER work. I thank Sarah Gilleman, Professor
of English at Holyoke Community College, for her ongoing partnership in the development of Learning
Communities that ask students to think critically about the social construct of disability in schools and for her
time in peer editing this text. I extend appreciation to Glenn Yarnell, Jr., licensed English as a Second Language
                                                                                                                                           INTRODUCTION | 3

teacher and high school humanities teacher at Emergence Academy in Springfield, MA, for his commitment
to holistic family partnerships in the school environment and for his time in peer editing this text.

Springfield-Agawam Indigenous Land Acknowledgement

I acknowledge that here, we stand on Indigenous land, known to the original Algonkian Indian (Native
American/Indigenous) inhabitants as "Agawam," or "Akawaham." The Indigenous name for this place is
a locative term that roughly translates to "low-lying marshy lands," describing a large region along both
sides of the Kwinitekw (now called the Connecticut River) from present-day Enfield, Connecticut to the
Holyoke Range. For at least 10,000 years, since the last era of glaciation, the Agawam people engaged in trade,
diplomacy, and kinship with other regional Indigenous people, most notably: the Quaboag to the East; the
Podunk to the South; the Woronoco to the West; and the Nonotuck, Pocumtuck, and Sokoki to the North.

   During the 1630s, when Agawam leaders invited English colonial settlers to build a small settlement here,
they attempted to preserve, in written deeds, Indigenous cartographies and rights to hunt, fish, plant, and
live on tribal lands. When diplomatic relations failed, the Agawam people were decimated and dispersed as a
direct result of colonial deceit, disease, and warfare. Although the survivors sought refuge with other Native
communities across the northeast, very few direct descendants of the Agawam people live in Springfield today.

   I acknowledge, however, that many Indigenous nations, from the territory we now call "southern New
England," still survive and still exercise sovereignty. I acknowledge, in particular, these contemporary
Indigenous nations: the Nipmuc to the East; the Wampanoag and Narragansett to the Southeast; the
Mohegan, Pequot, and Schaghticoke to the South; the Mohican to the West; and the Abenaki to the North,
among many others. Recognizing that the entirety of the North American continent constitutes territory
considered to be original Indigenous homelands, I respect the sovereignty of these and hundreds of other
Native American Indigenous nations that survive today and I pledge to support the rights of these nations and
the interests of Indigenous peoples.

   Pronunciation Guide:
Abenaki [a-ben-a-kee]
Agawam [aa-gah-wahm]
Akawaham [ah-kah-wa-hahm]
Algonkian [al-gone-kee-uhn]
Kwinitekw [kwin-eh-tek-wuh]
Mohegan [moh-he-gahn]
Mohican [moh-hee-kuhn]
4 | INTRODUCTION

Narragansett [nare-uh-gann-sett]
Nipmuc & Nipmuck [nip-muck]
Nonotuck [non-oh-tuck]
Pequot [pee-kwaht]
Pocumtuck [poe-come-tuck]
Podunk [poe-dunk]
Schaghticoke [scat-ti-coke]
Sokoki [soh-koh-kee]
Quaboag [qua-bog]
Wampanoag [wamp-ah-nawg]
Woronoco [wore-oh-no-co]

   This land acknowledgement was written by Margaret M. Bruchac (Associate Professor of Anthropology,
University of Pennsylvania) & Laurel Davis-Delano (Professor of Sociology, Springfield College). It can be
found at https://sites.google.com/view/springfieldagawam-landacknowl/home?authuser=2.

Licensing

CC BY-NC-SA
                                                                LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT STATEMENT FOR THE ROTEL PROJECT | 5

LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT STATEMENT
FOR THE ROTEL PROJECT

As part of ROTEL Project's mission to support the creation, management, and dissemination of culturally-
relevant textbooks, we must acknowledge Indigenous Peoples as the traditional stewards of the land, and
the enduring relationship that exists between them and their traditional territories. We acknowledge that the
boundaries that created Massachusetts were arbitrary and a product of the settlers. We honor the land on
which the Higher Education Institutions of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts are sited as the traditional
territory of tribal nations. We acknowledge the painful history of genocide and forced removal from their
territory, and other atrocities connected with colonization. We honor and respect the many diverse indigenous
people connected to this land on which we gather, and our acknowledgement is one action we can take to
correct the stories and practices that erase Indigenous People's history and culture.

   Identified Tribes and/or Nations of Massachusetts
   Historical Nations

  · Mahican
  · Mashpee
  · Massachuset
  · Nauset
  · Nipmuc
  · Pennacook
  · Pocomtuc
  · Stockbridge
  · Wampanoag

Present-Day Nations and Tribes

  · Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe
  · Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah
  · Herring Pond Wampanoag Tribe
  · Assawompsett-Nemasket Band of Wampanoags
  · Pocasset Wampanoag of the Pokanoket Nation
  · Pacasset Wampanoag Tribe
  · Seaconke Wampanoag Tribe
6 | LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT STATEMENT FOR THE ROTEL PROJECT

  · Chappaquiddick Tribe of the Wampanoag Indian Nation
  · Nipmuc Nation (Bands include the Hassanamisco, Natick)
  · Nipmuck Tribal Council of Chaubunagungamaug
  · Massachusett Tribe at Ponkapoag

At the time of publication, the links above were all active.
   Suggested Readings
   Massachusetts Center for Native American Awareness

A guide to Indigenous land acknowledgment
`We are all on Native Land: A conversation about Land Acknowledgements' (YouTube video)
Native-Land.ca | Our home on native land (mapping of native lands)
Beyond territorial acknowledgments - âpihtawikosisân
Your Territorial Acknowledgment Is Not Enough

   This land acknowledgement was based on the land acknowledgement of the Digital Commonwealth.
                     WHAT IS A FAMILY? | 7

PART I

WHAT IS A FAMILY?

Learning Objectives
8 | WHAT IS A FAMILY?

1.  Examine how culture influences the evolving definition of family.

Humans are social creatures. We make friends, live in communities, and connect to acquaintances through
shared interests. Perhaps nothing is more central to the social world than the concept of family. Our families
represent our earliest relationships and, often, our most enduring ones. In this module, you will learn how
culture influences the evolving definition of families and the stages of development of families.

   Our discussion will begin with a basic definition of family and how this has changed across time and
place. Next, we move on to a discussion of family roles and how families evolve across the lifespan. Finally,
we will explore how implicit, explicit, and confirmation bias impacts our work with families, schools, and
communities.

Media Attributions

  · What is a family © Joyce Kelly is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
                       DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES | 9

DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES

The United States' Census Bureau defines family as "...a group of two people or more (one of whom is the
householder) related by birth, marriage, or adoption and residing together; all such people (including related
subfamily members) are considered as members of one family." While this definition provides a framework
for understanding family configurations in the United States over a period of time, it may not accurately
represent the social and cultural factors that contextualize how we define "family" in our personal networks.
It is restrictive and does not integrate the diversity of the modern family in the United States.

   In 2023, the Pew Research Center released The Modern American Family: Key Trends in Marriage and
Family Life. This document outlined key data points from 1970 that chronicles how the American "family"
has evolved and changed.
10 | DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES

     Pause to Reflect!

          · Choose one of the categories listed in the left hand column of the infographic.
          · Describe how the data has evolved from 1970-2021.
          · How does this data change or expand how we define "family"?

The Pew Research Center points to overall changes in marriage types from 1970-2021.
  · The number of interracial or interethnic marriages have increased.
  · The number of same-sex marriages have increased.
  · Women have fewer children, resulting in smaller family sizes.
  · The number of women having children without being legally married has increased.
  · Individuals with a bachelor's degree are more likely to be married than those with less education.
  · Asian and White adults are more likely to be married than those who are Black or Hispanic.

Data trends are important in the field of Education and Child & Family Studies, as they point to the evolution
of "family", and therefore the need to continually examine the support structures, community centers or
schools or early childhood centers, that surround families.

     Pause to Reflect!

          · Families often face discrimination about their family structure or values. For example. Same-
             sex families and a family with an incarcerated caregiver both experience discrimination.
             However, that discrimination "looks" different. Describe how diverse families experience
             discrimination in the United States.

          · Navigate to The Modern American Family: Key Trends in Marriage and Family Life. At the
                                                                                                                               DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES | 11

             bottom of the article, locate an interactive data tool that allows you to examine marriage
             structures in the United States. Use the filters to explore differences in family structures by
             race, education, or ethnicity. Describe what you explored. How does that information
             influence the design of support structures, like community centers or schools or early
             childhood centers?

Paul R. Amato, Ph.D., former President of the National Council on Family Relations, asks us to expand
our definition of "family". Amato states, "Most current research is based on objective definitions of
families--definitions that are not shared by the majority of individuals that we study. Viewing families as
overlapping networks that extend across multiple households, with each network having at its nucleus a
reference person, might yield new insights, especially in an era when families are becoming more complex
and difficult to classify." Amato points to the complexity of "family" within a social construct. Amato's
perspective incorporates the idea of "fictive kinship." "Fictive kinship" recognizes the important bonds and
relationships of individuals outside of the boundaries of the traditional definition of "family." The idea that
an individual cannot pick their relatives does not apply to fictive kinship. Rather, fictive kinship honors the
diversity of the definition of "family" in that it extends to friend groups, resource families, mentors, etc. The
individual is at the center of the relationship and their "family" is self-defined based on their own social and
cultural criteria.

     Case Study (A)
12 | DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES

     Ella, a divorced mother lives with her child, Grace. Ella considers her ex-husband, Robert, to be a
     family member even though they do not live together and are divorced. Robert is Grace's biological
     father. Grace spends every weekend with Robert, and oftentimes, Robert picks Grace up from
     school and has dinner with Ella and Grace during the week. Robert is important in Grace's life and
     Ella supports his presence in her life.

          · U.S. Census Bureau
     A researcher who adopts the U.S. Census Bureau definition would say that Grace is in a single-
     parent family.

          · Modern Families
     A researcher who adopts a definition more consistent with an understanding of modern families
     would say that Grace would claim to be in a two-parent family.

     Case Study (B)
                                                                                                                        DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES | 13

Adam and Georgia are divorced parents of Allyson. Adam was recently remarried to Frank. They
purchased a home together. Allyson lives with them and visits Georgia on the weekends and
during school vacations. Allyson does not accept Frank as her parent and refuses to allow Frank to
attend parent-teacher conferences at her school. She only wants Adam and Georgia to attend.

     · U.S. Census Bureau
A researcher who adopts the U.S. Census Bureau definition would say that Allyson is in a two-
parent family with Adam and Frank.

     · Modern Families
A researcher who adopts a definition more consistent with an understanding of modern families
would say that Allyson would claim to be in a two-parent family with Adam and Georgia.

Case Study (C)
14 | DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES

     Jordan and Aaron have been best friends since second grade. They are now 22 years old and are
     considering renting an apartment together while they attend the local community college. Growing
     up, Jordan spent more time at Aaron's home than their own because it felt safer and supportive.
     Jordan currently lives with their mom and dad, but does not have a close relationship with them.
     Jordan considers Aaron's parents their "real" family.

          · U.S. Census Bureau
     A researcher who adopts the U.S. Census Bureau definition would say that Jordan is in a two-
     parent family with their biological parents.

          · Modern Families
     A researcher who adopts a definition more consistent with an understanding of modern families
     would say that Jordan would claim to be in a two-parent family with Aaron's family, or might claim
     to be an independent person getting ready to move out on their own.

     Pause to Reflect!
                                                                                                                               DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES | 15

     Discuss the following questions

         1. What does family mean to you? Who do you think of when you define family?
         2. Do you see your family represented in the "dominant culture"?
         3. Identify a minimum of three concrete examples of ways that the idea of "fictive kinship"

             connects to your professional or personal life.

A social construction is a mutual understanding and accepted reality created by members of a society:
something that is not determined by biology or the natural world. Is there anything that humans have created
that holds no real value in the natural world, yet we have assigned a great deal of value to it? If you are thinking
of cash, you're right on the money. Humans have determined that certain pieces of paper and metal objects are
worth an agreed-upon value. For example, in the United States, a one-dollar bill is worth 100 times the value of
a penny. One of the ways that we can tell money is a social construction is that it varies from culture to culture
and over time. When you visit another country, the United States dollar bill has to be "exchanged" for money
that has a different appearance and value. Compare money with another thing of value to human beings: air.
Air is needed by all human beings to survive. The need for air and its value do not change over time or from
culture to culture. Air is not a social construction. Money is.

   What does this have to do with families? While studying families, we must continually remind ourselves that
the idea of the family, and in particular the internalized belief that there is a "traditional family," is a social
construction. What is a "traditional family"? I suspect that we can each paint a picture in our heads, based
on the years each of us has been exposed to portrayals of families in institutions such as the media, schools,
government, and health care.

                                           Generally, the traditional American family has been identified as the
                                        nuclear family, most often represented as a male and female heterosexual
                                        married couple who is middle class, White, and with several children.
                                        When society or the individuals within a society designate one kind of
                                        family to be "traditional", this may imply a value, or a preference, for this
                                        kind of family structure with these particular social characteristics. This is
                                        sometimes called the Leave it to Beaver family after the popular sitcom
                                        television show that ran from 1957 until 1963.

                                           Friends, which concluded its 10th season in 2004, exemplifies a fictive
                                        kinship. The comedy presents a peer group of individuals in their 20s who
                                        live in New York City. The six main characters are best friends who enjoy
                                        holidays together, date each other, and remain close friends with one
16 | DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES

another as they age into their 30s. While they do not all live together in the same apartment, they consider
themselves a family.

New Girl, which concluded its 7th season in 2018, also exemplifies a fictive kinship. The comedy presents a
peer group of individuals in their 20s who live in Los Angeles. Like in Friends, the five main characters are best
friends who enjoy holidays together, date each other, and remain close friends with one another as they age
into their 30s. With the exception of one character, they all live together in the same apartment, they consider
themselves a family. In fact, two of the five characters marry one another.

Modern Family, which concluded its 11th season in 2020, also features this "traditional" family, but includes
                                                                                                                               DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES | 17

two other families which feature people of other ethnic groups, and a same-sex couple. Together they form an
                                                                 extended family who all live in the same town.

This is Us, which concluded its 6th season in 2022, also features this "traditional" family, but includes two
adopted children and a mixed-race, multigenerational family. It also extends its story to include adoption,
death, divorce, separation, and remarriage.

IIt is important to note, however, that the primacy of the upper-middle-class, White family image continues
to be emphasized as the "norm". Our role is to look at how this social construct impacts the way in which
children, families, schools, and communities interact with one another in respectful ways that are culturally
responsive, honor the diversity of the family structure, and include a vision of fictive kinship in their
collaborations.
18 | DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES

     Pause to Reflect!

          · Identify a family or fictive kinship in a current show or movie. Describe how that family
             representation aligns or misaligned with the data discussed earlier in this chapter from the
             Pew Research Center?

          · Provide three examples of a non traditional family dynamic within a book, a movie, tv show,
             or other form of entertainment and media.

The traditional definition of family has been criticized as being too narrow. Modern families, especially those
in industrialized societies, exist in many forms, including (but not limited to) the single-parent family, resource
families, same-sex couples, child-free families, and many other variations from traditional norms. Common
to each of these family forms is commitment, caring, and the close emotional ties that are increasingly the
defining characteristics of family (Benokraitis, 2015). The changing definition of family has come about, in
part, because of many factors that include divorce and remarriage. In many cases, people do not grow up with
their family of origin but become part of a step-family or blended family. Whether a single-parent, joint, or two-
parent family, a person's family of origin, the family into which he or she is born, or a fictive kinship generally
acts as the social context for young children learning about relationships.

   As we study families, we must keep in mind that this idea of the "traditional" family is not representative
of all families, yet it is continually reinforced by the social processes and institutions in our society. Media,
in particular, continually reminds us of what families are "supposed to" look like. Whether you consume
big-budget films, social media platforms, video games, and/or books and magazines, take a look. What kind
of people and families do you see represented? While the representation of women, people of color, and
people of differing sexualities and gender expressions has increased in media, they still predominantly play
less consequential characters within the plot lines. Government, schools, medical institutions, businesses,
and places of worship all reinforce a typical view of family through the forms, activities, requirements, and
processes that are shared with the public. How many times have you tried to fill out a form with checkboxes
only to find that you did not "fit" into one of the boxes? Typical examples include giving parental choices of
"mother" and "father," couple status choices such as "married" or "single," and gender choices such as "male"
or female," all of which reinforce a binary view of individuals and families. The preference for an idealized
traditional family type contributes to less social support for families who don't fit this type: for example, single-
parent families, LGBTQ+ families, rural families, or families with a member who is disabled, unemployed, or
who has a criminal record.
                   DIVERSITY OF FAMILIES | 19

Pause to Reflect!

Research and discuss the following questions.

    1. Identify two official forms that a family member may fill out on behalf of a child. Examples
        might include a school district enrollment form, Head Start enrollment form, or a form for a
        pediatrician or other medical professional.

   2. Examine the forms for inclusive language. Do they include the parental choices of "mother"
        and "father" or are they more flexible in their labels of parents, guardians, and/or other
        caregivers?

   3. If the forms are not inclusive, edit them.

Media Attributions

  · 5 of 25- to 49-year olds charts © Daily Citizen is licensed under a CC BY-SA (Attribution ShareAlike)
      license

  · Family making a snack © Chona Kasinger is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
  · A mother and teenager © Ben White is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · Young adults reading © Zachary Drucker is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND (Attribution

      NonCommercial NoDerivatives) license
  · Leave it to Beaver © ABC Television is licensed under a Public Domain license
  · Friends © GamesRadar is licensed under a All Rights Reserved license
  · New Girl © University of California at San Diego's Guardian is licensed under a All Rights Reserved

      license
  · Modern Family © ABC is licensed under a All Rights Reserved license
  · This is Us © NBC is licensed under a All Rights Reserved license
20 | THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES

THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES

The landscape of families has changed considerably over the last few decades. It is not that diverse families have
never existed; it is that in today's society, we are making places at the table for this diversity. Today, we elevate
and value diverse families. Following are definitions of many of the family structures today.

                                              Table 1.1: Family Structures
Family Structure                                                                           THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES | 21
Dual parent family
                                      Description

                                      This is often referred to as a mother and father raising children.
                                      However, if we think about the diversity of families this could
                                      include same sex caregivers as they are also raising children together.

Single parent (either by choice or    This could be a male or female caregiver who either wants to be a
through divorce)                      parent and doesn't have a partner to create a child with or is raising
                                      children on their own due to divorce. Often, we think of single
Grandparents or other relatives       parents as female, but today as we continue to form acceptance of
raising children (relatives can also  family structures, there are males who are also choosing to form a
be non-related family members         family on their own or raise their children (from divorce) on their
who are close to the child(ren))      own.

                                      As families immigrate or migrate to other parts of the U.S. or
                                      world, we might find single parents by default, as not all members
                                      of a family unit may move at the same time.

                                      Children whose caregivers are not able to care for them (for
                                      whatever reason), may be raised by their maternal or paternal
                                      grandparents or may be raised by extended family members
                                      including those family members that are not related biologically.

Teen parents                          Today it is more acceptable for teens who become pregnant to raise
Adoptive families                     a child. Sometimes they may do this together or separate.
                                      Sometimes they may do this with the help of their families. Teens
                                      who become pregnant while still in high school are often able to
                                      return to school and there are programs on high school campuses
                                      where teens may bring their child. They may receive parenting
                                      classes in addition to their high school curriculum.

                                      Families who are not able to conceive a child on their own may
                                      choose adoption. While this tends to be most common, there are
                                      families who consciously choose adoption over procreation as well
                                      as decide to add to their family through adoption. In any case,
                                      forming a family through adoption is a choice that is not taken
                                      lightly. There are many options in forming your family through
                                      adoption. You can choose to have an open or closed adoption.
                                      Open adoption refers to having a continued relationship with the
                                      birth parent(s) to just knowing who the birth parents are and
                                      everything in between. Closed adoption means that the family does
                                      not have access to birth parent(s) information. In addition, families
                                      may choose to adopt a child of the same race or of another race.
                                      They may choose to adopt nationally or internationally.
22 | THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES

Family Structure                   Description

Resource Families (formerly        Children placed in temporary care due to extenuating
referred to as Foster Families)    circumstances involving their family of origin are often placed in
                                   homes licensed to care for children. The adults who care for these
Families with Same Sex Parents     children must go through strict protocols in order to provide the
Bi-racial/Multi-racial families    support and care that these vulnerable children will need. The most
                                   common name for this arrangement is fostering, but you may also
                                   hear them described as resource families. In these cases, it is the
                                   intent to reunite the children with their family of origin whenever
                                   possible. When this is not possible, the children are placed in the
                                   system to be adopted. The foster family may decide to adopt the
                                   children or another family may adopt the children. It is always the
                                   intent to find a permanent arrangement for children whenever
                                   possible, as we know that stability has better outcomes for children.

                                   Same sex couples, whether two men or two women, may choose to
                                   form a family and raise the children together. There are many ways
                                   in which they may decide to form their family. They may adopt,
                                   they may use reproductive technology, or they may use egg or
                                   sperm donors. In the case where two women are choosing to form a
                                   family, they may decide to have one of them become pregnant and
                                   give birth to their child.

                                   These are children who are raised by parents from two different
                                   races, including parents who may be bi-racial themselves. This also
                                   includes multi-racial families.

Families with Multi-Religious/     There are children today raised in multi-religious homes. This
Faith Beliefs                      means that each parent may have different faiths/religions. They
                                   may choose one faith/religion or both in raising their children.

Children with an incarcerated      Sometimes children are raised by one caregiver while the other
parent(s)                          parent is incarcerated. This can be complicated for the family as the
                                   parent may spend some time away and then return home. While the
                                   parent who is incarcerated is away, the family structure changes.

Unmarried parents who are raising  Today, many caregivers are deciding not to marry but to raise
children                           children. The only difference is that they do not have a legal
                                   marriage license; however, their family structure is the same as dual
                                   parent families whether opposite sex or same sex.
Family Structure                                                                  THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES | 23
Transgender parents raising
children                     Description

Blended families             This refers to two ways in which children may be raised by a
                             transgender caregiver(s). A parent may transition after already
Families formed through      having children with someone of the opposite sex or they may
reproductive technology      transition prior to having a child and decide they want to parent.

First time older parents     A blended family can be two different caregivers that come together
                             each bringing their children from a previous relationship with
Families who experience      them. Sometimes the caregivers that come together with children
homelessness                 from a previous relationship may also decide to have a child
                             together.

                             Today we have sophisticated medical advances to help parents who
                             are infertile to become pregnant and give birth to their biological
                             child as well as to use the biological material from someone else and
                             carry that fertilized embryo to term. There are a variety of
                             reproductive technologies that are available to families. This is often
                             at a huge financial cost to the families, as most medical insurance
                             companies do not cover the medical expenses of becoming
                             pregnant.

                             Today it is becoming more common for men and women to have
                             children in their 30's, 40's, and even older. There are many reasons
                             why men and women may wait to become parents. It may be due to
                             infertility. It may be that the man and/or woman want to establish
                             themselves in a career prior to having children. It may be that they
                             wanted to have financial security before starting a family. What is
                             important is to not assume why someone is parenting at an older
                             age.

                             We know that some children are raised without a stable home. The
                             family may be living in their car, living in a hotel, a homeless shelter,
                             or living in multiple dwellings also known as couch surfing.
                             Families experiencing homelessness may be due to the loss of a job/
                             steady income, being employed by making minimal wages that do
                             not provide the means necessary to sustain housing (and other basic
                             necessities), or other issues that may complicate the family's ability
                             to sustain a stable place to live. Families do not always share their
                             homeless status as there is often shame and embarrassment that
                             society places on these families.
24 | THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES

Family Structure                      Description

Families with children who have       This refers to families who have a child or children with
developmental delays and              developmental delays and/or disabilities. These delays/disabilities
disabilities                          are varied. There also may be children without delays/disabilities in
                                      the family as well. This often places a burden on families, not only
                                      because of the time needed to care for a child who is not typically
                                      developing, but because society often misinterprets children who
                                      display behaviors that may be viewed as inappropriate.

Families raising their children in a  This refers to families who may have immigrated here and whose
culture not their own and in          children were either born in their country of origin or born in the
which English is not the primary      United States. This duality of cultures can create problems for the
language                              child and their family if societal expectations are that the family
                                      acculturate to the dominant culture. This results in children feeling
                                      shame about their family when they should feel pride in their
                                      family of origin.

Chosen or Found Family                A chosen or found family is made up of people who have
Multi-parent families                 intentionally chosen to embrace, nurture, love, and support each
                                      other regardless of blood or marriage. Rather than the blood ties
                                      that may dictate some biological families, found family stories
                                      emphasize the connections and communities we choose for
                                      ourselves. These narratives are often especially resonant for
                                      members of disenfranchised communities, such as those in the
                                      LGBTQ+ community, who keenly understand that unconditional
                                      love comes in all forms, and so do families.

                                      Multi-parent families come in a variety of forms, which include but
                                      are not limited to LGBTQIA+ and other families with children
                                      born via surrogacy or a sperm/egg donor, step-families where a
                                      child or children have developed a significant relationship with one
                                      or more step-parents, extended relationship families where relatives
                                      are raising the child, friends who wish to share the emotional and
                                      physical cost of child-rearing through platonic parenting,
                                      polyamorous families.

Children experience different family structures. Those structures may change as a child grows. We must
provide supportive and inclusive interactions, relationships and environments for each and every family. This
can be accomplished through our ability to be open, inviting, and listening to what the families in our program
need from us to feel a sense of belonging.

Pause to Reflect!
                                                                                                    THE DIVERSITY OF TODAY'S FAMILIES | 25

Discuss the following questions.

    1. After reviewing all of the families above, were there family structures that you were not
        previously familiar with?

   2. How do the family structures above challenge the traditional social construct of "family"?
   3. Imagine that you are working with families in a school or community setting. What level of

        comfort do you have in working with diverse families? What may be challenging for you?
        What are some strategies that you could use to help you in working on the biases that you
        may have?
26 | THE INFLUENCE OF CULTURE

THE INFLUENCE OF CULTURE

Culture is the set of beliefs, values, symbols, means of communication, religion, rituals, fashions, etiquette,
foods, and art that unite a particular society. Culture elements are learned behaviors; children learn them while
growing up in a particular culture as older members teach them how to live. As such, culture is passed down
from one generation to the next. The process of learning culture is called "acculturation".

   Some experts assert that who we are is a result of nurture--the relationships and caring that surround
us. Others argue that who we are is based entirely on genetics. According to this belief, our temperaments,
interests, and talents are set before birth. From this perspective, then, who we are depends on nature.

   One way researchers attempt to measure the impact of nature is by studying twins. Some studies have
followed identical twins who were raised separately. The pairs shared the same genetics but in some cases
were socialized in different ways. Instances of this type of situation are rare, but studying the degree to
which identical twins raised apart are the same and different can give researchers insight into the way our
temperaments, preferences, and abilities are shaped by our genetic makeup versus our social environment.

   For example, in 1968, twin girls were put up for adoption, separated from each other, and raised in different
households. The adoptive parents, and certainly the babies, did not realize the girls were one of five pairs of
twins who were made subjects of a scientific study (Flam 2007).

   In 2003, the two women, then aged thirty-five, were reunited. Elyse Schein and Paula Bernstein sat together
in awe, feeling like they were looking into a mirror. Not only did they look alike but they also behaved alike,
using the same hand gestures and facial expressions (Spratling 2007). Studies like these point to the genetic
roots of our temperament and behavior.

   Though genetics and hormones play an important role in human behavior, sociology's larger concern is the
effect society has on human behavior, the "nurture" side of the nature versus nurture debate. What race were
the twins? From what social class were their parents? What about gender? Religion? All these factors affected
the lives of the twins as much as their genetic makeup and are critical to consider as we look at life through the
sociological lens.

   The nature versus nurture debate is useful to help us contextualize the impact of culture on our definition
of self and our interaction with one another. Biology gives us the neural capacity for things like language
and culture, but our environments teach us how to use these capacities. For example, biology enables humans
to learn a language; this makes us different from other species. However, nothing about our biology dictates
whether a baby learns English, Spanish, or Tagalog. Which language one speaks is a learned behavior.
                                  THE INFLUENCE OF CULTURE | 27

Pause to Reflect!
Discuss the following questions.

     Imagine if the McClure Twins were separated at birth and adopted by or placed in separate
     resource families.

         1. What sociological factors might impact their development differently from one another?
         2. What biological factors might impact their development the same as one another?

Media Attributions

  · McClure twins © LaWr123 via wikimedia is licensed under a CC BY-SA (Attribution ShareAlike)
      license
28 | BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS

BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS

Our identities are ingrained in our being and the intersectionality of our identities make up the sum of who we
are. Those identities include:

  · Race
  · Ethnicity
  · Gender
  · Sex
  · Sexual Orientation
  · Religion
  · Socioeconomic status
  · Physical, Emotional, and Developmental (Dis)Ability
  · National Origin
  · First Language

Most of us have a tendency to view the world from the perspective of our own culture and may tend to view
different cultures as inferior or below one's own. This is referred to as ethnocentrism. This creates barriers
to building collaborative learning spaces for children, families, schools, and communities that celebrate and
elevate all members of that learning community. Reflecting on this affords us the opportunity to acknowledge
that no culture is better or worse than any other, only different.

   As we investigate our perspectives, we find that we are a product of our environments and as such, have
absorbed some of the thinking and ideas that have been passed to us from our family of origin. The relationship
between children, families, schools, and communities is delicate. Our goal is to promote collaboration that is
deeply respectful of one another. As such, we must self-reflect on areas of our own stereotypes, prejudice, and
discrimination and take care to mitigate or eliminate them from harming those relationships.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=43#h5p-1

                    Table 1.2: Connecting Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination
                                                                                            BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS | 29

Item        Function                                               Connection               Example
Stereotype
            Cognitive; thoughts about                              Overgeneralized beliefs  "Yankees fans are
Prejudice   people                                                 about people may lead    arrogant and
                                                                   to prejudice.            obnoxious."
            Affective; feelings about
            people, both positive and                              Feelings may influence   "I hate Yankees fans;
            negative                                               treatment of others,     they make me angry."
                                                                   leading to
                                                                   discrimination.

Discrimination Behavior; positive or negative treatment of others  Holding stereotypes      "I would never hire
                                                                   and harboring prejudice  nor become friends
                                                                   may lead to excluding,   with a person if I knew
                                                                   avoiding, and biased     they were a Yankees
                                                                   treatment of group       fan."
                                                                   members.

The American Psychological Association defines bias as "...an inclination or predisposition for or against
something." Bias often results in unfair treatment, in either positive or negative ways. Consider the following
forms of bias:

 1. Explicit bias: attitudes and beliefs (positive or negative) that we consciously or deliberately hold and
      express about a person or group. This kind of bias is outwardly and intentionally displayed through
      body language, facial expressions, speech, or other forms of communication. It is observed easily and
      oftentimes creates conflict between people.

 2. Implicit bias: attitudes and beliefs (positive or negative) about other people, ideas, issues, or institutions
      that occur outside of our conscious awareness and control, which affect our opinions and behavior. This
      kind of bias occurs automatically as the brain makes judgments based on past experiences, education and
      background. These judgments, if left unexamined, can cause friction with relationships.

 3. Confirmation bias: our subconscious tendency to seek and interpret information and other evidence in
      ways that affirm our existing beliefs, ideas, expectations, and/or hypotheses. Therefore, confirmation
      bias is both affected by and feeds our implicit biases.

Whether we mean to or not, we sometimes offend people by not thinking about what we say and the manner
in which we say it. One danger of limiting our social interactions to people who are from our own social group
is in being insensitive to people who are not like us. The term microaggression refers to acts of insensitivity that
reveal our inherent biases, cultural incompetency, and hostility toward someone outside of our community.
Those biases can be toward race, gender, nationality, or any other diversity variable. The individual on the
receiving end of a microaggression is reminded of the barriers to complete acceptance and understanding in the
relationship. Let's consider an example.
30 | BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=43#h5p-2

                                            Table 1.3: Microaggressions
                (9.3 Navigating the Diversity Landscape - College Success | OpenStax, n.d.)
                                                             BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS | 31

Category            Microaggression                          Why It's Offensive
Educational Status
or Situation        "You're an athlete; you don't need to Stereotypes athletes and ignores their
Educational Status
or Situation        study."                                  hard work.

Educational Status  "You don't get financial aid; you must Even an assumption of privilege can
or Situation
                    be rich."                                be invalidating.
Race, Ethnicity,
National Origin     "Did they have honors classes at your    Implies that someone is less prepared
                    high school?"                            or intelligent based on their
Race, Ethnicity,                                             geography.
National Origin
                    "You speak so well for someone like      Implies that people of a certain race/
Race, Ethnicity,    you."                                    ethnicity can't speak well.
National Origin
Race, Ethnicity,    "No, where are you really from?"         Calling attention to someone's
National Origin                                              national origin makes them feel
Race, Ethnicity,                                             separate.
National Origin
Race, Ethnicity,    "You must be good at _____."             Falsely connects identity to ability.
National Origin
Gender and          "My people had it so much worse          Makes assumptions and diminishes
Gender Identity     than yours did."                         suffering/difficulty.

Gender and          "I'm not even going to try your name. Dismisses a person's culture and
Gender Identity
                    It looks too difficult."                 heritage.
Gender and
Gender Identity     "It's so much easier for Black people    Assumes that merit is not the basis for
                    to get into college."                    achievement.
Gender and
Gender Identity     "They're so emotional."                  Assumes a person cannot be
                                                             emotional and rational.
Gender and
Gender Identity     "I guess you can't meet tonight          Assumes a parent (of any gender)
                    because you have to take care of your    cannot participate.
Sexual Orientation  son?"

Sexual Orientation  "I don't get all this pronoun stuff, so  Diminishes the importance of gender
                    I'm just gonna call you what I call      identity; indicates a lack of empathy.
Sexual Orientation  you."

                    "I can't even tell you used to be a      Conflates identity with appearance,
                    woman."                                  and assumes a person needs someone
                                                             else's validation.

                    "You're too good-looking to be so        Connects outward appearance to
                    smart."                                  ability.

                    "I support you; just don't throw it in Denies another person's right to

                    my face."                                express their identity or point of view.

                    "You seem so rugged for a gay guy."      Stereotypes all gay people as being
                                                             "not rugged," and could likely offend
                                                             the recipient.

                    "I might try being a lesbian."           May imply that sexual orientation is a
                                                             choice.
32 | BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS  Microaggression                        Why It's Offensive

 Category                     "I can't even keep track of all these  Bisexual, pansexual, asexual, and
 Sexual Orientation           new categories."                       other sexual orientations are just as
                                                                     valid and deserving of respect as more
 Sexual Orientation           "You can't just love whomever you      binary orientations.
                              want; pick one."
 Age                                                                 Bisexual, pansexual, asexual, and
 Age                          "Are you going to need help with the   other sexual orientations are just as
 Age                          software?"                             valid and deserving of respect as more
 Size                                                                binary orientations.
 Size                         "Young people have it so easy
 Size                         nowadays."                             May stereotype an older person as
 Ability                                                             lacking experience with the latest
 Ability                      "Okay, boomer."                        technology.
 Ability
                              "I bet no one messes with you."        Makes a false comparison between age
                                                                     and experience.
                              "You are so cute and tiny."
                                                                     Dismisses an older generation as out
                              "I wish I was thin and perfect like    of touch.
                              you."
                              (To a person using a wheelchair) "I    Projects a tendency to be aggressive
                              wish I could sit down wherever I       onto a person of large stature.
                              went."
                              "You don't have to complete the        Condescending to a person of small
                              whole test. Just do your best."        stature.

                              "I'm blind without my glasses."        Equates a person's size with character.

                                                                     Falsely assumes a wheelchair is a
                                                                     luxury; minimizes disabilities.

                                                                     Assumes that a disability means
                                                                     limited intellectual potential.

                                                                     Equating diminished capacity with a
                                                                     true disability.

Pause to Reflect!

Review Table 1: Family Structures. As you answer the following questions, think about implicit,
explicit, and confirmation bias both for and against the diversity of family structures.
                                                                                                             BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS | 33

1. What judgements or assumptions do I have about different family structures?
2. Identify examples of times when families are recipients of negative implicit, explicit, or

    confirmation bias from schools or communities.
3. Reflect on a time when you experienced or witnessed a microaggression in a family, school,

    or community:

         1. Describe what happened.
        2. What was the hidden message?
4. Calling out bias and microaggressions in schools and communities takes advocacy and
    courage. Describe concrete ways to bring awareness to and devise strategies around
    identifying and combating bias and microaggressions.
34 | BIAS & MICROAGGRESSIONS
                                                                                         THEORIES THAT HELP US UNDERSTAND FAMILIES | 35

PART II

THEORIES THAT HELP US
UNDERSTAND FAMILIES

     Learning Objectives
          · 2.1: Contrast five theories that help us to understand families.
          · 2.2: Explain how theories provide understanding of family dynamics.
          · 2.3: Analyze how a theoretical framework of families influences the reciprocal relationships
             between schools and/or communities and families.
36 | THEORIES THAT HELP US UNDERSTAND FAMILIES

Introduction

We examine theories about families in order to gain perspective about how they grow and develop. Our
examinations include an analysis of how families engage, collaborate, influence, and interact with children,
schools, and communities. In this chapter, we will look at five theories that help us to understand families:

 1. Bioecological systems theory,
 2. Family systems theory,
 3. Functionalism,
 4. Conflict theory, and
 5. Symbolic interaction.

Each theory presents a distinct and different perspective regarding the role of family in society. We will
identify areas of theoretical and practical overlap that inform our work with children, families, schools, and
communities.

Media Attributions

  · A family © Pixabay from Pexels is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
                                                                                                             BIOECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS THEORY | 37

BIOECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS THEORY

   One of the key theories that explains influences on individuals and their families is Bronfenbrenner's
bioecological systems theory. A basic tenet of Bronfenbrenner's bioecological systems theory (Bronfenbrenner
& Morris, 2006) is that child and youth development are influenced by many different contexts, settings, or
ecologies. Examples include family, peers, schools, communities, sociocultural belief systems, policy regimes,
and the economy. At the center of this theory is the child. As we move in and out of the circles, we categorize
the external influences that impact the child's development. Those circles impact each other. They shift and
change in society and in the overall influence on the child.
38 | BIOECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS THEORY

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=50#h5p-3

                Table 2.1: Bronfenbrenner's bioecological systems theory

Name          Description

Microsystem   Microsystems impact a child directly. These are the people with whom the child interacts such as
              parents, peers, and teachers. The relationship between individuals and those around them need to be
              considered.

Mesosystem    Mesosystems are interactions between those surrounding the individual. The relationship between
              parents and schools, for example, will indirectly affect the child.

Exosystem     Larger institutions such as the mass media or the healthcare system are referred to as the exosystem.
              These have an impact on families and peers and schools who operate under policies and regulations
              found in these institutions.

Macrosystem   We find cultural values and beliefs at the level of macrosystems. These larger ideals and expectations
              inform institutions that will ultimately impact the individual.

Chronosystem  All of this happens in an historical context referred to as the chronosystem. Cultural values change
              over time, as do policies of educational institutions or governments in certain political climates.
              Development occurs at a point in time.

Bronfenbrenner's bioecological systems theory looked at patterns of development across time. It also
considered the interactions between the development of the child and the environment. The implications of
this model include the social and political policies and practices affecting children, families, and parenting.
The bioecological systems theory serves as a visual organizer to both summarize and unpack key concepts and
themes as they relate to individual development, teaching and learning, and educational practices. The goal of
learning the bioecological systems theory is to understand the theoretical and research foundations that inform
the work in supporting students' well-being, teaching and learning, and identifying and using other factors/
resources such as parents, family, peers, to provide positive influence on students' learning and development.

Case Study (A)
                                                                                                       BIOECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS THEORY | 39

The human ecology framework extends Bronfenbrenner's model. As an example, a family seeking
refugee resettlement might be influenced by the following systems (Lang):

     · Biophysical environment: Were members of the family injured as they fled persecution?
     · Microsystem: Was there parental conflict from the stress of fleeing persecution?
     · Mesosystem: Is the family working with teachers and other school personnel who do not

        understand the complexities of refugee resettlement, or the home language of the family, or
        the cultural traditions of the family?
     · Exosystem: How have local leaders responded in ensuring that the family has support
        services and cultural experiences that welcome and include them into the community?
     · Macrosystem: Is the family experiencing discrimination or racism in the community of
        resettlement?
     · Chronosystem: How has the community of resettlement changed over time in response to
        the resettlement of multiple refugee families?

Case Study (B)

Reading about the Bioecological Systems Theory, I can think of a time in my life that shows each
40 | BIOECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS THEORY

     system impacting my childhood. Halfway through my fifth grade year, my parents informed me
     that we would travel overseas to live in Izmir, Turkey for two years. Even though my dad was in
     the military and we were used to moving a lot, we were surprised by this news. I didn't have a ton
     of time to prepare mentally and emotionally. We had a long sit down at the dinner table talking
     about this huge change in our life. I was so upset about leaving my friends and dog behind. For
     me, that resonates with microsystems.
     I experienced a lot of issues with being bullied while living in Turkey. I was the new kid, coming in
     with my southern U.S. accent. I was physically attacked by one girl in the bathroom at school
     which sent me to a local Turkish hospital. At the time, we were not living on a military base, but in
     the community of Izmir itself. My parents and my dad's commanding officer had to have a giant sit
     down meeting with the school. At the time, I felt like it was just making everything worse but
     really, I just wanted to go home back to my friends. This was part of my mesosystem.
     I developed panic attacks from the trauma of moving, of being bullied, and of feeling isolated. I was
     in and out of the hospital until I learned how to self soothe and control my anxiety on my own, but
     needing to go to the hospital from panic attacks was enough to stress me out and send me back
     time and time again. The cultural divide was wide. In Izmir, there was not a military base. Our
     family lived in Izmir. Americans were seen as aggressors. I was constantly harassed in the streets
     due to the significant cultural differences. I wore tank tops and shorts, while most women from
     Turkey dressed in long scarfs, head coverings, and long skirts. This was really hard for me as a fifth
     grader. I didn't fully understand. This was part of my exosystem and macrosystem.
     Coming back to the United States was difficult. I began to understand that cultural differences
     mattered and that the United States was seen as an aggressor in other parts of the world. I was
     able to have first-hand experience of cultures and beliefs outside of what I grew up in. I gained a
     deeper understanding of my own self and for how I interact with folks from parts of the world
     outside of the U.S. This was part of my chronosystem.

Bronfenbrenner's bioecological systems theory and the human ecology framework assume that families are
intentional in their decision-making and that they work toward

  · biological sustenance,
  · economic maintenance, and
  · psychosocial function.

As patterns in the social environment threaten family's quality of life in these three areas, the system will be
                                                                                                              BIOECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS THEORY | 41

more and more likely to seek change. Those threats create non-supportive and exclusive communities that
work against the families' participation and inclusion in schools and communities.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Think of yourself at a particular time in your childhood (e.g., age 10). Describe how each
             system in the bioecological systems theory model directly impacted your development.
             Identify your influencers in each system.
         2. Identify two specific community resources that are available to children and families in your
             community that address each system in the bioecological systems theory model. For each
             resource, provide the address, phone number, and web site. Why does each resource connect
             to the specific system level?

Media Attributions

  · Bronfenbrenner's ecological systems theory © Ian Joslin is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
  · Amina Aboukar, Nigerian refugee from Damassak © EU Civil Protection & Humanitarian Aid is

      licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND (Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivatives) license
42 | FAMILY SYSTEMS THEORY

FAMILY SYSTEMS THEORY

Dr. Murray Bowen's Family Systems Theory claims that the family is understood best by conceptualizing it as a
complex, dynamic, and changing collection of parts, subsystems and family members. Family Systems Theory
states that individuals cannot be understood in isolation from their family unit, as families are emotional
systems with interconnected members. It highlights key concepts like differentiation of self, which refers
to one's ability to separate personal thoughts and feelings from the family's emotional climate. Bowen also
identified patterns like triangles, where conflicts involve a third party to stabilize relationships, and
multigenerational transmission, where behaviors and patterns are passed down through generations. The
theory emphasizes the need for self-awareness and understanding family dynamics to improve individual
functioning and relationships.

   The Family Systems Theory is represented by triangles, or a three-person relationship system. It is
considered the building block or "molecule" of larger emotional systems because a triangle is the smallest stable
relationship system. A two-person system is unstable because it tolerates little tension before involving a third
person (Lang).
                                                                                                                    FAMILY SYSTEMS THEORY | 43

Pause to Reflect!
44 | FAMILY SYSTEMS THEORY

     Marcus and Antonio married three years ago and adopted a daughter, Angela, who is now eleven
     years old. Marcus and Antonio frequently argue about parenting styles and are navigating preteen
     years with different views on how to best support Angela.Marcus often confides in Angela, sharing
     his frustrations about Antonio. Angela feels uncomfortable about this and is not sure if she should
     talk with Antonio about what she has heard. Over time, Angela begins to feel undue stress and
     loyalty conflicts.

         1. Describe how this scenario relates to Family Systems Theory.
         2. Describe which sides of the family systems triangle are unstable.
         3. How might that instability impact the family's interactions with schools?

A triangle can contain much more tension without involving another person because the tension can shift
around three relationships. If the tension is too high for one triangle to contain, it spreads to a series of
"interlocking" triangles. Spreading the tension can stabilize a system, but does not resolve tension. Bowen
Family Systems Theory asks us to consider eight key interlocking triangles when understanding the family:

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=54#h5p-4

                                     Table 2.2: Bowen's Family Systems Theory
                                 FAMILY SYSTEMS THEORY | 45

Name                Description

Emotional           An emotional triangle represents the emotionally driven relationship process that is present in all
triangles           families. It describes the emotional dynamics between any two or all members of the triangle.

Differentiation of We are emotionally connected to our families, and those emotions impact our family dynamics.

self                Differentiation of self indicates that we are autonomous in our own emotional functioning.

Nuclear family      The nuclear family provides a symbolic image of the family at the nucleus, the center, of the
                    emotional system. In times of marital conflict, dysfunction of a spouse, emotional distancing, or
                    conflict over child rearing, that nucleus is threatened.

Family projective   The child is the focus of this key tenet of Bowen's Family Systems Theory. When there is an
process             intense focus on the child, they may not be given the tools or space to grow, think, feel, and act
                    for themself.

Multi-generational  Multi-generational transmission process refers to how generations of families teach or role model
transmission        emotional intensity. This key tenet asks us to consider how each generation offers greater or lesser
process             levels of differentiation of emotional intensity within the nuclear family.

Emotional cut-off Emotional cut-off describes our need for personal space and distance from emotional intensity.

Sibling position Personality characteristics fit within the sibling position in which a person grows up.

Societal emotional  Our emotions influence our cognitive systems and behaviors which, in turn, impact our
process             interactions with others. The societal emotional process describes that relationship within
                    society and amongst each other.

Other key concepts within the Family Systems Theory include:

  · boundaries (e.g.Who is a member of the system?),
  · equilibrium (e.g., during stressors or crises, the system attempts to return to its original state wherein

      members are functional and comfortable), and
  · bidirectional (e.g., a change with one member will impact at least one other member, and hence impact

      the whole system).

Case Study (C)

In order to assess patterns of adjustment in families that have resettled into a new country, we
must examine the structure of the family unit and the processes that occur within that family
system.
46 | FAMILY SYSTEMS THEORY

     For example, one 2008 study collected data from
     parents and their children who immigrated to the
     United States from Vietnam and Cambodia to
     assess the role of family processes in
     disagreements over cultural values. The
     researchers found that cultural clashes were
     linked to parent-child conflict, which in turn was
     linked to reduced parent-child bonding, both of
     which increase adolescent behavioral problems
     (Lang).

This theory also assumes that families can examine
their own processes and set deliberate goals. Change can occur when a family system acknowledges that a
particular family pattern causes family stressors and identifies new processes that support the family's goals.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. What is the main role you have in your family system?
         2. Which cultural values do you share with your family system?
         3. Which cultural values do you separate yourself from within your family system?
         4. How do family roles, patterns of interaction between family members, and shared or
             unshared cultural values impact a family's relationships with schools or communities?

Media Attributions

  · Family Systems Theory © Joan Giovannini
  · Mother and Daughter © RODNAE Productions is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero)

      license
               FUNCTIONALISM | 47

FUNCTIONALISM

When considering the role of family in society, functionalists uphold the notion that families are an important
social institution and that they play a key role in stabilizing society. They also note that family members take
on status roles in a marriage or family. The family, and its members, perform certain functions that facilitate
the prosperity and development of society. Functionalists believe that the family socializes children, it provides
emotional and practical support for its members, it helps regulate sexual activity and sexual reproduction,
and it provides its members with a social identity. In addition, sudden or far-reaching changes in the family's
structure or processes threaten its stability and weaken society.

   Sociologist George Murdock conducted a survey of 250 societies and determined that there are four
universal residual functions of the family: sexual, reproductive, educational, and economic (Lee 1982).
According to Murdock, the family (which for him includes the state of marriage) regulates sexual relations
between individuals. He does not deny the existence or impact of premarital or extramarital sex, but states that
the family offers a socially legitimate sexual outlet for adults (Lee 1985). This outlet gives way to reproduction,
which is a necessary part of ensuring the survival of society.

   Once children are born, the family plays a vital role in training them for adult life. As the primary agent
of socialization and enculturation, the family teaches young children the ways of thinking and behaving that
follow social and cultural norms, values, beliefs, and attitudes.

     Case Study (D)
48 | FUNCTIONALISM

     Functionalists believe that parents teach children gender roles. Gender roles are an important part
     of the economic function of a family. In each family, there is a division of labor that consists of
     instrumental and expressive roles. Men tend to assume the instrumental roles in the family, which
     typically involve work outside of the family that provides financial support and establishes family
     status. Women tend to assume the expressive roles, which typically involve work inside of the
     family which provides emotional support and physical care for children (Crano and Aronoff 1978).
     What might this little girl be learning about the role of her mother?

     Case Study (E)

     Maria and Sarah are a same-sex couple raising their 6-year-old son, Ethan, in a suburban
     community. Maria and Sarah adopted Ethan when he was an infant. Both parents are employed;
     Maria works as a nurse, while Sarah is a software engineer. They share responsibilities at home.
     Maria and Sarah read to Ethan daily, help him with homework, and encourage his curiosity. They
                                                                                                                                       FUNCTIONALISM | 49

     also teach him social skills through playdates and family gatherings. Both moms ensure Ethan feels
     loved and secure. They practice open communication, allowing Ethan to express his feelings and
     concerns. Every weekend, they participate in outings and game nights with family friends.
     Maria and Sarah budget carefully, saving for Ethan's education and ensuring all basic needs are
     met. Maria and Sarah share household duties and parenting responsibilities. They rotate tasks like
     cooking, cleaning, and attending parent-teacher meetings, ensuring a balanced workload and
     modeling cooperation for Ethan.

         1. Functionalism focuses on socialization, emotional support, economic support, reproduction
             and regulation of sexual activity, and family dynamics. Describe how this family fits into
             those categories.

According to functionalists, the differentiation of the roles on the basis of sex ensures that families are well
balanced and coordinated. When family members move outside of these roles, the family is thrown out of
balance and must recalibrate in order to function properly. For example, if the father assumes an expressive role
such as providing daytime care for the children, the mother must take on an instrumental role such as gaining
paid employment outside of the home in order for the family to maintain balance and function.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Functionalism is often criticized as being an outdated theory in understanding families.
             Why?
         2. How do traditional gender and family roles impact a family's relationships with schools or
             communities?

Media Attributions

  · Hanging Clothes Outside © Bud Ellison is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
50 | CONFLICT THEORY

CONFLICT THEORY

Conflict theorists are quick to point out that U.S. families have been defined as private entities, the
consequence of which has been to leave family matters to only those within the family. Many people in the
United States are resistant to government intervention in the family: parents do not want the government
to tell them how to raise their children or to become involved in domestic issues. Conflict theory highlights
the role of power in family life and contends that the family is often not a haven but rather an arena where
power struggles can occur. This exercise of power often entails the performance of family status roles. Conflict
theorists may study conflicts as simple as the enforcement of rules from parent to child, or they may examine
more serious issues such as domestic violence (spousal and child), sexual assault, marital rape, and incest.

   The conflict perspective views the family as a vehicle to maintain patriarchy (gender inequality) and social
inequality in society. According to conflict theorists, the family works toward the continuance of social
inequality within a society by maintaining and reinforcing the status quo. Because inheritance, education and
social capital are transmitted through the family structure, wealthy families are able to keep their privileged
social position for their members, while individuals from poor families are denied similar status.

     Case Study (D)
                                                                                                                                     CONFLICT THEORY | 51

     Conflict theorists have also seen the family as a social arrangement benefiting men more than
     women, allowing men to maintain a position of power. The traditional family form in most cultures
     is patriarchal, contributing to inequality between the sexes. Males tend to have more power and
     females tend to have less. Traditional male roles and responsibilities are valued more than the
     traditional roles done by their wives (i.e., housekeeping, child rearing). The traditional family is also
     an inequitable structure for women and children.
     What might this young child be learning about household responsibilities of the mother and the
     father?

The first study of marital power was performed in 1960. Researchers found that the person with the most
access to valued resources held the most power. As money is one of the most valuable resources, men who
worked in paid labor outside of the home held more power than women who worked inside the home (Blood
and Wolfe 1960). Even today, with more fluid family roles, conflict theorists find disputes over the division of
household labor to be a common source of marital discord. Household labor offers no wages and, therefore,
52 | CONFLICT THEORY

no power. Studies indicate that when men do more housework, women experience more satisfaction in their
marriages, reducing the incidence of conflict (Coltrane 2000). In general, conflict theorists tend to study areas
of marriage and life that involve inequalities or discrepancies in power and authority, as they are reflective of
the larger social structure.

     Case Study (E)

     John and Lisa have been married for 15 years. They have three children: Alex (14), Emily (11), and
     Jake (8). John is a high-powered attorney, and Lisa is a successful businesswoman. The family lives
     in an affluent suburban neighborhood, enjoying a lifestyle with access to extracurricular activities,
     and a vacation home.
     John and Lisa work in high-demand careers which result in very long work days. They hired a
     nanny and house cleaner to help with the day-to-day family operations. John and Lisa's busy
     careers mean less time spent with their children. Alex, being the oldest, often receives more
     attention and investment in extracurricular activities like private tutoring and sports, while Emily
     and Jake feel they receive less focus and resources.
     The children are socialized into a lifestyle that emphasizes material wealth and status, creating a
     competitive atmosphere among siblings. Alex, excelling academically and athletically, is often
     praised, intensifying sibling rivalry and feelings of inadequacy in Emily and Jake. Emily, in particular,
     shows signs of rebellion, such as declining grades and arguments with her parents. Family conflicts
     escalate when John and Lisa, recognizing the issues, attempt to impose stricter rules and oversight.

         1. Describe how this scenario relates to Conflict Theory.
         2. Describe the power struggles presented in this case study.
         3. How might those power struggles impact the family's interactions with schools?

     Pause to Reflect!
                                                                                                                                     CONFLICT THEORY | 53

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. How does the division of chores impact your household?
         2. How does the traditional household division impact a family's relationships with schools or
             communities?

Media Attributions

  · Family breakfast © Werner Pfennig is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
54 | SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM

SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM

Interactionists view the world in terms of symbols and the meanings assigned to them (LaRossa and Reitzes
1993). The family itself is a symbol. To some, it is a father, mother, and children. To others, it is any union
that involves respect and compassion. Interactionists stress that family is not an objective, concrete reality. Like
other social phenomena, it is a social construct that is subject to the ebb and flow of social norms and ever-
changing meanings.

   Consider the meaning of other elements of family: in the past, "parent" was a symbol of a biological
and emotional connection to a child. With more parent-child relationships developing through adoption,
remarriage, or change in guardianship, the word "parent" today is less likely to be associated with a biological
connection than with whoever is socially recognized as having the responsibility for a child's upbringing.
Similarly, the terms "mother" and "father" are no longer rigidly associated with the meanings of caregiver and
breadwinner. These meanings are more free-flowing through changing family roles.

     Case Study (F)
                                                                                                                       SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM | 55

     In Chapter 1, you learned about the changing definition of the family and explored "family" as a
     social construct that is influenced by culture, society, and the media. Interactionists also recognize
     how the family status roles of each member are socially constructed, playing an important part in
     how people perceive and interpret social behavior.
     Based on what you see in this photograph, describe the role of the father in this family.

Interactionists view the family as a group of role players or "actors" that come together to act out their parts in
an effort to construct a family. These roles are up for interpretation. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century, a "good father," for example, was one who worked hard to provide financial security for his children.
Today, for some, a "good father" is one who takes the time outside of work to promote his children's emotional
well-being, social skills, and intellectual growth--in some ways, a much more daunting task.

     Case Study (G)
56 | SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM

     Karen, a single mother, works as a nurse, balancing long shifts with raising her two teenage sons,
     Michael and David, in an urban neighborhood. Karen maintains an open and supportive
     communication style with her sons, fostering an environment where they feel comfortable sharing
     their thoughts and experiences.
     Karen assumes multiple roles: caregiver, disciplinarian, and emotional support. She often discusses
     her expectations openly with her sons, emphasizing the importance of responsibility and mutual
     respect. Michael and David communicate differently with Karen; Michael is more reserved and
     indirect, while David is expressive and straightforward. Michael and David understand and
     navigate their roles as sons and students. Michael, being the elder, often feels the implicit
     expectation to set an example for his younger brother, which shapes his behavior and decisions.
     Michael takes on a part-time job and aspires to attend college. David engages actively in school
     sports and arts. The family develops shared understandings and routines, such as dinner
     conversations and weekend activities.

         1. Describe how this scenario relates to Symbolic Interactionism.
         2. Describe the social interactions presented in this case study.
         3. How might those social interactions impact the family's interactions with schools?

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Based on what you learned in Chapter 1, which family structures align with the symbolic
             interactionist perspective?
         2. What implicit or explicit bias might a traditional family aligned with conflict theory
             experience from a teacher or community member who holds a symbolic interactionist
             perspective?
                    SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM | 57

Media Attributions

· Bedtime reading © Ron Lach is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
58 | SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM
                                                                                                                   A CLOSER LOOK AT PARENTING | 59

PART III

A CLOSER LOOK AT PARENTING

     Learning Objectives
          · 3:1: Apply Attachment Theory to our modern definition of "family".
          · 3.2: Identify different parenting styles.
          · 3.3: Describe how parenting develops over time.
60 | A CLOSER LOOK AT PARENTING

Introduction

Parenting styles influence the development of children's social and emotional growth. It is a major area of
study for developmental psychologists. We will examine a variety of parenting styles and analyze how culture
impacts them. We will also define attachment theory and discuss its application to our evolving definition of
"family" that we explored in Chapters 1 and 2.

Media Attributions

  · Young girla and boy © Photo by Annie Spratt on Unsplash
                   ATTACHMENT THEORY | 61

ATTACHMENT THEORY

Attachment

Psychosocial development occurs as children form relationships, interact with others, and understand and
manage their feelings. In social and emotional development, forming healthy attachments is very important
and is the major social milestone of infancy. Attachment is a long-standing connection or bond with others.
Developmental psychologists are interested in how infants reach this milestone. They ask such questions as:
How do parent and infant attachment bonds form? What accounts for children's attachment differences?

   Researchers Harry Harlow, John Bowlby, and Mary Ainsworth conducted studies designed to answer these
questions. In the 1950s, Harlow conducted a series of experiments on monkeys. He separated newborn
monkeys from their mothers. Each monkey was presented with two surrogate mothers. One surrogate monkey
was made out of wire mesh. She could dispense milk. The other monkey was softer and made from cloth: this
monkey did not dispense milk. Research shows that the monkeys preferred the soft, cuddly cloth monkey even
though she did not provide any nourishment. The baby monkeys spent their time clinging to the cloth monkey
and only went to the wire monkey when they needed to be fed. Prior to this study, the medical and scientific
communities generally thought that babies become attached to the people who provide their nourishment.
However, Harlow (1958) concluded that there was more to the mother-child bond than nourishment. Feelings
of comfort and security are the critical components to maternal-infant bonding, which leads to healthy
psychosocial development.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.

         1. Watch Harlow's Studies on Dependency in Monkeys.
62 | ATTACHMENT THEORY

                                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                                    view them online here: https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-
                         communities/?p=70#oembed-1

         2. Describe what you see in the video.
         3. Identify how this helps you to understand attachment.

Building on the work of Harlow and others, John Bowlby developed the concept of attachment theory.
He defined attachment as the affectional bond or tie that an infant forms with the mother (Bowlby, 1969).
An infant must form this bond with a primary caregiver in order to have normal social and emotional
development. In addition, Bowlby proposed that this attachment bond is very powerful and continues
throughout life. He used the concept of secure base to define a healthy attachment between parent and child
(Bowlby, 1969). A secure base is a parental presence that gives the child a sense of safety as the child explores
its surroundings. Bowlby said that two things are needed for a healthy attachment: the caregiver must be
responsive to the child's physical, social, and emotional needs. In addition, the caregiver and child must engage
in mutually enjoyable interactions (Bowlby, 1969).

   Bowlby concluded that the primary caregiver has a particular role in providing the infant and child with
a sense of safety: a secure base from which to thrive and flourish. Bowlby pointed toward four stages in the
development of attachment:

  · Preattachment phase (birth to 6 weeks)
  · `Attachment-in-the-making' phase (6 weeks to 6 to 8 months)
  · `Clear cut' attachment phase (6 to 8 months to 18 months to 2 years)
  · Formation of a reciprocal relationship (18 months to 2 years and on) (Harlow, 2021)

While Bowlby thought attachment was an all-or-nothing process, Mary Ainsworth's (1970) research showed
otherwise. Ainsworth wanted to know if children differ in the ways they bond, and if so, why.
                                                             ATTACHMENT THEORY | 63

   To find the answers, she used the Strange Situation
procedure to study attachment between mothers and their
infants (1970). In the Strange Situation, the mother (or
primary caregiver) and the infant (age 12-18 months) are
placed in a room together. There are toys in the room, and
the caregiver and child spend some time alone in the room.
After the child has had time to explore the surroundings, a
stranger enters the room. The mother then leaves her baby
with the stranger. After a few minutes, she returns to
comfort her child.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Watch Ainsworth's Strange Situation study.

                                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                                    view them online here: https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-
                                    communities/?p=70#oembed-2

         2. Describe what you see in the video.
         3. Identify how this helps you to understand attachment theory.

Based on how the infants/toddlers responded to the separation and reunion, Ainsworth identified three types
of parent-child attachments: secure, avoidant, and resistant (Ainsworth & Bell, 1970). A fourth style, known
as disorganized attachment, was later described (Main & Solomon, 1990).

                                            Table 3.1: Types of Attachments
64 | ATTACHMENT THEORY  Description

 Type                   The attachment figure is used as a secure base to explore
 Secure                 the environment and is sought out in times of stress.
                        Securely attached children were distressed when their
 Avoidant               caregivers left the room in the Strange Situation
                        experiment, but when their caregivers returned, the
 Resistant              securely attached children were happy to see them.
                        Securely attached children have caregivers who are
 Disorganized           sensitive and responsive to their needs.

                        The child is unresponsive to the parent, does not use the
                        parent as a secure base, and does not care if the parent
                        leaves. The toddler reacts to the parent the same way she
                        reacts to a stranger. When the parent does return, the
                        child is slow to show a positive reaction. Ainsworth
                        theorized that these children were most likely to have a
                        caregiver who was insensitive and inattentive to their
                        needs (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978).

                        Children tend to show clingy behavior, but then they
                        reject the attachment figure's attempts to interact with
                        them (Ainsworth & Bell, 1970). These children do not
                        explore the toys in the room, as they are too fearful.
                        During separation in the Strange Situation, they became
                        extremely disturbed and angry with the caregiver. When
                        the caregiver returns, the children are difficult to comfort.
                        Resistant attachment is the result of the caregivers'
                        inconsistent level of response to their child.

                        Children with disorganized attachment behave oddly in
                        the Strange Situation. They freeze, run around the room
                        in an erratic manner, or try to run away when the
                        caregiver returns (Main & Solomon, 1990). This type of
                        attachment is seen most often in children who have been
                        abused. Research has shown that abuse disrupts a child's
                        ability to regulate their emotions.

More recently, attachment theory has been critiqued for its limitations. While it is clear that secure attachments
to caregivers influence human development across the lifespan, it is important to note that Harlow's, Bowlby's,
and Ainsworth's studies focused, primarily, on the role of the mother. Also, as we consider the interactions
outlined in Table 1, we notice that each interaction is short in duration and does not provide multiple glimpses
into the relationship between the caregiver and the child. A longitudinal understanding of that relationship
development is lacking.

   John T. Bruer, author of the book The Myth of the First Three Years, critiqued the Strange Situation Test.
He believed that attachment classifications that infants received were not highly stable over time. "One would
think that when, or shortly after, the twig is bent into a type B baby, the infant would tend to remain a type
B baby. Recent studies of even middle class infants, however, do not show high stability in infants attachment
classification over time. What the evidence seems to suggest is that the classification remains stable as long as
the life circumstances for mother and infant and the caring relationship between mother and infant remains
                                                                                                                               ATTACHMENT THEORY | 65

stable." Breuer concludes that is really, as the wind blows, rather than, as the twig is bent. Later experience,
according to Bruer, can straighten a bent twig or bend a straight one.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.

         1. Think of a child that you know well.
         2. What type of attachment best describes the child's relationship with a caregiver?
         3. Describe interactions between the two that drew you to this conclusion.

Attachment theory has been critiqued for its limitations. While it is clear that secure attachments to caregivers
influence human development across the lifespan, it is important to note that Harlow's, Bowlby's, and
Ainsworth's studies focused, primarily, on the role of the mother. An example of one critique came from
psychologist Michael Rutter who argued that Attachment Theory excluded an examination of caregivers like
fathers and grandparents. Researchers like Lena Robinson noted that Attachment Theory was built around
Western notions of `good parenting' and ignored diverse parenting models practiced in communities around
the world. Finally, as we consider the interactions outlined in Table 1, we notice that each interaction is short
in duration and does not provide multiple glimpses into the relationship between the caregiver and the child.
A longitudinal understanding of that relationship development is lacking (Gibson et al., 2023).

   Researchers have pointed out that a child's temperament may have a strong influence on attachment
(Gervai, 2009; Harris, 2009), and others have noted that attachment varies from culture to culture, a factor not
accounted for in Ainsworth's research (Rothbaum, Weisz, Pott, Miyake, & Morelli, 2000; van Ijzendoorn &
Sagi-Schwartz, 2008).

   A growing body of research points toward the role of peers in relationship development. This research
questions which have more influence: caregivers or peers (Harris 1998). O'Connor and Zeanah (2003) suggest
that the definition of attachment disorder might be expanded to include problems in social relationships with
peers and social cognitive problems indexed by a difficulty in understanding the thoughts and feelings of self
and others. Reframing attachment theory through this lens leads to the question of the theory's applicability to
children with exceptionalities such as Autism Spectrum Disorders or psychiatric disorders where attachments
are influenced by the characteristics of the exceptionality.
66 | ATTACHMENT THEORY

   Researchers are interested in how early experience and attachments impact adulthood, indicating that
people who have insecure attachments as small children tend to be drawn to those who fit their expectations,
even if they are treated badly. "Our attachment system preferentially sees things according to what has
happened in the past," said Dr. Amir Levine, a psychiatrist at Columbia University and the co-author of the
book "Attached," which explores how attachment behaviors affect the neurochemistry of the brain. "It's kind
of like searching in Google where it fills in based on what you searched before" (Murphy, 2017). It is important
to note that our attachment models are not fixed.

   Secure attachments formed later in life can help us to override our expectations for insecure attachments.It
is important to note that our attachment models are not fixed. Secure attachments formed later in life can
help us to override our expectations for insecure attachments. Educators, caregivers, and support systems can
intervene directly with children with insecure attachments by focusing on their external social interactions and
internal feelings of self-worth to build a foundation. This foundation includes promoting

  · Trust that a caregiver is available and supportive,
  · Parental reflective function when a caregiver understands their own and their children's behaviors and

      stresses;
  · Self-esteem that encourages a positive self-view because of the stable and reliable external social

      environment;
  · Autonomy/self-efficacy that encourages the child to ask questions and demonstrate healthy protest;
  · Family membership. (Harlow, 2021).
                   ATTACHMENT THEORY | 67

Pause to Reflect!

Discuss the following questions.

    1. Choose one of the following lenses: temperament, culture, peers, exceptionalities. Give
        specific examples of how it challenges or extends your understanding of attachment theory.

   2. Identify life events that support the idea that attachment models are not fixed.
   3. Think back to Chapters 1 and 2 when you explored the growing definition of family. Apply

        attachment theory to one of those definitions. Where does it align and where does it
        diverge?

Media Attributions

  · Mother and infant in bed © Photo by kevin liang on Unsplash
  · Three young girls © Photo by Charlein Gracia on Unsplash is licensed under a Public Domain license
68 | PARENTING STYLES

PARENTING STYLES

Developmental psychologists have been interested in how parents influence the development of children's
social and instrumental competence since at least the 1920s. One of the most robust approaches to this
area is the study of what has been called "parenting style." Our text defines parenting style, explores four
types, and discusses how parenting styles influence the social and emotional development of children. It is
important to note that parenting styles are not the sole influencers in the development and trajectory of a
child's development. They are only one force within a system of forces.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Watch The Science Behind How Parents Affect Child Development.
             https://embed.ted.com/talks/lang/en/
             yuko_munakata_the_science_behind_how_parents_affect_child_development
         2. What are your key take-aways from Yuko Munakata's TED Talk?
         3. Identify how this helps you to understand parenting styles and their effect on the
             development of children?

Parenting Style Defined

Parenting is a complex activity that includes many specific behaviors that work individually and together to
influence child outcomes. Although specific parenting behaviors, such as spanking or reading aloud, may
influence child development, looking at any specific behavior in isolation may be misleading. Many writers
have noted that specific parenting practices are less important in predicting child well-being than is the broad
pattern of parenting. Most researchers who attempt to describe this broad parental milieu rely on Diana
Baumrind's concept of parenting style. The construct of parenting style is used to capture normal variations in
parents' attempts to control and socialize their children (Baumrind, 1991).
                                                                                                                                   PARENTING STYLES | 69

   Two points are critical in understanding this definition. First, parenting style is meant to describe normal
variations in parenting. In other words, the parenting style typology Baumrind developed should not be
understood to include deviant parenting, such as might be observed in abusive or neglectful homes. Second,
Baumrind assumes that normal parenting revolves around issues of control.

   Parenting style captures two important areas of focus: parental
responsiveness and parental demandingness (Maccoby & Martin, 1983).
Parental responsiveness (also referred to as parental warmth or
supportiveness) refers to "the extent to which parents intentionally
foster individuality, self-regulation, and self-assertion by being attuned,
supportive, and acquiescent to children's special needs and demands"
(Baumrind, 1991, p. 62). Parental demandingness (also referred to as
behavioral control) refers to "the claims parents make on children to
become integrated into the family whole, by their maturity demands,
supervision, disciplinary efforts and willingness to confront the child
who disobeys" (Baumrind, 1991, pp. 61- 62).

                         Table 3.2: Parenting Styles

Demand Level  Support (Low)  Support (High)
Low           Uninvolved     Permissive
High          Authoritarian  Authoritative

According to Baumrind, categorizing parents according to whether they are high or low on parental
demandingness and responsiveness creates a typology of four parenting styles: indulgent, authoritarian,
authoritative, and uninvolved (Maccoby & Martin, 1983). Each of these parenting styles reflects different
naturally occurring patterns of parental values, practices, and behaviors (Baumrind, 1991) and a distinct
balance of responsiveness and demandingness.

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
online here:
https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=75#h5p-5
70 | PARENTING STYLES

                       Table 3.3: Baumrind's Categories of Parenting

Category               Description
Indulgent
                       Indulgent caregivers may also be referred to as
                       "permissive" or "nondirective." They "are more
                       responsive than they are demanding. They are
                       nontraditional and lenient, do not require mature
                       behavior, allow considerable self-regulation, and avoid
                       confrontation" (Baumrind, 1991, p. 62). Indulgent
                       caregivers may be further divided into two types:

                         · democratic parents, who, though lenient, are more
                             conscientious, engaged, and committed to the child,
                             and

                         · nondirective parents.

Authoritarian          Authoritarian caregivers are highly demanding and
                       directive, but not responsive. "They are obedience- and
                       status-oriented, and expect their orders to be obeyed
                       without explanation" (Baumrind, 1991, p. 62). These
                       parents provide well-ordered and structured
                       environments with clearly stated rules. Authoritarian
                       caregivers can be divided into two types:

                         · non authoritarian-directive, who are directive, but
                             not intrusive or autocratic in their use of power, and

                         · authoritarian-directive, who are highly intrusive.

Authoritative          Authoritative caregivers are both demanding and
Uninvolved             responsive. "They monitor and impart clear standards for
                       their children's conduct. They are assertive, but not
                       intrusive and restrictive. Their disciplinary methods are
                       supportive, rather than punitive. They want their children
                       to be assertive as well as socially responsible, and
                       self-regulated as well as cooperative" (Baumrind, 1991, p.
                       62).

                       Uninvolved caregivers are low in both responsiveness and
                       demandingness. In extreme cases, this parenting style
                       might encompass both rejecting-neglecting and neglectful
                       parents, although most parents of this type fall within the
                       normal range. (Baumrind, 1991).

Parenting styles also differ in the extent to which they are characterized by a third dimension: psychological
control. Psychological control "refers to control attempts that intrude into the psychological and emotional
development of the child" (Barber, 1996, p. 3296) through use of parenting practices such as guilt induction,
withdrawal of love, or shaming. One key difference between authoritarian and authoritative parenting is in
the dimension of psychological control. Both authoritarian and authoritative parents place high demands
                                                                                                                                    PARENTING STYLES | 71

on their children and expect their children to behave appropriately and obey parental rules. Authoritarian
parents, however, also expect their children to accept their judgments, values, and goals without questioning.
In contrast, authoritative parents are more open to give and take with their children and make greater use of
explanations. Thus, although authoritative and authoritarian parents are equally high in behavioral control,
authoritative parents tend to be low in psychological control, while authoritarian parents tend to be high.

   Parenting style has been found to predict child well-being in the domains of social competence, academic
performance, psychosocial development, and problem behavior. Research in the United States, based on
parent interviews, child reports, and parent observations consistently finds that:

  · Children and adolescents whose parents are authoritative rate themselves and are rated by objective
      measures as more socially and instrumentally competent than those whose parents are nonauthoritative
      (Baumrind, 1991; Weiss & Schwarz, 1996; Miller et al., 1993).

  · Children and adolescents whose parents are uninvolved perform most poorly in all domains.
In general, parental responsiveness predicts social competence and psychosocial functioning, while parental
demandingness is associated with instrumental competence and behavioral control (i.e., academic performance
and deviance). These findings indicate that

  · Children and adolescents from authoritarian families (high in demandingness, but low in
      responsiveness) tend to perform moderately well in school and be uninvolved in problem behavior, but
      they have poorer social skills, lower self-esteem, and higher levels of depression.

  · Children and adolescents from indulgent homes (high in responsiveness, low in demandingness) are
      more likely to be involved in problem behavior and perform less well in school, but they have higher self-
      esteem, better social skills, and lower levels of depression.

In reviewing the literature on parenting style, one is struck by the consistency with which authoritative
72 | PARENTING STYLES

upbringing is associated with both instrumental and social competence and lower levels of problem behavior
in both boys and girls at all developmental stages. The benefits of authoritative parenting and the detrimental
effects of uninvolved parenting are evident as early as the preschool years and continue throughout adolescence
and into early adulthood. Although specific differences can be found in the competence evidenced by each
group, the largest differences are found between children whose parents are unengaged and their peers with
more involved parents.

   Differences between children from authoritative homes and their peers are equally consistent, but somewhat
smaller (Weiss & Schwarz, 1996). Just as authoritative parents appear to be able to balance their conformity
demands with their respect for their children's individuality, so children from authoritative homes appear to be
able to balance the claims of external conformity and achievement demands with their need for individuation
and autonomy.

   Lemasters and Defrain (1989) offer another model of parenting. This model is interesting because it looks
more closely at the motivations of the parent and suggests that parenting styles are often designed to meet the
psychological needs of the parent rather than the developmental needs of the child.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=75#h5p-6

                              Table 3.4: Lemaster and Defrain's Model of Parenting
                                            PARENTING STYLES | 73

Name                           Description
Martyr
Pal                            · Will do anything for the child-even tasks that the
Police Officer/Drill Sergeant     child should do for himself or herself

Teacher-Counselor              · May use all they do for the child to guilt the child
Athletic Coach                    into compliance

   Pause to Reflect!           · Child learns to be dependent and manipulative.

                               · Wants to be the child's friend;
                               · Lets children do what they want and focuses mostly

                                  on being entertaining and fun
                               · Sets few limits
                               · Children may have little self-discipline and may try

                                  to test limits with others.

                               · Focuses primarily on making sure that the child is
                                  obedient and that the parent has full control of the
                                  child

                               · May scold or punish child for not doing things right
                               · Struggles to allow child to grow and learn to make

                                  decisions independently
                               · Child may have a lot of resentment towards a parent

                                  that they may displace on others.

                               · Pays a lot of attention to expert advice on parenting
                                  and who believes that as long as all of the steps are
                                  followed, the parent can rear a perfect child

                               · Puts all responsibility for outcomes on parents

                               · Helps the child understand what needs to happen in
                                  certain situations and encourages and advises the
                                  child about how to manage these situations

                               · Does not intervene or do things for the child
                               · Sets consistent and objective rules
                               · Children are supported and guided while they learn

                                  firsthand how to handle situations.
74 | PARENTING STYLES

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Which parenting style were you raised in?
         2. If you are a parent now, which style are you? If you are not a parent, which style do you
             believe you will follow?
         3. How did your caregiver's parenting style impact you as a child, and as an adult today?
         4. Think about a family's relationship with a school or community organization. How might
             parenting styles impact parental engagement?

Media Attributions

  · African American father and son © Photo by Humphrey Muleba on Unsplash is licensed under a CC0
      (Creative Commons Zero) license

  · Father and teenage son © Photo by Kindel Media: https://www.pexels.com/photo/man-scolding-his-
      son-8550837/ is licensed under a Public Domain license

  · Mother and son holding hands © Photo by James Wheeler on Unsplash is licensed under a CC0
      (Creative Commons Zero) license
                       THE DEVELOPING PARENT | 75

THE DEVELOPING PARENT

Think back to an emotional event you experienced as a child. How did your parents react to you? Did your
parents get frustrated or criticize you, or did they act patiently and provide support and guidance? Did your
parents provide lots of rules for you or let you make decisions on your own? Why do you think your parents
behaved the way they did?

   Psychologists have attempted to answer these
questions about the influences on parents and
understand why parents behave the way they do.
Because parents are critical to a child's development,
a great deal of research has been focused on the
impact that parents have on children. Less is known,
however, about the development of parents
themselves and the impact of children on parents.
Nonetheless, parenting plays a major role in an
adult's life. Parenthood is often considered a
normative developmental task of adulthood. Cross-
cultural studies show that adolescents around the
world plan to have children. In fact, most men and
women in the United States will become parents by
the age of 40 years (Martinez, Daniels, & Chandra,
2012).

   People have children for many reasons, including
emotional reasons (e.g., the emotional bond with
children and the gratification the parent-child
relationship brings), economic and utilitarian
reasons (e.g., children provide help in the family and
support in old age), and social-normative reasons
(e.g., adults are expected to have children; children provide status) (Nauck, 2007).

   Parenthood is undergoing changes in the United States and elsewhere in the world. Children are less
likely to be living with both parents, and women in the United States have fewer children than they did
previously. The average fertility rate of women in the United States was about seven children in the early
1900s and has remained relatively stable at 2.1 since the 1970s (Hamilton, Martin, & Ventura, 2011; Martinez,
Daniels, & Chandra, 2012). Not only are parents having fewer children, the context of parenthood has also
76 | THE DEVELOPING PARENT

changed. Parenting outside of marriage has increased dramatically among most socioeconomic, racial, and
ethnic groups, although college-educated women are substantially more likely to be married at the birth of a
child than are mothers with less education (Dye, 2010). Finally, our evolving definition of "family" influences
us to provide an inclusive lens to "parenthood" and the definition of "parent" or "caregiver".

   Galinsky (1987) was one of the first to emphasize the development of parents themselves, how they respond
to their children's development, and how they grow as parents. Parenthood is an experience that transforms
one's identity as parents take on new roles. Children's growth and development force parents to change their
roles. They must develop new skills and abilities in response to children's development. Galinsky identified six
stages of parenthood that focus on different tasks and goals.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=78#h5p-7

                                   Table 3.5: Galinsky's Six Stages of Parenthood
                        THE DEVELOPING PARENT | 77

Stage                   Description
Stage 1
The Image-Making Stage  As prospective parents think about and form images about their roles as parents and what
Stage 2                 parenthood will bring and prepare for the changes an infant will bring, they enter the
The Nurturing Stage     image-making stage. Future parents develop their ideas about what it will be like to be a
                        parent and the type of parent they want to be. Individuals may evaluate their relationships
Stage 3                 with their own parents as a model of their roles as parents.
The Authority Stage
Stage 4                 The nurturing stage occurs at the birth of the baby. A parent's main goal during this stage
The Interpretive Stage  is to develop an attachment relationship to their baby. Parents must adapt their romantic
                        relationships, their relationships with their other children, and with their own parents to
Stage 5                 include the new infant. Some parents feel attached to the baby immediately, but for other
The Interdependent      parents, this occurs more gradually. Parents may have imagined their infant in specific
Stage                   ways, but they now have to reconcile those images with their actual baby. In
Stage 6                 incorporating their relationship with their child into their other relationships, parents
The Departure Stage     often have to reshape their conceptions of themselves and their identity. Parenting
                        responsibilities are the most demanding during infancy because infants are completely
                        dependent on caregiving.

                        The authority stage occurs when children are 2 years old until about 4 or 5 years old. In
                        this stage, parents make decisions about how much authority to exert over their children's
                        behavior. Parents must establish rules to guide their child's behavior and development.
                        They have to decide how strictly they should enforce rules and what to do when rules are
                        broken.

                        The interpretive stage occurs when children enter school (preschool or kindergarten) to
                        the beginning of adolescence. Parents interpret their children's experiences as children are
                        increasingly exposed to the world outside the family. Parents answer their children's
                        questions, provide explanations, and determine what behaviors and values to teach. They
                        decide what experiences to provide their children, in terms of schooling, neighborhood,
                        and extracurricular activities. By this time, parents have experience in the parenting role
                        and often reflect on their strengths and weaknesses as parents, review their images of
                        parenthood, and determine how realistic they have been. Parents have to negotiate how
                        involved to be with their children, when to step in, and when to encourage children to
                        make choices independently.

                        Parents of teenagers are in the interdependent stage. They must redefine their authority
                        and renegotiate their relationship with their adolescent as the children increasingly make
                        decisions independent of parental control and authority. On the other hand, parents do
                        not permit their adolescent children to have complete autonomy over their
                        decision-making and behavior, and thus adolescents and parents must adapt their
                        relationship to allow for greater negotiation and discussion about rules and limits.

                        During the departure stage of parenting, parents evaluate the entire experience of
                        parenting. They prepare for their child's departure, redefine their identity as the parent of
                        an adult child, and assess their parenting accomplishments and failures. This stage forms a
                        transition to a new era in parents' lives. This stage usually spans a long time period from
                        when the oldest child moves away (and often returns) until the youngest child leaves. The
                        parenting role must be redefined as a less central role in a parent's identity.

Case Study (A)
78 | THE DEVELOPING PARENT

     James and Emma have been married for 20 years. They have three children: Olivia (18), Ethan (15),
     and Lily (10).
     Stage 1: Image-Making

             During Emma's pregnancy with Olivia, James and Emma imagined their future roles as
             parents, discussing their parenting philosophies and dreams for their child. They developed a
             vision of themselves as nurturing and supportive parents, laying the foundation for their
             parenting journey.
     Stage 2: Nurturing
             After Olivia's birth, James and Emma adjusted to the demands of caring for an infant,
             balancing sleepless nights and work responsibilities. They strengthened their bond with
             Olivia, learning to interpret her needs and establishing a secure attachment through
             consistent and loving care.
     Stage 3: Authority
             With Ethan's birth, James and Emma navigated setting boundaries and enforcing rules. They
             worked on being authoritative figures while allowing room for exploration. They established
             routines and clear expectations, helping Olivia and Ethan understand limits and appropriate
             behaviors.
     Stage 4: Interpretive
             As Olivia started school, James and Emma focused on helping her make sense of the world,
             answering questions and guiding her through social interactions. They supported Ethan's
             early education and Lily's preschool experience. They provided a framework for
             understanding values, ethics, and social norms, ensuring their children developed a strong
             moral compass.
     Stage 5: Interdependent
             With Olivia entering high school and Ethan transitioning to middle school, James and Emma
             faced new challenges related to independence and identity. They negotiated rules, offered
             guidance, and respected their children's growing autonomy. They learned to balance
             authority with independence, fostering open communication and mutual respect. Olivia's
             part-time job and Ethan's involvement in sports highlighted their growing interdependence.
     Stage 6: Departure
             As Olivia prepared for college, James and Emma grappled with the impending change in
             family dynamics. They supported her applications, planned campus visits, and helped her
                                                                                                                          THE DEVELOPING PARENT | 79

             develop life skills for independence. They transitioned to a more advisory role, offering
             support while allowing Olivia to make her own decisions. This stage marked a shift in their
             identity, embracing their evolving roles as parents of an adult child.

   It is important to note that little research has examined developmental changes in parents' experiences and
behaviors over time. Thus, it is not clear whether these theoretical stages are generalizable to parents of different
races, ages, and religions, nor do we have empirical data on the factors that influence individual differences
in these stages. Additionally, because our definition of "family" is evolving, caregivers may enter parenthood
in a nonlinear progression through Galinsky's stages or may skip through them, depending on the family
circumstances. Little research has examined developmental changes from non-linear or skipped stages.

Media Attributions

  · Reflection of father and son © Photo by Ksenia Chernaya: https://www.pexels.com/photo/father-and-
      son-playing-toy-blocks-on-the-floor-7301371/ is licensed under a Public Domain license
80 | INFLUENCES ON PARENTING

INFLUENCES ON PARENTING

Parenting is a complex process in which parents and children influence one another. There are many reasons
that parents behave the way they do. The multiple influences on parenting are still being explored. Proposed
influences on parental behavior include:

  · parent characteristics,
  · child characteristics, and
  · contextual and sociocultural characteristics (Belsky, 1984; Demick, 1999).

Parent Characteristics

Caregivers bring unique traits and qualities to the parenting relationship that affect their decisions as parents.
These characteristics include the age of the caregiver, gender, beliefs, personality, developmental history,
knowledge about parenting and child development, and mental and physical health. Caregivers' personalities
affect parenting behaviors. Caregivers who are more agreeable, conscientious, and outgoing are warmer and
provide more structure to their children. Caregivers who are more agreeable, less anxious, and less negative also
support their children's autonomy more than caregivers who are anxious and less agreeable (Prinzie, Stams,
Dekovic, Reijntjes, & Belsky, 2009). Caregivers who have these personality traits appear to be better able to
respond to their children positively and provide a more consistent, structured environment for their children.

   Caregivers' developmental histories, or their experiences as children, also affect their parenting strategies.
Caregivers may learn parenting practices from their own parents (Kerr, Capaldi, Pears, & Owen, 2009).
Patterns of negative parenting and ineffective discipline also appear from one generation to the next. However,
caregivers who are dissatisfied with their own parents' approach may be more likely to change their parenting
methods with their own children.
                       INFLUENCES ON PARENTING | 81

Child Characteristics

   Parenting is bidirectional. Not only do caregivers
affect their children, children influence their caregivers.
Child characteristics, such as gender, birth order,
temperament, and health status, affect parenting
behaviors and roles. For example, an infant with an easy
temperament may enable parents to feel more effective,
as they are easily able to soothe the child and elicit
smiling and cooing.

   On the other hand, a cranky or fussy infant elicits
fewer positive reactions from his or her parents and may
result in caregivers feeling less effective in the parenting role (Eisenberg et al., 2008). Over time, caregivers of
more difficult children may become more punitive and less patient with their children (Clark, Kochanska, &
Ready, 2000; Eisenberg et al., 1999; Kiff, Lengua, & Zalewski, 2011). Caregivers who have a fussy, difficult
child are less satisfied with their marriages and have greater challenges in balancing work and family roles
(Hyde, Else-Quest, & Goldsmith, 2004).

Contextual Factors and Sociocultural Characteristics

The parent-child relationship does not occur in isolation. Sociocultural characteristics, including economic
hardship, religion, politics, neighborhoods, schools, and social support, also influence parenting. Parents
who experience economic hardship are more easily frustrated, depressed, and sad, and these emotional
characteristics affect their parenting skills (Conger & Conger, 2002). Culture also influences parenting
behaviors in fundamental ways. Although promoting the development of skills necessary to function
effectively in one's community is a universal goal of parenting, the specific skills necessary vary widely from
culture to culture. Thus, caregivers have different goals for their children that partially depend on their
culture (Tamis-LeMonda et al., 2008). For example, caregivers vary in how much they emphasize goals for
independence and individual achievements and goals involving maintaining harmonious relationships and
being embedded in a strong network of social relationships. These differences in parental goals are influenced
by culture and by immigration status. Other important contextual characteristics, such as the neighborhood,
school, and social networks, also affect parenting, even though these settings don't always include both the
child and the parent (Brofenbrenner, 1989).

   For example, Latina mothers who perceived their neighborhood as more dangerous showed less warmth
with their children, perhaps because of the greater stress associated with living in a threatening environment
(Gonzales et al., 2011). Fieldwork by Furstenberg and his colleagues (1993) led them to conclude "where
82 | INFLUENCES ON PARENTING

parents live affects how they manage their children" (p. 254). The results from several ethnographic and
qualitative studies suggest that residence in dangerous or impoverished neighborhoods is associated with
more restrictive parenting practices (e.g., Burton, 1990; Furstenberg, 1993). Neighborhood characteristics
also have been found to affect the parenting dimension of warmth/responsiveness. Klebanov, Brooks-Gunn,
and Duncan (1994) found a strong association between residence in poorer neighborhoods and lower levels
of displayed maternal warmth toward children. Again, ethnographic research supports this contention by
providing narratives that suggest that parents who live in more impoverished or dangerous neighborhoods
are less warm and more controlling with their children than parents who live in more advantaged and safer
neighborhoods (e.g., Furstenberg, 1993). This parenting style is considered to be somewhat adaptive because
it teaches children to take care of themselves in a dangerous environment (Leventhal & Brooks-Gunn, 2000).

   In addition to socioeconomic status, typically defined as the proportion of families under the poverty line
residing in a particular neighborhood, neighborhoods or communities may be classified by population density
(e.g., urban vs. rural; Forehand et al, 2000), thus allowing for a comparison of parenting practices across diverse
community contexts. For example, Armistead and colleagues examined parenting among single-parent African
American families (most of whom were poor) in rural and urban communities. They found that, on average,
urban parents monitor their children's activities more than their rural counterparts, and that urban parents
perceive more risks in their communities than did rural parents, which the authors speculate could account
for the differential rates of parental monitoring across the two contexts. Interestingly, the authors also found
that higher levels of parental monitoring were associated with better child and adolescent outcomes in urban,
but not rural, families. Their findings suggest, once again, that parents alter their parenting strategies to fit the
environmental circumstances in which they are raising their children so that their children's chances of success
are maximized (Ogbu, 1981).

   It is important to distinguish between differences in the distribution and the correlations of parenting
style in different subpopulations. Although in the United States authoritative parenting is most common
among intact, middle-class families of European descent, the relationship between authoritativeness and child
outcomes is quite similar across groups. There are some exceptions to this general statement, however:

 1. Demandingness appears to be less critical to girls' than to boys' well-being (Weiss & Schwarz, 1996), and
 2. Authoritative parenting predicts psychosocial outcomes and problem behaviors for adolescents in all

      ethnic groups studied (African-, Asian-, European-, and Hispanic Americans), but it is associated with
      academic performance only among European Americans and, to a lesser extent, Hispanic Americans
      (Steinberg, Dornbusch, & Brown, 1992; Steinberg, Darling, & Fletcher, 1995).

Chao (1994) and others (Darling & Steinberg, 1993) have argued that observed ethnic differences in the
association of parenting style with child outcomes may be due to differences in social context, parenting
practices, or the cultural meaning of specific dimensions of parenting style.

   Despite the interest in the development of parents among lay people and helping professionals, little
                                                                                                                      INFLUENCES ON PARENTING | 83

research has examined developmental changes in parents' experience and behaviors over time. Thus, it is not
clear whether these theoretical stages are generalizable to parents of different races, ages, and religions, nor do
we have empirical data on the factors that influence individual differences in these stages.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Consider the parenting behaviors (e.g., rules, discipline strategies, warmth, and support) used
             in your household when you were a child. What socioeconomic or cultural factors influenced
             those parenting behaviors?
         2. Think about different parents and grandparents you know. Do the challenges they face as
             parents differ based on the age of their children? Do your observations fit with Galinsky's
             stages of parenting?

Media Attributions

  · Sad child © Photo by Direct Media on StockSnap is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero)
      license
84 | CAREGIVERS AND THE EVOLVING DEFINITION OF FAMILY

CAREGIVERS AND THE EVOLVING
DEFINITION OF FAMILY

Divorce

Divorce refers to the legal dissolution of a marriage. Despite popular belief, divorce rates in the United States
actually declined for many years during the 1980s and 1990s, and only just recently started to climb back
up--landing at just below 50% of marriages ending in divorce today; however, it should be noted that divorce
rates increase for each subsequent marriage, and there is considerable debate about the exact divorce rate. Are
there specific factors that can predict divorce? Are certain types of people or certain types of relationships more
or less at risk for breaking up?

   Indeed, there are several factors that appear to be either risk factors or protective factors. Pursuing education
decreases the risk of divorce. So too does waiting until we are older to marry. Likewise, if our parents are still
married, we are less likely to divorce. Factors that increase our risk of divorce include having a child before
marriage and living with multiple partners before marriage, known as serial cohabitation (cohabitation with
one's expected marital partner does not appear to have the same effect). And, of course, societal and religious
attitudes must also be taken into account. In societies that are more accepting of divorce, divorce rates tend to
be higher. Likewise, in religions that are less accepting of divorce, divorce rates tend to be lower.

   Divorce can impact the stages of the developing parent and the attachments to the child(ren). Caregivers can
employ specific strategies to their parenting style by reassuring their children that all caregivers will continue
to love them and that the divorce is in no way the children's fault. Caregivers should also encourage open
communication with their children and be careful not to bias them against their "ex" or use them as a means
of hurting their "ex" (Denham, 2013; Harvey & Fine, 2004; Pescosoido, 2013).

     Pause to Reflect!

     Listen to the following podcast:
                                                                               CAREGIVERS AND THE EVOLVING DEFINITION OF FAMILY | 85

     She wanted to vaccinate their kids against COVID. He didn't. A judge had to decide
     Consider the co-parenting model and debate presented to the caregivers in the story.

         1. What questions would you ask the caregivers in this story about their parenting
             relationships?

         2. What questions would you ask the caregivers in this story about their co-parenting future?
         3. What questions would you ask the children in this story?
         4. What strategies would you offer to this family as it moves forward into the future?

Abuse

Abuse can occur in multiple forms and across all family relationships. Breiding, Basile, Smith, Black, &
Mahendra (2015) define the forms of abuse as

  · Physical abuse: the use of intentional physical force to cause harm. Scratching, pushing, shoving,
      throwing, grabbing, biting, choking, shaking, slapping, punching, and hitting are common forms of
      physical abuse;

  · Sexual abuse: the act of forcing someone to participate in a sex act against his or her will. Such abuse is
      often referred to as sexual assault or rape;

  · Psychological abuse: aggressive behavior that is intended to control someone else. Such abuse can
      include threats of physical or sexual abuse, manipulation, bullying, and stalking. Abuse between
      partners is referred to as intimate partner violence; however, such abuse can also occur between a parent
      and child (child abuse), adult children, their aging parents (elder abuse), and even between siblings.

  · Neglect: a family's failure to provide for a child's basic physical, emotional, medical, or educational needs
      (DePanfilis, 2006).

Abuse is a complex issue, especially within families. There are many reasons people become abusers: poverty,
stress, and substance abuse are common characteristics shared by abusers, although abuse can happen in any
family. There are also many reasons adults stay in abusive relationships: (a) learned helplessness (the abused
person believing he or she has no control over the situation); (b) the belief that the abuser can/will change; (c)
shame, guilt, self-blame, and/or fear; and (d) economic dependence. All of these factors can play a role.
86 | CAREGIVERS AND THE EVOLVING DEFINITION OF FAMILY

   Children who experience abuse may "act out" or otherwise respond in a variety of unhealthful ways. These
include acts of self-destruction, withdrawal, and aggression, as well as struggles with depression, anxiety, and
academic performance. Researchers have found that abused children's brains may produce higher levels of
stress hormones. These hormones can lead to decreased brain development, lower stress thresholds, suppressed
immune responses, and lifelong difficulties with learning and memory (Middlebrooks & Audage, 2008).

Adoption

Adoption has long historical roots and involves taking in and raising someone else's child legally as one's own.
Becoming a parent is one of the most fulfilling things a person can do (Gallup & Newport, 1990), but even
with modern reproductive technologies, not all couples who would like to have children are able to. In 2013,
in the United States, there were over 100,000 children in resource families available for adoption (Soronen,
2013). In total, about 2% of the U.S. child population is adopted, either through foster care or through private
domestic or international adoption (Adopted Children, 2012).

   For years, international adoptions have been popular. In the United States, between 1999 and 2014, 256,132
international adoptions occurred, with the largest number of children coming from China (73,672) and
Russia (46,113) (Intercountry Adoption, 2016). People in the United States, Spain, France, Italy, and Canada
adopt the largest numbers of children (Selman, 2009). More recently, however, international adoptions have
begun to decrease. One significant complication is that each country has its own set of requirements for
adoption, as does each country from which an adopted child originates. As such, the adoption process can vary
greatly, especially in terms of cost, and countries are able to police who adopts their children.
            CONCLUSION | 87

CONCLUSION

Parenting factors include characteristics of the parent, such as gender and personality, as well as characteristics
of the child, such as age. Parenting style provides a robust indicator of parental functioning that predicts child
well-being across a wide spectrum of environments and across diverse communities of children. Both parental
responsiveness and parental demandingness are important components of good parenting. Furthermore,
parenting influences not just a child's development, but also the development of the caregiver. The interaction
among all these factors creates many different patterns of parenting behavior. As caregivers are faced with new
challenges, they change their parenting strategies and construct new aspects of their identity. The goals and
tasks of caregivers change over time as their children develop (Darling & Steinberg, 1993; Baumrind, 1991; and
Barber, 1996).
88 | CONCLUSION
                                                                                             WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? | 89

PART IV

WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT
IMPORTANT?

     Learning Objectives
          · 4.1 Differentiate between sex and gender and explain how gender is a social construct.
          · 4.2 Identify how gender is a socializing agent.
          · 4.3 Define gender as a continuum.
90 | WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

Introduction

When Harry was born, his parents, Steve and Barb, were delighted to add another boy to their family. But
as their baby boy began to grow and develop, they noticed that Harry began to express himself in a manner
that they viewed as more feminine than masculine. He gravitated toward dolls and other toys that our culture
typically associates with girls. But Harry's preference was not simply about liking pink more than blue or
flowers more than fire trucks. He even began to draw himself as a girl, complete with a dress and high-heeled
shoes. In fact, Harry did not just wish to be a girl; he believed he was a girl.

   In kindergarten, Harry often got into arguments with male classmates because he insisted that he was a girl,
not a boy. He even started calling himself "Hailey." Steve and Barb met with several psychologists, all of whom
told them that Hailey was transgendered. But Steve and Barb had a hard time understanding that their five-
year-old son could have already developed a gender identity that went against society's expectations. Concerned
with the social ramifications associated with his child being transgendered, Steve hoped this was just a phase.
But Barb, and eventually Steve, realized that Harry's feelings were genuine and unyielding, and they made the
decision to let Harry live as Hailey--a girl. They came to this decision after concluding that the criticism he
would endure from his peers and other members of society would be less damaging than the confusion he
might experience internally if he were forced to live as a boy.

   Many transgendered children grow up hating their bodies. This population can have high rates of drug
abuse and suicide (Weiss 2011). Fearful of these outcomes and eager to make their child happy, Steve and Barb
now refer to Harry as Hailey and allow her to dress and behave in manners that are considered feminine. To a
stranger, Hailey is likely to appear just like any other girl and may even be considered extra girly due to her love
of all things pink. But to those who once knew Hailey as Harry, Hailey is likely to endure more ridicule and
rejection as the result of adopting a feminine gender identity.

   Currently, seven-year-old Hailey and her parents are comfortable with her gender status, but Steve and
Barb are concerned about what questions and problems might arise as she gets older. "Who's going to
love my child?" asks Steve (Ling 2011). This question isn't asked because Hailey is unlovable, but because
North American society has yet to fully listen to or understand the personal narratives of the transgendered
population (Hines and Sanger 2010).

   A social construct is an important term. It refers to ideas that have been created by and accepted in society.
 According to the World Health Organization, "gender refers to the characteristics of women, men, girls and
boys that are socially constructed. This includes norms, behaviors and roles associated with being a woman,
man, girl or boy, as well as relationships with each other" (2022). As a social construct, gender varies from
society to society and can change over time.

   In this chapter, we will explore the social constructs of gender and intersectionality. Social constructs
challenge, and oftentimes reinforce, our understanding of human behavior, leading to dangerous stereotypes,
                                                                                             WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? | 91

microaggressions, implicit bias, explicit bias, and confirmation bias. We will determine how our ideas about
gender support or harm our collaborative relationships with children, families, schools, and communities.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Re-read Hailey's story.
         2. Identify at least 2 social constructs of gender identified in the story.
         3. Identify at least 1 microaggression or bias identified in the story.
         4. Discuss how a school or community can best support Hailey.

Media Attributions

  · An example of gender non-conformity © Photo by Alexander Grey on Unsplash is licensed under a
      Public Domain license
92 | WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
                SEX AND GENDER | 93

SEX AND GENDER

When filling out a document such as a job application or school registration form, you are often asked to
provide your name, address, phone number, birth date, and sex or gender. But have you ever been asked to
provide your sex and your gender? As with most people, it may not have occurred to you that sex and gender
are not the same. However, sociologists and most other social scientists view sex and gender as conceptually
distinct.

  · Sex refers to physical or physiological differences between males and females, including both primary sex
      characteristics (the reproductive system) and secondary characteristics such as height and muscularity.

  · Gender is a term that refers to social or cultural distinctions associated with being male or female.
      Gender identity is the extent to which one identifies as being either masculine or feminine (Diamond
      2002).

Sex refers to the anatomical and other biological differences between females and males that are determined at
the moment of conception and develop in the womb and throughout childhood and adolescence. Humans
and many other mammals have one pair of sex chromosomes in each cell. Females have two X chromosomes
while males have one X and one Y chromosome. The Y chromosome is very small. It likely contains 50 to
60 genes and represents 2% of a cell's total DNA. Because only males have the Y chromosome, the genes on
this chromosome tend to be involved in male sex determination and development (National Human Genome
Research Institute 2022).
94 | SEX AND GENDER
                                                                                                                                      SEX AND GENDER | 95

   When babies are born, they are assigned a gender based on their biological sex--male babies are assigned as
boys, female babies are assigned as girls, and intersex babies (those who are born with sex characteristics that
do not fit the typical definitions for male or female bodies) are usually relegated into one gender category or
another. Scholars generally regard gender as a social construct, meaning that it doesn't exist naturally but is
instead a concept that is created by cultural and societal norms. From birth, children are socialized to conform
to certain gender roles based on their biological sex and the gender to which they are assigned.

   The term gender roles refers to a society's expectations of people's behavior and attitudes based on whether
they are females or males. Understood in this way, gender, like race, is a social construction. How we think and
behave as females and males is not etched in stone by our biology but rather is a result of how society expects
us to think and behave based on what sex we are. As we grow up, we learn these expectations as we develop our
gender identity, or our beliefs about ourselves as females or males.

   These expectations are called femininity and masculinity. Femininity refers to the cultural expectations we
have of girls and women, while masculinity refers to the expectations we have of boys and men. A familiar
nursery rhyme nicely summarizes these two sets of traits:

          What are little boys made of?
       Snips and snails,
       And puppy dog tails,
       That's what little boys are made of.
       What are little girls made of?
       Sugar and spice,
       And everything nice,
       That's what little girls are made of.
96 | SEX AND GENDER

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. As a child, what toys did you play with?
         2. In what ways did those toys reinforce the social construction of gender?
         3. In what ways did those toys resist the social construction of gender?

A person's sex, as determined by biology, does not always correspond with gender. Therefore, the terms sex
and gender are not interchangeable. A baby boy who is born with male genitalia will be identified as male.
As he grows, however, he may identify with the feminine aspects of his culture. Since the term sex refers to
biological or physical distinctions, characteristics of sex will not vary significantly between different human
societies. For example, all persons of the female sex, in general, regardless of culture, will eventually menstruate
and develop breasts that can lactate. Characteristics of gender, on the other hand, may vary greatly between
different societies. For example, in American culture, it is considered feminine (or a trait of the female gender)
to wear a dress or skirt. However, in many Middle Eastern, Asian, and African cultures, dresses or skirts (often
referred to as sarongs, robes, or gowns) can be considered masculine. For example, the kilt worn by a Scottish
male does not make him appear feminine in his culture.

   The dichotomous view of gender (the notion that one is either male or female) is specific to certain cultures
and is not universal. In some cultures, gender is viewed as fluid. In the past, some anthropologists used the term
berdache to refer to individuals who occasionally or permanently dressed and lived as the opposite gender. The
practice has been noted among certain Aboriginal groups (Jacobs, Thomas, and Lang 1997). Samoan culture
accepts what they refer to as a "third gender." Fa'afafine, which translates as "the way of the woman," is a term
used to describe individuals who are born biologically male but embody both masculine and feminine traits.
Fa'afafines are considered an important part of Samoan culture. Individuals from other cultures may mislabel
them as homosexuals because fa'afafines have a varied sexual life that may include men or women (Poasa 1992).

Media Attributions

  · Baby siblings © Image by mgeejnr from Pixabay is licensed under a Public Domain license
                                                                                                              GENDER AS A SOCIALIZING AGENT | 97

GENDER AS A SOCIALIZING AGENT

Sociologists and other social scientists generally attribute many of the behavioral differences between genders
to socialization. Socialization is the process of transferring norms, values, beliefs, and behaviors to group
members. The most intense period of socialization is during childhood, when adults who are members of a
particular cultural group instruct young children on how to behave in order to comply with social norms.
Gender is included in this process; individuals are taught how to socially behave in accordance with their
assigned gender, which is assigned at birth based on their biological sex (for instance, male babies are given
the gender of "boy", while female babies are given the gender of "girl"). Gender socialization is thus the
process of educating and instructing males and females as to the norms, behaviors, values, and beliefs of group
membership.

   Preparations for gender socialization begin even before the birth of the child. One of the first questions
people ask of expectant parents is the sex of the child. This is the beginning of a social categorization process
that continues throughout life. Preparations for the birth often take the infant's sex into consideration (e.g.,
painting the room blue if the child is a boy, pink for a girl). Today it is largely believed that most gender
differences are attributed to differences in socialization, rather than genetic and biological factors.

   Gender stereotypes can be a result of gender socialization. Girls and boys are expected to act in certain
ways, and these ways are socialized from birth by many parents (and society). For example, girls are expected
to be clean and quiet, while boys are messy and loud. As children get older, gender stereotypes become more
apparent in styles of dress and choice of leisure activities. Boys and girls who do not conform to gender
stereotypes are usually ostracized by same-age peers for being different. This can lead to negative effects, such
as lower self-esteem.

   In Western contexts, gender socialization operates as a binary, or a concept that is exclusively composed of
two parts. In other words, individuals are socialized into conceiving of their gender as either masculine (male)
or feminine (female). Identities are therefore normatively constructed along this single parameter. However,
some individuals do not feel that they fall into the gender binary and they choose to question or challenge
the male-masculine / female-feminine binary. For example, individuals that identify as transgender feel that
their gender identity does not match their biological sex. Individuals that identify as genderqueer challenge
classifications of masculine and feminine, and may identify as somewhere other than male and female, in
between male and female, a combination of male and female, or a third (or fourth, or fifth, etc.) gender
altogether. These identities demonstrate the fluidity of gender, which is so frequently thought to be biological
and immutable. Gender fluidity also shows how gender norms are learned and either accepted or rejected by
the socialized individual.
98 | GENDER AS A SOCIALIZING AGENT

     Pause to Reflect!

     Choose one of the podcasts from the How to Be a Girl series and listen to it.
         1. Summarize the podcast that you listened to, emphasizing your key takeaways.
         2. What questions would you ask the caregivers in this story about their parenting
             relationships?
         3. What questions would you ask the children in this story?
         4. What strategies would you offer the schools and communities in this story to best support
             this family as it moves forward into the future?

The Family

Socialization into gender roles begins in infancy, as almost from the moment of birth parents begin to socialize
their children as boys or girls without even knowing it (Begley, 2009; Eliot, 2009). Many studies document this
process (Lindsey, 2011). Parents commonly describe their infant daughters as pretty, soft, and delicate and their
infant sons as strong, active, and alert, even though neutral observers find no such gender differences among
infants when they do not know the infants' sex. From infancy on, parents play with and otherwise interact
with their daughters and sons differently. They play more roughly with their sons--for example, by throwing
them up in the air or by gently wrestling with them--and more quietly with their daughters. When their infant
or toddler daughters cry, they warmly comfort them, but they tend to let their sons cry longer and to comfort
them less. They give their girls dolls to play with and their boys "action figures" and toy guns. While these
gender differences in socialization are probably smaller now than a generation ago, they certainly continue to
exist. Go into a large toy store and you will see pink aisles of dolls and cooking sets and blue aisles of action
figures, toy guns, and related items.

Peers

Peer influences also encourage gender socialization. As they reach school age, children begin to play different
games based on their gender. Boys tend to play sports and other competitive team games governed by inflexible
rules and relatively large numbers of roles, while girls tend to play smaller, cooperative games such as hopscotch
                                                                                                              GENDER AS A SOCIALIZING AGENT | 99

and jumping rope with fewer and more flexible rules. Although girls are much more involved in sports now
than a generation ago, these gender differences in their play as youngsters persist and continue to reinforce
gender roles. For example, they encourage competitiveness in boys and cooperation and trust among girls. Boys
who are not competitive risk being called "sissy" or other words by their peers. The patterns we see in adult
males and females thus have their roots in their play as young children (King, Miles, & Kniska, 1991).

   In considering the debate, discussed in the text, between biology and
sociology over the origins of gender roles, some widely cited studies by
sociologists over gender differences in children's play and games provide
evidence for the importance of socialization.

   Janet Lever (1978) studied fifth-grade children in three different
communities in Connecticut. She watched them play and otherwise
interact in school and also had the children keep diaries of their play and
games outside school. One of her central aims was to determine how complex the two sexes' play and games
were in terms of such factors as number of rules, specialization of roles, and size of the group playing. In all of
these respects, Lever found that boys' play and games were typically more complex than girls' play and games.
She attributed these differences to socialization by parents, teachers, and other adults and argued that the
complexity of boys' play and games helped them to be better able than girls to learn important social skills such
as dealing with rules and coordinating actions to achieve goals.

   Meanwhile, Barrie Thorne (1993) spent many months in two different working-class communities in
California and Michigan observing fourth and fifth graders sit in class and lunchrooms and play on the school
playgrounds. Most children were white, but several were African American or Latino. As you might expect,
the girls and boys she observed usually played separately from each other, and the one-sex groups in which they
played were very important for the development of their gender identity, with boys tending to play team sports
and other competitive games and girls tending to play cooperative games such as jump rope. These differences
led Thorne to conclude that gender-role socialization stems not only from practices by adults but also from
the children's own activities without adult involvement. When boys and girls did interact, it was often "girls
against the boys" or vice versa in classroom spelling contests and in games such as tag. Thorne concluded that
these "us against them" contests helped the children learn that boys and girls are two different and antagonistic
sexes and that gender itself is antagonistic, even if there were also moments when both sexes interacted on the
playground in more relaxed, noncompetitive situations. Boys also tended to disrupt girls' games more than the
reverse and in this manner both exerted and learned dominance over females. In all of these ways, children were
not just the passive recipients of gender-role socialization from adults (their teachers), but they also played an
active role in ensuring that such socialization occurred.

   The studies by Lever and Thorne were among the first to emphasize the importance of children's play and
peer relationships for gender socialization. They also called attention to the importance of the traits and values
learned through such socialization for outcomes later in life. The rise in team sports opportunities for girls
in the years since Lever and Thorne did their research is a welcome development that addresses the concerns
100 | GENDER AS A SOCIALIZING AGENT

expressed in their studies, but young children continue to play in the ways that Lever and Thorne found. To
the extent children's play has the consequences just listed, and to the extent these consequences impede full
gender inequality, these sociological studies suggest the need for teachers, parents, and other adults to help
organize children's play that is more egalitarian along the lines discussed by Lever, Thorne, and other scholars.
In this way, their sociological work has helped to make a difference and promises to continue to do so.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. What does egalitarian children's play look like?
         2. Identify at least 2 games played by children that offer an egalitarian lens.

Schools

School is yet another agent of gender socialization (Klein, 2007). First of all, school playgrounds provide a
location for the gender-linked play activities just described to occur. Second, and perhaps more important,
teachers at all levels treat their female and male students differently in subtle ways of which they are probably
not aware. They tend to call on boys more often to answer questions in class and to praise them more when
they give the right answer. They also give boys more feedback about their assignments and other school work
(Sadker & Sadker, 1994). At all grade levels, many textbooks and other books still portray people in gender-
stereotyped ways. It is true that the newer books do less of this than older ones, but the newer books still
contain some stereotypes, and the older books are still used in many schools, especially those that cannot afford
to buy newer volumes.

     Pause to Reflect!
                                                                                                             GENDER AS A SOCIALIZING AGENT | 101

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Identify at least 3 children's books published in the last 10 years that highlight trans or non-
             binary characters.
         2. Read at least one of those stories.
         3. Is the character(s) story presented from a strengths or deficit based lens?
         4. How is gender or socialization presented in the story?

Media Attributions

  · Girls at play © Photo by Antonius Ferret: https://www.pexels.com/photo/girls-running-on-the-
      playground-5275809/ is licensed under a Public Domain license
102 | THE GENDER CONTINUUM

THE GENDER CONTINUUM

Viewing gender as a continuum allows us to perceive the rich diversity of genders, from trans- and cisgender
to gender queer and agender. Most Western societies operate on the idea that gender is a binary, that there are
essentially only two genders (men and women) based on two sexes (male and female), and that everyone must
fit one or the other. This social dichotomy enforces conformance to the ideals of masculinity and femininity in
all aspects of gender and sex--gender identity, gender expression, and biological sex.

   According to supporters of queer theory, gender identity is not a rigid or static identity but can continue
to evolve and change over time. Queer theory developed in response to the perceived limitations of the way in
which identities are thought to become consolidated or stabilized (for instance, gay or straight), and theorists
constructed queerness in an attempt to resist this. In this way, the theory attempts to maintain a critique rather
than define a specific identity. While "queer" defies a simple definition, the term is often used to convey an
identity that is not rigidly developed but is instead fluid and changing.

The Gender Unicorn

Trans Student Educational Resources was co-founded in 2011 by two 16-year-old transgender women, as
Trans Student Equality Resources (TSER). It was and remains the only national organization run by young
transgender people. TSER created the Gender Unicorn which describes the continuums of five major areas:
Gender Identity, Gender Expression, Sex Assigned at Birth, Physically Attracted to, and Emotionally Attracted
to.
                                                                                                                        THE GENDER CONTINUUM | 103

The Genderbread Person

In 2012, Sam Killerman created the Genderbread Person as an infographic to break down gender identity,
gender expression, biological sex, and sexual orientation. Killerman writes,

          Gender identity is all about how you think about yourself. It's about how you internally interpret the
       chemistry that composes you (e.g., hormone levels). As you know it, do you think you fit better into
       the societal role of "woman" or "man," or does neither ring particularly true for you? That is, do you
       have aspects of your identity that align with elements from both? Or do you consider your gender to fall
       outside of the gender norms completely? The answer is your gender identity. It has been accepted that
       we form our gender identities around the age of three and that after that age, it is incredibly difficult to
       change them. Formation of identity is affected by hormones and environment just as much as it is by
       biological sex. Oftentimes, problems arise when someone is assigned a gender based on their sex at birth
       that doesn't align with how they come to identify.
104 | THE GENDER CONTINUUM

   The Genderbread Person, a pictorial representation of these variations in identity, is, in 2022, in its fourth
version as Killerman continues to update it to be more accurate and inclusive.
THE GENDER CONTINUUM | 105
106 | THE GENDER CONTINUUM

Transgender or Gender Non-Conforming Children

Children who do not feel that they are the gender they were assigned with birth deserve a bit of special
attention in this discussion about gender. "Gender identity and expression are central to the way we see
ourselves and engage in the world around us. This is certainly true of transgender and gender-expansive
children and teens, for whom family support is absolutely critical" (Human Rights Campaign, 2019).

   Transgender issues manifest at different times in life in different individuals. In most cases of gender
dysphoria, the condition is often apparent in early childhood, when such a child may express behavior
incongruent with and dissatisfaction related to their assigned gender. However, many of these children
experience rejection as a result of their differences and quickly attempt to repress them. Therefore, people who
see these children regularly may be unaware that they are unhappy as members of their assigned gender.

   Family acceptance among transgender children predicts an increase in greater self-esteem, social support,
and general health status. It also protects against depression, substance abuse, and suicidal ideation and
behaviors. Parents' access to information is critical in aiding and advocating for transgender youth.

   A safe school climate is essential for transgender, gender dysphoric, and gender non-conforming children,
who likely experience stress and anxiety due to their desire to transition or display themselves as a different
gender. While many schools have become more accepting and allow children to express their desired gender
identity, current research shows that there is an increased amount of harassment, bullying, indifference by
school staff, and antigay victimization towards transgender and gender non-conforming youth.

Trans Parenting

There is little to no visibility or public support through pregnancy and parenting resources directed towards
trans parents. In the case of trans individuals who desire to become parents and to be legally recognized as
mothers or fathers of their children, courts often refuse to legally acknowledge such roles because of biological
discrimination.
                                                                                                                        THE GENDER CONTINUUM | 107

LGBT Parenting

LGBT parenting refers to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people raising one or more children
as parents or resource parents. This includes: children raised by same-sex couples (same-sex parenting), children
raised by single LGBT parents, and children raised by an opposite-sex couple where at least one partner is
LGBT. LGBT people can become parents through various means including current or former relationships,
coparenting, adoption, donor insemination, reciprocal IVF, and surrogacy.

   Many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people are parents. In the 2000 U.S. Census, for example, 33
percent of female same-sex couple households and 22 percent of male same-sex couple households reported at
least one child under the age of 18 living in the home. As of 2005, an estimated 270,313 children in the United
States live in households headed by same-sex couples.

   Scientific research consistently shows that gay and lesbian parents are as fit and capable as heterosexual
108 | THE GENDER CONTINUUM

parents, and their children are as psychologically healthy and well-adjusted as those reared by heterosexual
parents despite the reality that considerable legal discrimination and inequity remain significant challenges for
these families. Major associations of mental health professionals in the U.S., Canada, and Australia have not
identified credible empirical research that suggests otherwise.

   Children of LGBT parents do not have any differences in their gender role behaviors in comparison to
those observed in heterosexual family structures. In fact, a study by Bos and Sandfort (2009) also revealed that
children raised by same-sex couples felt less pressured to follow gender stereotypes. But children may struggle
with negative attitudes about their parents from the harassment they may encounter by living in society.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. What challenges might LBGT families face when identifying an early childhood program?
         2. What role might early childhood educators and their program play in supporting LBGT
             families?
                    THE GENDER CONTINUUM | 109

Media Attributions

· genderunicorn1-1024×791 © Design by Landyn Pan and Anna Moore / TSER-Trans Student
   Educational Resources is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license

· Genderbread-Person-v4 © Sam Killerman is licensed under a Public Domain license
· Three friends of varying genders taking a selfie in a park with a polaroid camera © The Gender Spectrum

   Collaborative is licensed under a Public Domain license
· Family at a parade © Photo by Aiden Craver on Unsplash is licensed under a Public Domain license
110 | THE GENDER CONTINUUM
                          BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES | 111

PART V

BUILDING COLLABORATIVE
RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES
OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES

     Learning Objectives

          · 5.1 Understand disability as a social construct
          · 5.2 Understand that disability systems and structures are inherently inequitable and biased
          · 5.3 Name and describe two different models of disability
          · 5.4 Understand the importance of and describe some best practices when collaborating with

             families of children with disabilities
112 | BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES

Introduction

According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, a social construct is "an idea that has been created and accepted
by the people in a society" (Merriam-Webster, n.d.). When discussing social constructions, it is common to talk
about the ways in which race has been socially constructed across history. So often, though, when disability
is discussed, it is seen as something biological and real, and certainly not something that has been socially
constructed. When thinking about disability broadly and in connection with collaborating with children with
disabilities and/or their families, it is important to remember that how we think about disability has also been
socially constructed over time and space. These understandings of disability impact how family members,
professionals and others view children with disabilities, including how each of us as individual members of
society think about and interact with disability. Annamma, Connor and Ferri (2013) provide two examples
that illustrate disability as a social construct. One example is the line between someone who has poor eyesight
and someone who is blind. This imaginary fine line between the two categories is something that has been
shaped and determined by a variety of factors. Another example that highlights how disability has been socially
constructed is in the history of the category we know of today as intellectual disability. Prior to 1973, people
with an IQ of 85 or less were identified as having an intellectual disability. In 1973 this number changed and
the official cut-off for an intellectual disability became 70 (Annamma, Connor & Ferri, 2013, p.3 ). While
nothing had changed about the people in question, anyone who had an IQ that fell in the range of 71 to 85
was suddenly no longer seen as having an intellectual disability. If disability was not a social construct, it would
not have been possible to change the IQ requirements for the definition of intellectual disability and suddenly
change the disability status of many people across the country.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.

         1. Re-read the introduction.
         2. Identify at least one additional example of disability as a social construct.
                         BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES | 113

Media Attributions

  · Parents and child with disability © Photo by Nathan Anderson on Unsplash is licensed under a CC0
      (Creative Commons Zero) license
114 | BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES
                                                DISABILITY AND INEQUALITY: OVERREPRESENTATION IN SPECIAL EDUCATION | 115

DISABILITY AND INEQUALITY:
OVERREPRESENTATION IN SPECIAL
EDUCATION

Overrepresentation in special education refers to the ways in which students of color are labeled with
disabilities at higher rates than their peers. Artiles and Trent (1994) explain that "even though 25 years have
passed, many of the problems [of overrepresentation] still plague the field today." Twenty-six years after
Artiles and Trent (1994) wrote about 25 years of similar structural problems, educational researchers, such
as Cavendish et al. (2020), continue to address the issue of overrepresentation and argue for the need for a
different approach to overrepresentation. It is important for professionals working with children and families
to understand overrepresentation. As an example, students of color are more likely to be identified as having
a disability within our society due to many factors, including individual level implicit and explicit bias and
structural bias, such as the bias found within the standardized assessments used to identify a disability in
children.

   Every year, schools across the country have to report data to the U.S. Department of Education concerning
their special education delivery. Some examples of disability categories where overrepresentation occurs include
developmental delay, emotional disturbance, intellectual disability and specific learning disability (U.S.
Department of Education, 2021, p. 51). For example, the data shows American Indian or Alaskan Native
students are over four times as likely to be identified as having a developmental delay, over two times as likely to
be labeled with an intellectual disability, and more than two times as likely to be identified as having a specific
learning disability as their white peers. Black or African students are over 1.5 times more likely to be labeled
with an emotional disturbance, over three times as likely to be labeled as having an intellectual disability, and
two times as likely to be identified as having a specific learning disability as their white peers (U.S. Department
of Education, 2021, p. 51). When working with children with disabilities and their families, it is important to
understand that overrepresentation means that students of color are more likely to be seen as having a disability
than white students.

     Pause to Reflect!
116 | DISABILITY AND INEQUALITY: OVERREPRESENTATION IN SPECIAL EDUCATION

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Re-read the data presented in this section from the U.S. Department of Education regarding
             the overrepresentation of students of color labeled as having a disability.
         2. Describe the implicit and explicit bias and structural bias, including standardized assessments,
             that lead toward overrepresentation.
                      REFRAMING DISABILITY | 117

REFRAMING DISABILITY

In the previous section, we highlighted how disability has been constructed in the United States as a deficit,
thus positioning anyone with a disability as inferior, and how it has been used to further marginalize and
oppress certain groups of people. Next, we present different models of disability and important perspectives
and concepts to consider when working to reframe disability to better shape our collaboration with families.

Models of Disability

Conceptual models are representations, often abstract, of something such as a physical object or social
phenomena. They are meant to aid in understanding social phenomena. Above, disability is explained as a
social construct. So, models of disability then would be abstract representations meant to aid in understanding
disability as a social phenomena. Each model represents a different understanding of disability. There are an
ever-growing number of models of disability. However, here we will focus on two opposing and common
models in hopes of illustrating the different approaches to disability and how the approaches shape practice.
"The medical model and social models of disability... are two ways of understanding disability within
traditions dominant in Western science and philosophy. At the center of the divide between these models lies
the contested concept of normalcy." (Baglieri and Lalvani, 2020)

The Social Model vs. The Medical Model of Disability

The medical model of disability approaches disability as an inherently individual problem or deficit within
someone. Because of this view, disability is something that should be thus identified or diagnosed and then
treated accordingly, with the goal of either overcoming or mitigating the "symptoms" or impacts of the
disability for the person and for society.

   The social model of disability distinguishes disability from impairment. Impairment is a difference (mental,
physical, etc.) within an individual, and disability is a societal problem or barrier due to inaccessible
environments and structures. Taking this approach, barriers in the environment and social structures and
systems should be identified and altered or removed in order to address disability and increase access for all.

   According to Baglieri and Lalvani (2020), the center of the debate between these two opposing models of
disability is the concept of normalcy. In the medical model of disability, disability is positioned as inferior to
some other marker which in this case is normalcy. The medical model assumes a neutral normal and then
positions disability as a deficit in relation to that. The social model rethinks what normal is and views disability
118 | REFRAMING DISABILITY

as diversity, as part of the natural variance in human existence. The medical model of disability is the traditional
view of disability, and the dominant approach in US systems and structures. In order to qualify for disability
services whether that is inside or outside of the US public school system, individuals must be diagnosed or
labeled, which then prompts a determination of qualifications and services. To rethink disability through the
social model then goes against much of what parents have been taught and socialized to accept.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-
        communities/?p=107#oembed-1

Reframing disability as diversity, in the social model of disability, works to push against the view and the
systems which have marginalized and oppressed not only people with disabilities, but other minority groups
as well. To come from the social model of disability means to recognize that the problem of disability is the
societal and environmental barriers that are in place that limit individuals with disabilities and their families. In
the next section, we will look at different phenomena that are important to examine when reframing disability
in our approach to collaborating with families with children with disabilities.

Parental Involvement

Differing levels of parental involvement are required for navigating disability support services whether in school
or out. For example, the Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA) requires parental/guardian consent and
involvement. (Rosetti et al., 2017). Family involvement and advocacy can mean all the difference for a child's
trajectory within the special education/general education system (Fish, 2010). We will use the special education
system within public K-12 schools to illustrate barriers families may come up against when navigating systems
designed for individuals with disabilities. However, these barriers will apply in almost any context. When
examining disability and the experiences of children with disabilities and their families within the K-12 public
education system through a social model lens, we see numerous potential barriers.

   Navigating and advocating within the K-12 system, first and foremost, requires knowledge of the system.
It requires knowledge of the laws that govern the system children are being served by, the ways in which
different labels come with different likely trajectories for students both inside and outside of the K-12 system,
the people to get involved in any given situation, and the ways in which to communicate to increase the
likelihood of a favorable outcome for their child. For example, going back to the notion of over-representation,
not only in special education but in certain labels that will more likely lead to segregation, the knowledge of
this phenomena and how to push back, may fall under the category of cultural capital.
                                                                                                                             REFRAMING DISABILITY | 119

   Another potential barrier that impacts the ability of families to collaborate is the time commitment for their
jobs. Students served under the IDEA all have an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) which requires family
involvement. However, IEP meetings are often held either during the school day or right before or after school.
It is a privilege to have a job and/or life structure that is either flexible enough to work around any meeting
time or that offers enough time-off to be able to take some for the numerous meetings families are invited to or
required to attend for their children. Families who don't have this flexibility or ability are then either left out
of important decision-making or are forced to make difficult decisions that may impact their ability to keep up
with the commitments that allow them to support their family.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.

         1. Identify ways that the education system can collaborate with the families to ensure that
             there is equity within the the special education process.

         2. What strategies can schools employ to prioritize family involvement in the IEP process?

Biased Assessments

Assessments are often used to categorize, label, and place students in terms of special education. Dudley-
Marling and Gurn (2010) explain that one of the most powerful tools of modern society is the concept of
normality and go on to describe the Bell curve or normal curve as something that has been used to legitimize
it. "In the context of schooling, the ideology of the normal curve affects school placement, grading, college
admission, educational policy and research, and the everyday language of teachers." (Dudley-Marling & Gurn,
2010, p. 2) They go on to explain that measuring students up against this concept of normality impacts many
facets of education for individual students (2010).

   The ideology of the normal curve does harm to individuals with disabilities and their families. But it isn't
just individuals who are at risk of being marginalized and pathologized by the concept of "normal." Normal
curve thinking has been used to rationalize the marginalization of whole groups of people, perpetuating
historic injustices. (Dudley-Marling & Gurn, 2010, pp. 5-6)

   Assessments are designed to implement this idea of the bell-shaped or "normal curve," but as Dudle-Marling
and Gurn (2010) describe, the curve is designed in such a way that it promotes white superiority and thus
120 | REFRAMING DISABILITY

works to marginalize minority groups. So assessments created largely by and for white people are then what is
being used to decide what students do and do not qualify for, what labels they receive, and what options are
available to them within and beyond K-12.

Language Debate

Another important point of consideration when reframing disability is language. A debate in the disability
community is whether to use person-first or identity-first language. In an effort to recognize and center the
human before the label, person-first language has long been promoted throughout the disability field as best
practice. For example, person-first language would dictate best practice would be using phrases such as a person
with a disability, or a student who has autism. More recently, there has been push back by the disability
community, who want to claim disability as an identity and thus prefer to be referred to in identity-first
language. So, rather than be called a student with autism, some prefer to be referred to as an autistic student.
It is the difference between saying "I have autism" and "I am autistic." In saying "I have autism," the person
is saying that autism is something they have but not necessarily who they are. In saying, "I am autistic," the
person is claiming autistic as an identity that describes who they are.

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
                   https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=107#h5p-8

                                   Table 5.1: Person and Identity First Language
                                                      REFRAMING DISABILITY | 121

Person-First Language              Identity-First Language

Person with a disability           Disabled Person

Person with autism                 Autistic person

Person who is blind                Blind person

Person who uses a wheelchair       Wheelchair user

Person who uses non-verbal communication Non-speaking person

Person with a learning disability  Learning Disabled

Person who is deaf                 Deaf person

Some argue that person-first language is the most respectful way to talk about people with disabilities, while
others argue that by using person-first language, there is an erasure of the disabled identity and culture. We
argue here not for one or the other (person-first versus identity-first language), but rather to ask individuals and
base the decision on how individuals or groups of people refer to themselves. Another method is to do your
research when you don't have the other options available and to be clear why you are making the decision you
are in terms of your language use. Rather than prescribe an approach for someone, let them decide and respect
their language preferences and ways of identifying themselves.

Pause to Reflect!

Discuss the following questions.

    1. Identify at least 3 children's books published in the last 10 years that highlight children with
        disabilities.

   2. Read at least one of those stories.
   3. Is the character's story presented from a medical or social construct lens?
   4. Describe the challenges and/or opportunities that are presented between the families and

        schools and/or communities.
122 | COLLABORATION WITH FAMILIES

COLLABORATION WITH FAMILIES

There are best practices for collaboration with families that use an inclusive approach, reframing disability as
diversity and honoring what families bring to the collaboration.

Parents as Co-Equals of the Team

First and foremost, parents must be treated as and believed to be co-equals in the collaborative process. In a
study of guardians' perceptions of the IEP process, Fish (2010) found that guardians had positive perceptions
when they were treated as co-equals in the decision making. To position guardians as co-equals, professionals
must honor the knowledge and approach that families bring to the table. This often requires acknowledging
that certain knowledge and ways of knowing have been constructed in ways that uphold white hegemony
(the social, cultural, ideological, or economic influence exerted by a dominant group), and actively pushing
back. When we apply this to disability, we must recognize that families may have different understandings of
disability than those that have been presented here and are in our current repertoire. We must also recognize
that as we work to reframe disability, parents will most likely be most familiar with the medical model of
disability, as it is the dominant approach in the US and is often what families of individuals must learn to
navigate for survival. We need to work to understand how families approach disability and honor that in our
collaboration with them. When we value family contributions and treat them as equals in the collaborative
process, many of the other best practices we present will fall into place because they will be necessary to carry
out an equal and equitable process.

Prioritizing Family Involvement

In order for families of individuals with disabilities to be valuable and co-equal members of the collaborative
team, their involvement in all aspects of the process and decision-making has to be prioritized. As Rosetti et al.
(2017) explain, although family involvement in the IEP process has been federally mandated for over 40 years,
"many families have indicated a lack of collaboration during the IEP process" (Rosetti et al., 2017, p. 329). The
collaborative process must prioritize and ensure parental involvement in their children's education. There are
several best practices that may prioritize family involvement.
                                                                                                               COLLABORATION WITH FAMILIES | 123

Plain Language Documents and Communication

In order to be involved in the collaborative process and "make informed educational decisions, families must
be able to read and comprehend the information that is given to them by their school" (Fitzgerald & Watkins,
2006). Fitzgerald and Watkins conducted a study that looked at the readability of the documents given to
families going through the K-12 public school IEP process and found that only four to eight percent of the
documents examined were at the recommended reading level and as much as half of the documents were
written at the college reading level or higher (2006). In order to ensure families can be co-equals of the team
and can be informed about the process and what it will mean for their children, it is crucial that we provide
documents and communicate in plain language that does not require specific training and knowledge of
professional jargon. When background knowledge is necessary, this should also be offered for families in order
to ensure they are being supported and informed in the collaboration process.

Appropriate Translation

When necessary, it is imperative that families are offered appropriate translation for ALL planned collaborative
interactions. If families are seen as co-equals on the team, then it makes sense they should have the supports
necessary to fully participate. Per federal guidance, "schools must communicate information to limited English
proficient parents in a language they can understand about any program, service, or activity that is called to the
attention of parents who are proficient in English" (Rosetti et al., 2017). Rosetti et al. (2017) focus on research-
based strategies for improving collaboration with families who are culturally and linguistically diverse and
emphasize the importance of offering proper translation services to ensure the ability to foster collaboration in
all interactions within the IEP process.

Flexible Scheduling

Another practice that is required in order to prioritize family involvement is flexible scheduling that takes into
account family work schedules and other responsibilities. "Teachers should ask families about their preferred
meeting times and comfort level with the special education process. This conveys willingness to be flexible and
supportive within the collaboration" (Rosetti et al, 2017). As we outline above, it is a privilege to have either a
work and responsibilities schedule that aligns with the K-12 schedule, or to have the flexibility to adjust work
schedule around meetings with the school team.
124 | COLLABORATION WITH FAMILIES

Parental Barriers to Participation

Our final suggestion for best practice when collaborating with families with children who have disabilities is to
look for and be aware of any additional barriers families are facing with regard to collaboration with the team
in support of their children. Barriers may be limited available transportation causing an inability to attend in-
person meetings, events, etc. There may also be cultural differences in expectations for communication and
who should and should not be a part of the decision-making process. It is not enough to be aware of these
barriers; we must work together to mitigate these.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Visit a school or early childhood center.
         2. Gather information about how families with children with disabilities collaborate with and
             are included in communications, translation, scheduling, etc.
         3. Identify best practices and challenges that need to be addressed.
         4. Identify at least two additional recommendations to foster inclusive and collaborative
             relationships with families with children with disabilities.
            CONCLUSION | 125

CONCLUSION

When we recognize that disability is a social construct that has been used historically and culturally in the
United States to marginalize and justify oppression, we cannot only use this reimagining in how we interact
with disabled people but also with families of children with disabilities. In pushing back against the systems
and structures which have been used to uphold hegemony and thus continue to oppress marginalized groups,
we open up new possibilities for collaborating with families, both specifically around disability and in a much
broader sense.
126 | CONCLUSION
                                                                                           WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? | 127

PART VI

WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT
IMPORTANT?

     Learning Objectives
          · 6.1 Explain ethnocentrism and xenocentrism
          · 6.2 Define cultural capital, funds of knowledge, and cultural humility
          · 6.3 Recommend strategies for child, family, school, and community collaboration that
128 | WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

             respects cultural exchange in equitable relationships and decision-making.

Introduction

What are the rules when you pass an acquaintance at school, work, in the grocery store, or in the mall?
Generally, we do not consider all of the intricacies of the rules of behavior. We may simply say, "Hello!" and
ask, "How was your weekend?" or some other trivial question meant to be a friendly greeting. Rarely do we
physically embrace or even touch the individual. In fact, doing so may be viewed with scorn or distaste, since
as people in the United States we have fairly rigid rules about personal space. However, we all adhere to various
rules and standards that are created and maintained in culture.

   These rules and expectations have meaning, and there are ways in which you may violate this negotiation.
Consider what would happen if you stopped and informed everyone who said, "Hi, how are you?" exactly
how you were doing that day, and in detail. You would more than likely violate rules of culture and specifically
greeting. Perhaps in a different culture the question would be more literal, and it may require a response. Or
if you are having coffee with a good friend, perhaps that question warrants a more detailed response. These
examples are all aspects of culture, which is shared beliefs, values, and practices that participants must learn.
Sociologically, we examine in what situation and context certain behavior is expected and in which situations
perhaps it is not. These rules are created and enforced by people who interact and share culture.

     Pause to Reflect!
                                                                                          WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? | 129

     Examine the image from a parent-teacher conference.
          · What cultures might be represented in the image?
          · Describe the body language, room set up, and participant facial expressions.
          · Based on what you see in the image, determine if there is equitable conversation and
             collaboration between the teacher and the family.

It is important to begin with a clear understanding of terms presented in this chapter:
  · A culture represents the beliefs and practices of a group.
  · A society represents the people who share the beliefs and practices of a culture.
  · "Community" refers to a definable region--as small as a neighborhood (Brooklyn, or "the east side of
130 | WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

      town"), as large as a country (Ethiopia, the United States, or Nepal), or somewhere in between (in the
      United States, this might include someone who identifies with Southern or Midwestern society).
  · Neither society nor culture could exist without the other.
  · "Dominant culture" refers to the cultural norms, values, and practices that are accepted and pervasive
      within a particular social, economic, or institutional context. It's the "default setting" of a society, the
      background noise that influences how we behave, speak, and even think.

In this chapter, we will elevate the importance of culture, society, and community in our work with children,
families, schools, and communities. We will examine factors, such as bias, microaggressions, and
discrimination, that impact how families engage with the larger structures of schools and communities.
We will recommend strategies that create equitable partnerships that honor the cultures, societies, and
communities of families with the dominant culture.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. What rules shape your interactions with your family?
         2. What rules shape your interactions with your coworkers?
         3. What rules shape your interactions with strangers?
         4. Compare and contrast those rules.

Media Attributions

  · Baby sitting on father © Photo by William Fortunato from Pexels: https://www.pexels.com/photo/
      happy-muslim-mother-embracing-black-baby-sitting-on-father-6392845/ is licensed under a Public
      Domain license

  · Parent-Teacher Conference © Chona Kasinger adapted by Disabled And Here is licensed under a CC
      BY (Attribution) license
                  WHAT IS CULTURE? | 131

WHAT IS CULTURE?

Humans are social creatures. Since the dawn of Homo sapiens nearly 250,000 years ago, people have grouped
together into communities in order to survive. Living together, people form common habits and
behaviors--from specific methods of childrearing to preferred techniques for obtaining food. In modern-day
Paris, many people shop daily at outdoor markets to pick up what they need for their evening meal, buying
cheese, meat, and vegetables from different specialty stalls. In the United States, the majority of people shop
once a week at supermarkets, filling large carts to the brim. How would a Parisian perceive U.S. shopping
behaviors that Americans take for granted?

   Almost every human behavior, from shopping to marriage to expressions of feelings, is learned. In the
United States, people tend to view marriage as a choice between two people based on mutual feelings of love. In
other nations and in other times, marriages have been arranged through an intricate process of interviews and
negotiations between entire families, or in other cases, through a direct system, such as a "mail order bride."
To someone raised in New York City, the marriage customs of a family from Nigeria may seem strange or even
wrong. Conversely, someone from a traditional Kolkata family might be perplexed with the idea of romantic
love as the foundation for marriage and lifelong commitment. In other words, the way in which people view
marriage depends largely on what they have been taught.

   Behavior based on learned customs is not a bad
thing. Being familiar with unwritten rules helps
people feel secure and "normal." Most people want
to live their daily lives confident that their behaviors
will not be challenged or disrupted. But even an
action as seemingly simple as commuting to work
evidences a great deal of cultural propriety.

   Take the case of going to work on public
transportation. Whether people are commuting in
Dublin, Cairo, Mumbai, or San Francisco, many
behaviors will be the same, but significant differences also arise between cultures. Typically, a passenger will
find a marked bus stop or station, wait for his bus or train, pay an agent before or after boarding, and quietly
take a seat if one is available. But when boarding a bus in Cairo, passengers might have to run because buses
there often do not come to a full stop to take on patrons. Dublin bus riders would be expected to extend an
arm to indicate that they want the bus to stop for them. And when boarding a commuter train in Mumbai,
passengers must squeeze into overstuffed cars amid a lot of pushing and shoving on the crowded platforms.
132 | WHAT IS CULTURE?

That kind of behavior would be considered the height of rudeness in the United States, but in Mumbai it
reflects the daily challenges of getting around on a train system that is taxed to capacity.

   In this example of commuting, culture consists of thoughts (expectations about personal space, for example)
and tangible things (bus stops, trains, and seating capacity). Material culture refers to the objects or belongings
of a group of people. Metro passes and bus tokens are part of material culture, as are automobiles, stores, and
the physical structures where people worship. Nonmaterial culture, in contrast, consists of the ideas, attitudes,
and beliefs of a society. Material and nonmaterial aspects of culture are linked, and physical objects often
symbolize cultural ideas. A metro pass is a material object, but it represents a form of nonmaterial culture,
namely, capitalism, and the acceptance of paying for transportation. Clothing, hairstyles, and, jewelry are part
of material culture, but the appropriateness of wearing certain clothing for specific events reflects nonmaterial
culture. A school building belongs to material culture, but the teaching methods and educational standards
are part of education's nonmaterial culture. These material and nonmaterial aspects of culture can vary subtly
from region to region. As people travel farther afield, moving from different regions to entirely different
parts of the world, certain material and nonmaterial aspects of culture become dramatically unfamiliar. What
happens when we encounter different cultures? As we interact with cultures other than our own, we become
more aware of the differences and commonalities between others' worlds and our own.

Cultural Universals

Often, a comparison of one culture to another will reveal obvious differences. But all cultures also share
common elements. Cultural universals are patterns or traits that are globally common to all societies. One
example of a cultural universal is the family unit: every human society recognizes a family structure that
regulates sexual reproduction and the care of children. Even so, how that family unit is defined and how it
functions vary. In many Asian cultures, for example, family members from all generations commonly live
together in one household. In these cultures, young adults continue to live in the extended household family
structure until they marry and join their spouse's household, or they may remain and raise their nuclear family
within the extended family's homestead. In the United States, by contrast, individuals are expected to leave
home and live independently for a period before forming a family unit that consists of parents and their
offspring. Other cultural universals include customs like funeral rites, weddings, and celebrations of births.
However, each culture may view the ceremonies quite differently.

     Pause to Reflect!
                                                                                                                                   WHAT IS CULTURE? | 133

     Discuss the following questions.

         1. What is the cultural norm in your family unit regarding who you live with and when, or even
             if, you are expected to establish your own home?

Anthropologist George Murdock first recognized the existence of cultural universals while studying systems of
kinship around the world. Murdock found that cultural universals often revolve around basic human survival,
such as finding food, clothing, and shelter, or around shared human experiences, such as birth and death or
illness and healing.

   Anthropologists closely examine modern and ancient human family structures, compare familial structures
to those of our living primate relatives, and strive to understand pre-human familial structures based on the
fossil record.

   Modern family structures vary across cultures and across time indicating the variety of ways that a human
society can be constructed. Cultural anthropologists are particularly interested in this variation and seek to
better understand the diverse ways that families exist because it is within the family that we are first exposed to
cultural norms and beliefs. Humans are enculturated by our families: we learn our religions, race, traditions,
gender roles, etc. within our family units and then we bring these beliefs and traditions into our societies.

   If you look at a society - consider the United States, as an example - you might say that the U.S. is one
culture. But each state also has its own culture within the larger culture. Then, each city has its own, unique
culture within that state's culture, and each neighborhood also has its own specific culture. Then, within each
neighborhood, each family has its own, unique traditions, beliefs, and practices. So, from this perspective,
you can understand that the family unit is the smallest building block of our overall cultural system. No two
families have identical beliefs, histories, or worldviews and we can understand how cultural conflict arises when
we are able to examine the diverse cultural beliefs of each family group that still live side-by-side within a larger
cultural context.

   For many, our first childhood slumber party was a sort of anthropological fieldwork. Your first sleepover
was the first time you realized that different people have different cultures and practices than you do. Other
families may go to bed at a different time, they may have different rules about snacks or watching cartoons,
other families may share chores in a way that is different from your own family, etc. These encounters can
be the first instances that we are meaningfully introduced to cultural diversity and - in a way - participant
observation. This is why anthropologists like to study family structures: closely examining family structures
creates an opportunity to understand the basic building blocks of human nature, biological evolution, cultural
norms, and cultural differences.

   Cultural anthropologists call this the study of kinship. Kinship is a system of meaning and power that
we create in order to determine who is responsible for whom (Guest). Each culture constructs familial
134 | WHAT IS CULTURE?

responsibility differently. For example, some cultural groups believe that parents are responsible for children
when they are young while children are then responsible for their parents later in life. Some cultures do not
believe that children must care for aging parents and still each culture varies in the extent to which parents are
expected to care for children (Ex: Should both parents raise the children? Should both parents earn money for
the children? When should the children start earning money for the family - if at all? etc.)

   At the same time, each culture constructs relatedness differently: Some cultures incorporate exclusively
blood relatives, others believe that you can have family members who are not blood related to you. Some
cultures believe that cousins and grandparents are part of the same household while, in other cultures, parents
can live in entirely separate households. Each tradition varies from place to place, culture to culture, and
generation to generation, and there is no one, universal idea of what kinship (or family) is nor is there one
universal idea of what kinship (or family) should achieve.

   While it's difficult to come up with one clear definition of kinship, cultural anthropologists typically point
to a variety of shared characteristics that we commonly see in kinship structures. Typically, kinship serves the
following functions:

  · Families provide support and they nurture
  · Families ensure reproduction
  · Families protect group assets
  · Families influence, social, economic, and political systems

To summarize, anthropologists closely examine family structures because:

  · Basic social structures frequently follow family structures
  · The family is where humans learn behavior
  · Family identity is intertwined with age, gender, ethnicity, sexuality
  · It's within our families that we learn gender roles, division of labor, religion, warfare, politics, migration,

      nationalism, etc.
  · We create families in order to maintain cultural continuity.

Media Attributions

  · Two smiling men © Photo by Alvin Mahmudov on Unsplash is licensed under a Public Domain license
          THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 135

THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN
COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN,
FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

Ethnocentrism and Cultural Relativism

Despite how much humans have in common, cultural differences are far more prevalent than cultural
universals. For example, while all cultures have language, analysis of particular language structures and
conversational etiquette reveal tremendous differences. In some Middle Eastern cultures, it is common to stand
close to others in conversation. North Americans keep more distance and maintain a large "personal space."
Even something as simple as eating and drinking varies greatly from culture to culture. If your professor comes
into an early morning class holding a mug of liquid, what do you assume she is drinking? In the United States,
it's most likely filled with coffee, not Earl Grey tea, a favorite in England, or Yak Butter tea, a staple in Tibet.

   The way cuisines vary across cultures fascinates many people. Some travelers pride themselves on their
willingness to try unfamiliar foods, like celebrated food writer Anthony Bourdain, while others return home
expressing gratitude for their native culture's fare. Often, people in the United States express disgust at other
cultures' cuisine and think that it's gross to eat meat from a dog or guinea pig, for example, while they
don't question their own habit of eating cows or pigs. Such attitudes are an example of ethnocentrism, or
evaluating and judging another culture based on how it compares to one's own cultural norms. Ethnocentrism,
as sociologist William Graham Sumner (1906) described the term, involves a belief or attitude that one's own
culture is better than all others. Almost everyone is a little bit ethnocentric. For example, Americans tend to say
that people from England drive on the "wrong" side of the road, rather than on the "other" side. Someone from
a country where dog meat is standard fare might find it off-putting to see a dog in a French restaurant--not on
the menu, but as a pet and patron's companion. A good example of ethnocentrism is referring to parts of Asia
as the "Far East." One might question, "Far east of where?"

   A high level of appreciation for one's own culture can be healthy; a shared sense of community pride,
for example, connects people in a society. But ethnocentrism can lead to disdain or dislike for other cultures
and could cause misunderstanding and conflict. People with the best intentions sometimes travel to a society
to "help" its people, because they see them as uneducated or backward--essentially inferior. In reality, these
travelers are guilty of cultural imperialism, the deliberate imposition of one's own cultural values on another
culture. Europe's colonial expansion, begun in the sixteenth century, was often accompanied by a severe
cultural imperialism. European colonizers often viewed the people in the lands they colonized as uncultured
savages who were in need of European governance, dress, religion, and other cultural practices. A more modern
136 | THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

example of cultural imperialism may include the work of international aid agencies who introduce agricultural
methods and plant species from developed countries while overlooking indigenous varieties and agricultural
approaches that are better suited to the particular region.

   Ethnocentrism can be so strong that when confronted with all of the differences of a new culture, one may
experience disorientation and frustration. In sociology, we call this culture shock. A traveler from Chicago
might find the nightly silence of rural Montana unsettling, not peaceful. An exchange student from China
might be annoyed by the constant interruptions in class as other students ask questions--a practice that is
considered rude in China. Perhaps the Chicago traveler was initially captivated with Montana's quiet beauty
and the Chinese student was originally excited to see a U.S.-style classroom firsthand. But as they experience
unanticipated differences from their own culture, their excitement gives way to discomfort and doubts about
how to behave appropriately in the new situation. Eventually, as people learn more about a culture, they
recover from culture shock.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.

         1. Discuss the following questions.

                  1. Reflect on how ethnocentrism might affect the dynamics between families and
                      schools.

                 2. How might cultural biases and assumptions from both educators and parents
                      influence communication, expectations, and the educational experiences of students.

                 3. How can recognizing and addressing ethnocentrism improve relationships and
                      outcomes in the school community?

Cultural relativism is the practice of assessing a culture by its own standards rather than viewing it through the
lens of one's own culture. Practicing cultural relativism requires an open mind and a willingness to consider
and even adapt to new values and norms. However, indiscriminately embracing everything about a new culture
is not always possible.

   Sometimes when people attempt to rectify feelings of ethnocentrism and develop cultural relativism, they
swing too far to the other end of the spectrum. Xenocentrism is the opposite of ethnocentrism, and refers
to the belief that another culture is superior to one's own. (The Greek root word xeno, pronounced "ZEE-
no," means "stranger" or "foreign guest.") An exchange student who goes home after a semester abroad or a
          THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 137

sociologist who returns from the field may find it difficult to associate with the values of their own culture after
having experienced what they deem a more upright or nobler way of living.

   Perhaps the greatest challenge for sociologists studying different cultures is the matter of keeping a
perspective. It is impossible for anyone to keep all cultural biases at bay; the best we can do is strive to be aware
of them. Pride in one's own culture doesn't have to lead to imposing its values on others. And an appreciation
for another culture shouldn't preclude individuals from studying it with a critical eye.

   Schools and communities must examine the role of ethnocentrism and xenocentrism in their interactions
with children and families. This requires deep self-reflection, honesty, and cultural humility. It also requires
that schools and communities view families and children from a strengths-based perspective by honoring their
cultural capital and funds of knowledge.

   Cultural humility is the lifelong practice of self-reflection and learning to understand and respect different
cultural perspectives, recognizing one's own biases, and engaging with others authentically and respectfully.
It emphasizes openness, self-awareness, and the commitment to equitable and inclusive interactions. Cultural
humility in education involves teachers acknowledging their own biases, continuously learning about different
cultures, and engaging with families and communities in a respectful and collaborative manner.

     Case Study (A)

     Mr. Smith, a middle school teacher, has a new student, Amina, who recently arrived from a refugee
     camp in Syria. Amina's family has faced significant trauma and disruption due to the war and their
     subsequent displacement.
     Mr. Smith takes time to reflect on his own cultural background, beliefs, and potential biases. He
     acknowledges that he might have preconceived notions about refugees and consciously decides to
     approach the situation with an open mind and a willingness to learn. He

          · attends a workshop on cultural competence and reads about the experiences of Syrian
             refugees to better understand Amina's background.

          · learns more about Amina's cultural background, including the challenges her family might
             have faced and their cultural practices.

          · reaches out to local refugee support organizations and community groups to gather
             information and resources that could help him better understand Amina's needs.

          · organizes a meeting with Amina's parents, ensuring that an interpreter is present to facilitate
             effective communication.
138 | THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

          · listens actively to the parents' concerns, asks about their expectations, and shows genuine
             interest in their cultural practices and values.

          · discusses various support options, such as language assistance and counseling services, and
             seeks the parents' preferences and suggestions.

          · includes stories and materials from diverse cultures, including Syrian culture, in his
             curriculum.

          · pairs Amina with a peer buddy to help her navigate the new school environment.

Cultural capital refers to the non-financial social assets that influence an individual's ability to succeed in
society. These assets include education, intellect, style of speech, dress, and even physical appearance, which
can grant social mobility and access to resources and opportunities. In an educational setting, recognizing
and valuing the cultural capital of all families involves acknowledging and leveraging the unique strengths,
knowledge, and experiences these families bring to the educational environment.

     Case Study (B)

     Ms. Garcia is a teacher at an early childhood education center. She has a new student, Sam, whose
     family is currently experiencing homelessness and living in a shelter. Ms. Garcia wants to ensure
     that Sam and his family feel valued and included in the classroom community. She

          · takes time to learn about the experiences and strengths of Sam's family. She understands
             that living through homelessness requires resilience, resourcefulness, and strong problem-
             solving skills.

          · she learns that Sam's mother, despite their current situation, is actively involved in
             community support networks and has extensive knowledge about local resources and
             services.

          · invites Sam's mother to share her knowledge about community resources with other parents
             during a parent workshop, highlighting her expertise and contributions.

          · learns that Sam's family has a tradition of storytelling and often shares stories about their
             cultural heritage. Ms. Garcia invites Sam's mother to tell a story to the class, celebrating and
             valuing their cultural background.
          THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 139

          · creates a "family wall" where each child can bring in photos and share stories about their
             family. This helps Sam and other children feel proud of their backgrounds and promotes
             understanding and empathy among classmates.

          · invites Sam's mother to join the parent advisory committee, recognizing her insights and
             experiences as valuable contributions to the school's decision-making processes.

          · organizes a "skills day" where parents can lead activities based on their unique skills and
             experiences. Sam's mother, who is an excellent cook, leads a cooking activity, teaching the
             children how to make a traditional dish.

Funds of knowledge are the diverse cultural and experiential knowledge that students bring from their home
and community environments. This concept recognizes these assets as valuable resources for learning, helping
educators connect curriculum to students' real-life experiences and enhancing educational engagement and
relevance.

     Case Study (C)

     Mx. Taylor is an elementary school teacher who has a new student, Alex, who identifies as non-
     binary. Mx. Taylor wants to create an inclusive classroom environment that recognizes and values
     Alex's unique experiences and knowledge. They

          · take time to learn about Alex's interests, experiences, and the knowledge they bring to the
             classroom. This includes understanding Alex's gender identity and the experiences related to
             it.

          · have a conversation with Alex and their parents to learn more about Alex's hobbies, such as
             their interest in storytelling and creative writing, and how they express their identity through
             these activities.

          · design a writing project where students create their own stories. Alex's contribution includes
             stories featuring non-binary characters, which helps broaden the perspectives of their peers.

          · include books and resources in the classroom library that feature non-binary and LGBTQ+
             characters and themes.

          · collaborate with Alex's family and the broader community to bring in additional resources
140 | THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN COLLABORATION WITH CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

             and perspectives that support Alex's learning and well-being.
          · ensure that classroom activities and groupings are not based on gender, allowing all

             students, including Alex, to participate comfortably and equally.

In an ethnographic study in Geneva, Switzerland, Jean-Paul Payet and Fabien Deshayes (2019) found that,
while teachers and schools adopt language about multiculturalism and diversity, they oftentimes approach
families through a deficit-based lens, especially when it is combined with poor school results and when parents
have little knowledge of the institution and its expectations. Even though a family may view culture and
ethnicity as a resource, as a fund of knowledge, the teacher or school may not truly recognize it as such. This
results in distrust of the school and teachers. It decreases caregiver participation.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Reflect on a time when cultural humility, cultural capital, and/or funds of knowledge were integral
     to the outcome of a school or community based discussion.

          · Was the outcome positive or negative?
          · Were all stakeholders collaborative and equitable?
          · Recommend additional strategies for highlight cultural humility, cultural capital, and/or funds

             of in that discussion.
                    VALUES AND BELIEFS | 141

VALUES AND BELIEFS

   Joan Giovannini

The first, and perhaps most crucial, elements of culture we will discuss are its values and beliefs. Values are a
culture's standard for discerning what is good and just in society. Values are deeply embedded and critical for
transmitting and teaching a culture's beliefs. Beliefs are the tenets or convictions that people hold to be true.
Individuals in a society have specific beliefs, but they also share collective values. To illustrate the difference,
Americans commonly believe in the American Dream--that anyone who works hard enough will be successful
and wealthy. Underlying this belief is the American value that wealth is good and important.

   Values help shape a society by suggesting what is good and bad, beautiful and ugly, sought or avoided.
Consider the value that the United States places upon youth. Children represent innocence and purity, while
a youthful adult appearance signifies sexuality. Shaped by this value, individuals spend millions of dollars
each year on cosmetic products and surgeries to look young and beautiful. The United States also has an
individualistic culture, meaning people place a high value on individuality and independence. In contrast,
many other cultures are collectivist, meaning the welfare of the group and group relationships are a primary
value.

   Living up to a culture's values can be difficult. It's easy to value good health, but it's hard to quit smoking.
Marital monogamy is valued, but many spouses engage in infidelity. Cultural diversity and equal opportunities
for all people are valued in the United States, yet the country's highest political offices have been dominated by
white men.

   Values often suggest how people should behave, but they don't accurately reflect how people do behave.
Values portray an ideal culture, the standards society would like to embrace and live up to. But ideal culture
differs from real culture, the way society actually is, based on what occurs and exists. In an ideal culture, there
would be no traffic accidents, murders, poverty, or racial tension. But in real culture, police officers, lawmakers,
educators, and social workers constantly strive to prevent or repair those accidents, crimes, and injustices.
American teenagers are encouraged to value celibacy. However, the number of unplanned pregnancies among
teens reveals that not only is the ideal hard to live up to, but the value alone is not enough to spare teenagers
the potential consequences of having sex.

   One way societies strive to put values into action is through rewards, sanctions, and punishments. When
people observe the norms of society and uphold its values, they are often rewarded. A boy who helps an elderly
woman board a bus may receive a smile and a "thank you." A business manager who raises profit margins may
receive a quarterly bonus. People sanction certain behaviors by giving their support, approval, or permission,
or by instilling formal actions of disapproval and nonsupport. Sanctions are a form of social control, a way to
encourage conformity to cultural norms. Sometimes people conform to norms in anticipation or expectation
142 | VALUES AND BELIEFS

of positive sanctions: good grades, for instance, may mean praise from parents and teachers. From a criminal
justice perspective, properly used social control is also inexpensive crime control. Utilizing social control
approaches pushes most people to conform to societal rules, regardless of whether authority figures (such as
law enforcement) are present.

   When people go against a society's values, they are punished. A boy who shoves an elderly woman aside
to board the bus first may receive frowns or even a scolding from other passengers. A business manager who
drives away customers will likely be fired. Breaking norms and rejecting values can lead to cultural sanctions
such as earning a negative label--lazy, no-good bum--or to legal sanctions, such as traffic tickets, fines, or
imprisonment.

   Values are not static; they vary across time and between groups as people evaluate, debate, and change
                                                                                                                                VALUES AND BELIEFS | 143

collective societal beliefs. Values also vary from culture to culture. For example, cultures differ in their values
about what kinds of physical closeness are appropriate in public. It's rare to see two male friends or coworkers
holding hands in the United States, where that behavior often symbolizes romantic feelings. But in many
nations, masculine physical intimacy is considered natural in public. This difference in cultural values came
to light when people reacted to photos of former president George W. Bush holding hands with the Crown
Prince of Saudi Arabia in 2005. A simple gesture, such as hand-holding, carries great symbolic differences
across cultures.

   Conversations with families require us to be open to seeing their perspectives. Sometimes we share the
same perspectives and our conversations go smoothly. At other times, we are surprised by something or feel
challenged. Sometimes our program cannot accommodate a family's request. No matter the situation, it always
helps to approach the conversation with the family's strengths in mind. Adopting a strengths-based attitude
does not mean avoiding challenges. Instead it shows families that we want to work together with them to find
a solution. In contrast, when we approach our interactions with a fixed or negative attitude, we may convey
our distrust or judgment. They may feel that they can't trust us. We may put up barriers to engaging families
without realizing it.

   A strengths-based approach involves

  · acknowledging the strengths of families first
  · respecting and learning from differences
  · showing openness to adapting practice based on family preferences
  · sharing decision-making
  · approaching families as equal and reciprocal partners.

Each child and family have unique strengths that can be the foundation of our discussions and partnership.
Families are the most important constant in children's lives, and children's healthy development relies on
sensitive and nurturing interactions within the family and the community. Families make choices every day
that affect a child's development and learning. These choices are rooted in their belief systems and cultural
identities. Being open to families' suggestions and requests helps us do our best on behalf of their children.
144 | VALUES AND BELIEFS

Strength-based Attitudes               Description
All families have strengths.
                                       Each child and family have unique strengths that can be the foundation of our
Families are the first and the most    discussions and partnership.
important teachers of their children.
                                       Families are the most important constant in children's lives, and children's
Families have expertise about their    healthy development relies on sensitive and nurtuing interactions within the
child and their family.                family and the community.
Families' contributions are important
and valuable.                          Families make choices every day that affect a child's development and learning.
                                       These choices are rooted in their belief systems and cultural identities.

                                       Being open to families' suggestions and requests helps us do our best on
                                       behalf of their children.

Case Study (D)

Consider the following case study:
Ravi, a 5-year-old in Ms. Martinez's early childhood class, recently migrated to the United States
from India with his family. His parents are concerned about his adjustment to the new environment
and his progress in learning English.
In the parent-teacher conference, Ms. Martinez adopts a strengths-based approach, starting by
celebrating Ravi's enthusiasm for learning and his quick adaptation to classroom routines. She
notes his eagerness to participate in group activities. Ms. Martinez highlights Ravi's ability to form
friendships quickly, using his non-verbal communication and friendly demeanor. She shares
examples of Ravi's leadership during playtime and his curiosity about new topics.
Ms. Martinez and Ravi's parents discuss strategies to support his English language development
while valuing his cultural background. They agree to incorporate bilingual resources and cultural
stories in the classroom and at home.
Ravi's parents leave the conference feeling positive and supported. They appreciate the focus on
Ravi's strengths and the collaborative plan that respects their cultural heritage. This strengths-
based approach fosters a welcoming environment for Ravi's growth and adjustment.

     · List specific ways that Ms. Martinez demonstrated a strengths-based lens with the family.
                                                                                                                                VALUES AND BELIEFS | 145

          · Identify examples of cultural humility, cultural capital, and/or funds of knowledge in this case
             study.

Media Attributions

  · Young girla and boy © Photo by Annie Spratt on Unsplash
  · Soldiers_Holding_Hands © Geordie Mott from Halifax, NS, Canada, CC BY 2.0 , via Wikimedia

      Commons is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
146 | VALUES AND BELIEFS
                                                                                                              HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY | 147

PART VII

HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

     Learning Objectives
          · Define terms and categories used to describe children from linguistically diverse
             backgrounds.
          · Report on data and demographics about linguistic diversity in the United States.
          · Apply an understanding of legal responsibilities related to linguistic diversity to inclusive
             strategies for schools and communities.
          · Identify strategies to support families defined as immigrants, migrants, and refugees.

Linguistic diversity is a reflection of the broader cultural diversity within a community. Community bonds
148 | HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

are strengthened when schools and communities show an understanding and appreciation for different
languages. Families feel connected, welcomed, respected, and are more likely to participate in community
activities and school events. This engagement leads to stronger partnerships between families and schools
which fosters a supportive environment for children's development.

                                         Are we welcoming multilingual families?

Media Attributions

  · Linguistic Diversity © Kadyn Pierce is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
                                                                                 INTRODUCTION TO HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY | 149

INTRODUCTION TO HONORING LINGUISTIC
DIVERSITY

Lev Semyonovich Vygotsky was a Russian and Soviet psychologist, best known for his work on psychological
development in children. Vygotsky's theories on cognitive development and the role of language in learning
provide valuable extensions into understanding and addressing linguistic diversity in educational settings.
Vygotsky asserted that cognitive development is largely a social process, occurring through interaction with
more knowledgeable others (parents, teachers, peers). This perspective underscores the importance of
linguistic diversity. Among many of his major publications and research is the concept of Zone of Proximal
Development (ZPD). ZPD refers to the gap between a child's current level of development and the level they
are capable of reaching with tools provided by others with more knowledge.
150 | INTRODUCTION TO HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

Zone of proximal development

Vygotsky argued that language is a primary tool for thinking and learning. He distinguished between "inner
speech" (internal thought) and "external speech" (communication with others), emphasizing that
internalization of language transforms cognitive processes. Vygotsky's theories suggest that learning is deeply
embedded in cultural and linguistic contexts. This implies that students' home languages and cultural
backgrounds should be integrated into the educational process to support learning. Vygotsky's view that
language develops through social interaction highlights the importance of creating collaborative and
communicative classroom environments that honor and engage with families. Recognizing and valuing
students' home languages and cultures enhances their cognitive development and self-esteem. According to
                                                                                  INTRODUCTION TO HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY | 151

Vygotsky, language is a means of cultural transmission, so incorporating students' linguistic backgrounds in
the classroom supports their overall development.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Kamila Noori, a prominent Afghan judge, on the balcony of the apartment where she will live with her
     husband and two of their daughters.

     Listen to From Kabul to Virginia: An Afghan family is starting over in America
          · How might the drastic change in environment affect the cultural identity and emotional well-
             being of Kamila Noori's children and grandchildren?
          · In what ways can the educational system in Northern Virginia support the Mohib children in
             maintaining their home language, Dari, while also helping them achieve proficiency in
             English?
          · What challenges might the Mohib children face in navigating their dual identities as Afghan
152 | INTRODUCTION TO HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

             refugees and new residents of the United States?

In 2009, the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) released Where We Stand
on Responding to Linguistic and Cultural Diversity. In the statement, NAEYC asserts that early childhood
education must

  · Help all families realize the cognitive advantages of a child knowing more than one language, and
      provide them with strategies to support, maintain, and preserve home language learning.

  · Ensure that children remain cognitively, linguistically, and emotionally connected to their home
      language and culture.

  · Encourage home language and literacy development.
  · Help develop essential concepts in the children's first language and within cultural contexts that they

      understand.
  · Make every effort to use children's home languages and create classroom environments that reflect

      children's languages and cultures.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Mariela is a 41-year-old migrant worker who immigrated to the United States from Oaxaca, Mexico,
     looking for work and a better life for her family. She now works on a strawberry farm in Florida.
     Her 4-year-old daughter, Alicia, and 2-year-old son, Mariano, are enrolled in a local Spanish/English
     Head Start program.
     Mariela's first language is Mixtec, an Indigenous Oaxacan language. Spanish is her second language.
     Mariela struggles with the idea of teaching Mixtec to her children. Mariela says she wants to spare
     her children the discrimination she felt when she arrived in this country. At home, she only speaks
     Mixtec with her husband and adult family members. After listening to her concerns, Alicia's teacher
     suggests that Mariela speak with her children in Mixtec. She encourages Mariela to sing songs and
     rhymes and ask open-ended questions in Mixtec, Spanish, and English.

         1. How does Mariela's concern about discrimination reflect broader societal attitudes towards
             Indigenous languages and cultures?
                                                                                 INTRODUCTION TO HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY | 153

         2. What role can schools and educators play in addressing and mitigating discrimination against
             students who speak Indigenous languages?

         3. How can the Head Start program support Mariela in her efforts to teach Mixtec to her
             children?

         4. What strategies can be implemented by the school to foster a collaborative environment
             that respects and promotes the use of home languages?

Media Attributions

  · Zone of Proximal Development illustration is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · Afghan Family © Alyssa Schukar for NPR is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
154 | DESCRIPTIVE TERMS FOR DIVERSE LINGUISTIC BACKGROUNDS

DESCRIPTIVE TERMS FOR DIVERSE
LINGUISTIC BACKGROUNDS

Families encounter myriad terms, definitions, and categories to describe children from diverse linguistic
backgrounds. According to TESOL, "the bottom line is that whatever term you choose to use, it is important
to ensure that it portrays the student from an asset-based perspective, is concise, and cannot be
misinterpreted." This section introduces common terms used to describe and categorize children from diverse
linguistic backgrounds and programs that support them.
                                         DESCRIPTIVE TERMS FOR DIVERSE LINGUISTIC BACKGROUNDS | 155

          Table A: Terms and Categories for Children from Diverse Linguistic Backgrounds

Term                        Description

English Learner (EL)        A broad term used to describe students who are in the process of acquiring English
                            language skills and have not yet reached proficiency.

Limited English Proficient  An older term that is still used in some legal and educational contexts to describe
(LEP)                       students whose primary language is not English and who have limited ability to read,
                            write, speak, or understand English. According to TESOL, "terms such as this
                            reinforce the damaging colonial view of English as the ideal language to be learned;
                            stigmatize the learner as being somehow less important and capable than others; and
                            fail to recognize the diverse languages, skills, and knowledge that the learner brings
                            with them." Therefore, avoid using this term.

Dual Language Learner       Often used for younger children, particularly in early childhood education, who are
(DLL)                       learning two languages simultaneously, typically their home language and English.

Newcomer                    Refers to recently arrived immigrants or refugees who are new to the U.S. school
                            system and are in the initial stages of learning English.

Long-term English Learner   Describes students who have been in U.S. schools for several years (usually 5 years or
(LTEL)                      more) but have not yet achieved proficiency in English.

Pause to Reflect!

    1. Reflect on your experiences in schools as either a student, caregiver, teacher, or other
        support staff. List the terms that were used to describe and categorize children from diverse
        linguistic backgrounds.

   2. Determine if those terms fall into asset or deficit based categories. Describe your rationale.
   3. How does the use of deficit-based language when discussing linguistic diversity affect the

        perception and self-esteem of multilingual students?
156 | DESCRIPTIVE TERMS FOR DIVERSE LINGUISTIC BACKGROUNDS

      Table B: Terms and Categories for Programs for Children from Diverse Linguistic Backgrounds

Term                    Description

Bilingual Education     Programs that provide instruction in both the student's home language and English.

English as a Second     Programs focused on teaching English to students whose first language is not English. This
Language (ESL)          instruction is typically provided in English and may be integrated into regular classes or
                        provided in separate settings.

English Language        A specific approach within ESL programs that focuses on developing proficiency in
Development (ELD)       English, often using structured methods and curricula.

Sheltered Instruction   A teaching approach that uses simplified English and visual aids to help ELs understand
                        content in subjects like math, science, and social studies.

Transitional Bilingual  Programs that initially use the student's home language but transition to English over time,
Education               with the goal of moving students to English-only instruction.

Two-Way Immersion       Programs that aim to develop bilingualism and biliteracy by providing instruction in two
(TWI) or Dual           languages to both English learners and native English speakers.
Language Immersion

Pause to Reflect!

      1. Visit an early childhood center or school.
      2. Which programs are offered for children from diverse linguistic backgrounds?
      3. What are the goals and objectives of those programs?
      4. How are the programs marketed to families?

Media Attributions

  · DescriptiveTerms
                                                                      DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS | 157

DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS

Linguistic diversity in schools in the United States is significant and growing. The data reflects a wide array of
languages spoken by students and underscores the importance of addressing the needs of children from diverse
linguistic backgrounds. Here are some key statistics and insights about linguistic diversity in U.S. schools from
the National Center for Education Statistics:

The data table represented in the map is at the end of this chapter.
158 | DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS

     Pause to Reflect:
         1. Which three states had the highest percentages of English Learners (ELs) in their public
             school populations in fall 2021?
         2. What was the range of percentages for states that identified at least 6.0 but less than 10.0
             percent of their students as ELs?
         3. How did the percentage of ELs in Massachusetts compare to the percentage in West
             Virginia, and what does this tell you about the regional differences in EL populations?

   The data table represented in the map is at the end of this chapter.
                                        DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS | 159

Pause to Reflect!

      1. What trend was observed in the percentage of English Learners (ELs) across different grade
          levels in fall 2021?

      2. How does this data inform programming and support services for schools and communities?

   Number and percentage distribution of English learners (ELs) in public schools and number of ELs as a
percentage of total public school enrollment, by the 10 most commonly reported home languages of ELs: Fall

                                                                 2021

          Home Language  Number of ELs  Percentage distribution Number of ELs as a % of
                                        of ELs1
                                                 total enrollment

Spanish, Castilian       4,023,289      76.4                                                         8.4

Arabic                   130,917        2.5                                                          0.3
English2
                         116,771        2.2                                                          0.2

Chinese                  95,584         1.8                                                          0.2

Vietnamese               75,070         1.4                                                          0.2

Portuguese               50,205         1.0                                                          0.1

Russian                  39,403         0.7                                                          0.1

Haitian, Haitian Creole  31,122         0.6                                                          0.1

Hmong                    30,181         0.6                                                          0.1

Urdu                     26,567         0.5                                                          0.1

1 Detail does not sum to 100 percent because not all home language categories are shown.
   2 Examples of situations in which English might be reported as an English learner's home language include

students who live in multilingual households and students adopted from other countries who were raised
speaking another language but currently live in households where English is spoken.

   NOTE: Data in this table represent the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Includes all students
identified as ELs-both those participating in EL programs and those not participating in EL programs.
Excludes ELs who are enrolled in prekindergarten.

   SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, EDFacts file 141, Data
Group 678, 2021-22, extracted December 12, 2023. See Digest of Education Statistics 2023, table 204.27.
160 | DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS

     Pause to Reflect!

         1. Which home language was the most commonly reported among EL public school students in
             fall 2021?

         2. Which languages do you see represented in your own community and schools?
         3. Which languages are you familiar with? Unfamiliar with? Where are these languages

             spoken?

   Data table represented on Figure 1's map and Figure 3's graph:
                                           DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS | 161

Figure 1. Table Percentage of public school students who were English learners (ELs), by state or
                   jurisdiction: Fall 2021 [National Center for Education Statistics]

State or jurisdiction          Percentage low to high

Less than 3.0 percent

Puerto Rico                    0.272795577

West Virginia                  0.754194365

Vermont                        2.037511164

Montana                        2.376244216

Wyoming                        2.725231757

New Hampshire                  2.836387165

3.0 to less than 6.0 percent

Mississippi                    3.076244344

Maine                          3.129059262

North Dakota                   3.326088445

Ohio                           3.794163976

Missouri                       3.843172375

Pennsylvania                   4.57892551

South Dakota                   4.627513145

Alabama                        4.672753564

Louisiana                      4.871665769

Kentucky                       5.416063549

Idaho                          5.780918863

Tennesee                       5.798984458

South Carolina                 5.842141794

Wisconsin                      5.944711518

6.0 to less than 10.0 percent

Iowa                           6.203920017

MI                             6.383767681

IN                             6.96973351

NE                             7.304832033

GA                             7.683147842
162 | DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS  Percentage low to high
                             7.965785987
 State or jurisdiction       7.984154059
 NC                          8.122108402
 KS                          8.229420256
 AR                          8.239682198
 NJ                          8.298042939
 AZ                          8.806831889
 UT                          9.294457103
 MN                          9.365411929
 OK                          9.394750423
 CT                          9.513459406
 VA                          9.537296881
 FL                          9.691425118
 OR
 NY                          10.02032591
 10.0 percent or more        10.43689679
 HI                          10.54669011
 CO                          10.64791982
 MA                          10.78695438
 United States AVERAGE       11.18211696
 AK                          11.28694831
 Maryland                    11.44213304
 Washington, DC              11.53892879
 Washington                  12.47708673
 Deleware                    12.81890861
 Rhode Island                12.86933481
 Illinois                    13.76826782
 Bureau of Indian Edu.       18.80265795
 Nevada                      18.92036689
 New Mexico
 California
State or jurisdiction                   DATA AND DEMOGRAPHICS | 163
Texas
                       Percentage low to high
                       20.15188778

Media Attributions

  · Percentage of ELs by state Fall 2021 © Education. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education
      Sciences. Retrieved [date], from https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/cgf. is licensed under a
      Public Domain license

  · Percentage ELL by State © Education. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences.
      Retrieved 11/5/2024
164 | LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES

LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES

     Pause to Reflect!

     When COVID-19 began, a Sudanese refugee father of three elementary-aged children tried to get
     information from his children's school about distance learning. The school provided most
     information in English and Spanish, but he spoke Arabic and very limited English. He appreciated
     when his children's teachers called, but he didn't understand anything they were saying. Therefore,
     he was at a loss for how to best support his children's learning while they were home.

         1. What challenges did the father face in understanding the information provided by the
             school?

         2. How could this situation affect the emotional well-being of both the father and the children?
         3. What strategies could the school implement to better communicate with non-English
                                                                                                                           LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES | 165

             speaking parents?
         4. How can schools leverage community resources to bridge language gaps?

Schools and communities adhere to a set of legal responsibilities, rights, and laws as they relate to working with
families with diverse linguistic backgrounds. Legal responsibilities, rights, and laws aim to promote inclusivity
and engagement between families, schools, and communities. They ensure equitable access to education. This
section focuses on translation, interpretation, and key legal frameworks.

   What are the legal requirements related to language access?
166 | LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES

                        Table C: Legal Frameworks for Translation and Interpretation Services

Act Name                                  Provisions of the Law

Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964  Title VI prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national
                                          origin in any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. Public
                                          schools must ensure that language barriers do not impede any student from
                                          equal participation in school programming. This includes discrimination
                                          based on language. Public schools are required to translate or interpret all
                                          documents and communications with caregivers, who are not fluent in
                                          English, into a language they can understand.

                                          Joint guidance from the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S.
                                          Department of Education states that "schools must provide translation or
                                          interpretation from appropriate and competent individuals and may not
                                          rely on or ask students, siblings, friends, or untrained school staff to translate
                                          or interpret for parents".

Individuals with Disabilities Education IDEA mandates that caregivers of children with disabilities must be able to

Act (IDEA)                                participate in decisions regarding their child's education.

                                          For caregivers with deafness or for those whose native language is not
                                          English, schools must provide interpreters for meetings (such as
                                          Individualized Education Program (IEP) meetings) to ensure that parents
                                          fully understand the proceedings and can contribute meaningfully.

Equal Education Opportunity Act of        The Equal Education Opportunity Act of 1974 confirms that school
1974                                      districts cannot discriminate against students or families through the failure
                                          to provide ways to overcome barriers that impede equal participation,
                                          including language differences.

Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)         ESSA requires that schools and districts communicate effectively with
                                          caregivers of English learners (ELs). This includes providing information
                                          about academic standards, assessments, and the child's progress in a
                                          language that parents can understand. Interpreters must be available for
                                          parent-teacher conferences, disciplinary meetings, and other important
                                          interactions.

Examples of state-specific guidance that  The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education
extend or enhance federal policies        requires that public schools provide an interpreter for families whose home
                                          language is not English and who are not proficient in English. Specifically,
                                          communications with caregivers must be in both English and the primary
                                          language of the home. Interpreters must be fluent in the primary language
                                          of the home and familiar with educational procedures, programs, and
                                          services. If the parents or the student are unable to read in any language or
                                          are blind or deaf, communications required by these regulations are made
                                          orally in English and with the use of a foreign language interpreter, in
                                          Braille, in sign language, via TTY, or in writing.

                                          The Connecticut State Board of Education requires that schools inventory
                                          the language needs of non-English speaking students, provide translation
                                          services during "critical interactions with teachers and administrators" (i.e.
                                          parent-teacher conferences) on behalf of multilingual learner students and
                                          their parents, and establish programming for bilingual education if twenty
                                          or more students speak the same dominant non-English language and attend
                                          the same school. Connecticut explicitly outlines the right to attend public
                                          school, regardless of immigration status.
                   LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES | 167

Pause to Reflect!

         1. What are the potential ethical and practical issues of using students or family members as
             translators during important meetings between caregivers, schools, and communities?

         2. How might professional translators better support the accuracy, confidentiality, and
             effectiveness of these meetings?

Colorín Colorado, an educational service of WETA, stresses that is important to note that bilingual staff and
interpreters are not the same thing:

  · Bilingual/multilingual staff speak multiple languages. They may also be able to write and translate in
      those languages, but that is not always the case. They may not have had formal training in translation or
      interpretation.

  · Interpreters have received extensive training related to best practices for interpreting/translation, as well
      as training on specific legal and educational considerations around matters where they will be
      interpreting.

Bilingual staff members' ability to communicate directly with families in their home language is a valuable
asset for establishing partnerships with multilingual families. However, bilingual staff without formal training
should not be responsible for facilitating interpreted communication between families and staff for meetings
and events -- only trained interpreters should be interpreting for families.
168 | LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES

                                          Bilingual Staff  Interpreters

Use Biligual Staff For:                               Use Interpreters For:

Communicating directly with families in their native  Facilitating communication between families and staff
language                                              ("middle man")

Building relationships with families                  Situation that require an unbiased party

Presenting parent workshops in Spanish or whatever    Facilitating at workshops and events that are presented in
language is common among parents                      English

Key access points, like the Front Office              Parent / Teacher conferences

-                                                     Disciplinary situations

-                                                     IEP meetings

   Pause to Reflect!

         1. What challenges and limitations might arise when bilingual staff members at an early
             childhood center are tasked with translating all materials into languages other than English?

         2. How can dedicated professional translation services improve the accuracy and quality of
             these translations while supporting staff in their primary roles?

Many tools exist to simplify and streamline legal frameworks and requirements. For example, the United States
Department of Agriculture recommends "I Speak Statement Cards" to help schools and agencies identify the
language needs of its families and participants.
                                                                                                                          LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES | 169

I Speak Statements
170 | LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES

The United States Department of Education requires the use of home language surveys. A home language
survey is a questionnaire given to parents or guardians that helps schools and schools identify which students
are potential English Learners and who will require assessment of their English language proficiency to
determine whether they are eligible for language assistance services. A sample of a home language survey is
provided below.

Sample #2 format of the Primary/Home Language Survey for Incoming Students from www.ed.gov
                                                                                                                           LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES | 171

Legal frameworks exist to protect the rights associated with equal access to public education. They ensure that
families can communicate effectively with school staff about their child and about the educational process.
Schools should
 Determine the primary language spoken at home for each student and identify families that need translation
or interpretation services.
 Use qualified interpreters who are trained in educational terminology and confidentiality. Schools should
not rely on using students, siblings, other family members, or untrained staff for interpretation.
 Ensure that essential documents, such as consent forms, report cards, and notices, are translated into the
primary languages of the community.
 Educate school staff on the importance of language access services and how to work effectively with
interpreters.

Media Attributions

  · Sudanese family © UNHCR The UN Refugee Agency is licensed under a Public Domain license
  · ISpeak © USDA
  · Primary/Home Language Survey is licensed under a Public Domain license
172 | WORKING WITH IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS

WORKING WITH IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT
AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS

An immigrant is a person who has been granted permission by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
(USCIS) to reside permanently in the United States as a Lawful Permanent Resident (LPR). They are eligible
to apply for citizenship after five years. In general, immigrants come to the U.S. voluntarily, while refugees
are forced to leave their homeland, often with little time for preparation. Some people entering the U.S. are
considered undocumented immigrants (those who enter the country without invitation or application; or who
enter legally as a visitor, student, or temporary employee, and stay after their visa expires). In addition, some
groups are awarded a temporary status (such as "Temporary Protected Status") by USCIS due to extraordinary
and temporary conditions in designated countries that would threaten personal safety. This type of status can
be terminated at any time, and it therefore provides an uncertain future to those it covers.

   A migrant child is an individual under the age of 18 who moves across international borders or within
their own country, either with family or alone, primarily due to economic, social, political, or environmental
reasons. This movement often seeks better living conditions, education, safety from conflict, or employment
opportunities for the family. Migrant children may face unique challenges, including legal and educational
barriers, language differences, and potential risks of exploitation or discrimination. They might be classified
differently depending on whether they are accompanied by guardians, unaccompanied, or separated from
their primary caregivers. Ensuring their rights and well-being often involves international and national legal
protections, as stipulated by conventions such as the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.

   Refugees are a special class of immigrants who have fled their countries of nationality and have been
determined unable or unwilling to return to their countries due to a well-founded fear of persecution.
Refugees are screened and approved for resettlement to the United States by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS). Refugee migration may involve a long and difficult journey, long waits in refugee camps or
other countries, extreme deprivation, and/or physical and emotional trauma, including torture. Asylees are
approved according to similar criteria, but apply for asylum after they arrive in the United States.
                                                           WORKING WITH IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS | 173

   It is important to help refugee, migrant, and immigrant children and youth nurture a strong and positive
connection to their ethnic heritage, to maintain their home language, and to develop a positive bicultural
identity as Americans. This helps to keep families strong and thereby provides the support that children need
to succeed in this country.

   Refugee, migrant, and immigrant families come to the United States with a wealth of parenting strengths,
drawing on culture, tradition, and family experience. They have often sacrificed tremendously to provide their
children with an opportunity for safety and success in this new country. At the same time, families that are new
to the U.S. have often experienced incredible loss and trauma, including the loss of extended family members,
community, and homeland. They must adapt to new traditions and lifestyles that are often at odds with their
own beliefs and practices. Refugee and immigrant families overcome cultural, language, and practical barriers
to learn about and access the community services that are available to them as having newly arrived to our
country.

   It is important for early childhood education programs to use family and community centered, strengths-
based approaches with refugees and immigrants. This helps to maximize family and community input and
build upon cultural assets in order to successfully engage and serve families who have newly arrived in the U.S.
174 | WORKING WITH IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS

     Pause to Reflect!

     .
     The Demir family, recent immigrants from Turkey, enrolled their young daughter, Aylin, in an early
     childhood center in New York. Upon her arrival, the center's staff recognized the importance of
     honoring Aylin's linguistic and cultural background to support her transition and learning.
     To create an inclusive environment, the center implemented several strategies. First, they engaged
     a professional translator to ensure that all communication with the Demir family was clear and
     respectful of their home language. This included translating enrollment forms, newsletters, and
     classroom materials into Turkish.
     The teachers also integrated Turkish cultural elements into the classroom. They included Turkish
     storybooks in the reading corner and celebrated cultural events such as Turkish Children's Day,
     inviting Aylin's parents to share traditions and stories with the class. This helped Aylin feel valued
     and connected to her heritage.
     Additionally, the center encouraged Aylin to use both Turkish and English in her interactions.
     Teachers used bilingual labels and incorporated Turkish phrases during daily routines, fostering a
     bilingual learning environment. Peers were taught basic Turkish greetings and phrases, promoting
     mutual respect and curiosity among the children.
                                                           WORKING WITH IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS | 175

     These efforts resulted in Aylin's increased confidence and active participation in class activities. The
     Demir family felt welcomed and respected.

         1. How does honoring a child's home language and cultural background positively impact their
             overall social-emotional development and sense of belonging in an early childhood center?

         2. Based on the experience of the Demir family, how can similar strategies be adapted or
             modified to support the linguistic diversity of children from other immigrant communities in
             early childhood education settings?

         3. Imagine you are a teacher in an early childhood center where a new child from a different
             cultural and linguistic background has enrolled. What specific steps would you take to ensure
             that both the child and their family feel valued and included, while also fostering a
             supportive learning environment for all children in your classroom?

Some cultural considerations that you should remember as you help families navigate an unfamiliar system of
early childhood education:

  · Families with limited English skills are likely to have difficulty gathering information about the varied
      early care and education options and may rely on word of mouth or recommendations from others
      within their ethnic or religious community.

  · Hiring staff from the same culture and language as families and providing opportunities for families
      from the same cultural or linguistic backgrounds to connect may encourage family engagement and
      mutual support. However, it is important to identify any areas of discrimination or political conflict that
      program staff or families from the same region may have experienced.

  · Do not assume that staff and families that originate from the country will be free of conflict with each
      other. Be aware that class, race, or ethnic conflicts may exist, even though they now live in the United
      States.

            Pause to Reflect!

            [First image looks copyrighted - do you have attribution? or other image?]
            Mariela is a 41-year-old migrant worker who immigrated to the United States from Oaxaca,
176 | WORKING WITH IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS

            Mexico, looking for work and a better life for her family. She now works on a strawberry farm
            in Florida. Her 4-year-old daughter, Alicia, and 2-year-old son, Mariano, are enrolled in a local
            Spanish/English Head Start program.
            Mariela's first language is Mixtec, an Indigenous Oaxacan language. Spanish is her second
            language. Mariela struggles with the idea of teaching Mixtec to her children. Mariela says she
            wants to spare her children the discrimination she felt when she arrived in this country. At
            home, she only speaks Mixtec with her husband and adult family members. After listening to
            her concerns, Alicia's teacher suggests that Mariela speak with her children in Mixtec. She
            encourages Mariela to sing songs and rhymes and ask open-ended questions in Mixtec,
            Spanish, and English

                1. How does Mariela's concern about discrimination reflect broader societal attitudes
                    towards Indigenous languages and cultures?

                2. What role can schools and educators play in addressing and mitigating discrimination
                    against students who speak Indigenous languages?

                3. How can the Head Start program support Mariela in her efforts to teach Mixtec to her
                    children?

               4. What strategies can be implemented by the school to foster a collaborative
                    environment that respects and promotes the use of home languages?

Media Attributions

  · Group of Children © Siddhant Soni is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
  · Turkish Family in Pause and Reflect © Adam Jones is licensed under a CC BY-SA (Attribution

      ShareAlike) license
   STRATEGIES TO SUPPORT COLLABORATION BETWEEN SCHOOLS, COMMUNITIES, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES FROM
                                                                                                   LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE BACKGROUNDS | 177

STRATEGIES TO SUPPORT
COLLABORATION BETWEEN SCHOOLS,
COMMUNITIES, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES
FROM LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE
BACKGROUNDS

Schools and communities can employ a variety of strategies to welcome families from diverse linguistic
backgrounds, ensuring that they feel included, respected, and supported.

  · Hire bilingual or multilingual staff who can communicate directly with families in their home languages.
  · Provide translation and interpretation services for meetings, documents, and communications. This

      includes translating enrollment forms, newsletters, and other important information. Take note that this
      is a requirement in public schools.
  · Use signs and labels in multiple languages throughout the school or community center to create an
      inclusive environment.
  · Offer professional development for staff on cultural competence and the importance of respecting and
      valuing linguistic diversity.
  · Incorporate books, games, and educational materials that reflect the diverse languages and cultures of
      the families in the community.
  · Recognize and celebrate cultural holidays and events from various backgrounds, involving families in
178 | STRATEGIES TO SUPPORT COLLABORATION BETWEEN SCHOOLS, COMMUNITIES, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES
FROM LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE BACKGROUNDS

      planning and participation.
  · Establish open lines of communication with families, encouraging them to share their cultural practices

      and language preferences.
  · Host family nights, potlucks, and cultural events where families can share their traditions and languages

      with the center's community.
  · Form parent committees or councils that include representation from diverse linguistic backgrounds to

      ensure their voices are heard in decision-making processes.
  · Implement dual language or bilingual education programs that support the development of both

      English and the home language.
  · Provide resources and activities that encourage language development in both English and the home

      language, such as bilingual storytime or language learning apps.
  · Encourage families to continue speaking their home language at home, reinforcing the benefits of

      bilingualism for cognitive and academic development.
  · Partner with local community organizations, cultural centers, and language services to provide

      additional support and resources for families.

Media Attributions

  · Linguistic Diversity (1) is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
                                                                 EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT | 179

PART VIII

EXPLORING THE CORE
COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY
ENGAGEMENT

     Learning Objectives

          · 7.1 Differentiate between the terms parent involvement, family involvement, family
             engagement, and family learning.

          · 7.2 Integrate the Dual Capacity-Building Framework into our understanding of family
             engagement.

          · 7.3 Reflect on how the Family Engagement Core Competencies from the National
             Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement can inform your work with
             children, families, schools, and communities.
180 | EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT

Introduction

In the field of Child and Family Studies, professionals are guided by sets of core competencies that outline
the intellectual, personal, and social and emotional proficiencies necessary to foster positive and collaborative
relationships between families, schools, and communities. Collaborative relationships honor funds of
knowledge, equitable processes, cultural humility, and trust. Exemplar core competencies incorporate those
concepts into their mission statement, domains, and objectives.

   Professionals in the field of Child and Family Studies have access to many core competencies from reputable
organizations. Below are examples from national or state education and outreach associations that Child and
Family professionals may connect with:

  · National Association for the Education of Young Children
  · Massachusetts Department of Early Education and Care
  · Head Start
  · National Family Support Network
  · National Education Association
  · National Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement

Core competencies are critically important in helping to guide the field of Child and Family Studies. They
outline the core values and strategic vision of organizations. They incorporate the voices of families and
communities. They outline the professional development areas for staff and serve as the philosophical
foundation for the development of programming for their members. This chapter will draw heavily on the
core competencies presented by the National Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Choose two of the organizations listed above that you are interested in learning about.
         2. Read through the organizations' mission statements and core competencies.
         3. Create a table of that information that summarizes the key points.
                                                                 EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT | 181

         4. Based on what you have read, determine if the organizations' core competencies reflect
             funds of knowledge, equitable processes, cultural humility, and trust.

Media Attributions

  · Teacher and preschoolers in garden © Allison Shelley/The Verbatim Agency for EDUimages is licensed
      under a CC BY-NC (Attribution NonCommercial) license
182 | EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT
                                                                                EXPLORING THE LANGUAGE OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT | 183

EXPLORING THE LANGUAGE OF FAMILY
ENGAGEMENT

Before we can begin to apply the core competencies of family engagement, we must create a shared
understanding of the language that describes engagement and involvement. From this lens, we will differentiate
between language and phrases that are all too often used interchangeably:
184 | EXPLORING THE LANGUAGE OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT
                   EXPLORING THE LANGUAGE OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT | 185

Pause to Reflect!

Discuss the following questions.

    1. Contact an early childhood center or local school.
   2. Conduct an inventory of parent involvement, family engagement, and family learning

        strategies and events that are facilitated there.
   3. Is the early childhood center or local school using "parent involvement", "family

        engagement", and "family learning" as interchangeable words?
   4. Categorize the strategies and events into "parent involvement", "family engagement", and

        "family learning".

Media Attributions

  · Engagement Terminology © ROTEL is licensed under a CC BY-SA (Attribution ShareAlike) license
186 | DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK

DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK

Hoover-Dempsey & Sandler Model of Parental
Involvement Process

Family engagement models begin by asking three primary questions:

 1. Why do (and don't) families become involved with their childrens' communities and schools?
 2. What do families do when they are involved?
 3. How does family involvement make a positive difference in child outcomes?

These questions serve as the foundation to the Hoover-Dempsey and Sandler model of parent involvement
(1995, 1997):

   Hoover-Dempsey and Sandler's model is broken up into 5 levels leading from the caregivers'' motivators,
perception of invitation to be involved, and life context variables up through student achievement. It outlines
the role that caregiver involvement plays in modeling collaborative relationships with schools and communities
for children so that student achievement is impacted positively. The model suggests that caregivers'
involvement is motivated by

  · how the caregiver involvement role is constructed and
  · if the caregiver has a sense of efficacy for helping the child succeed in school.

Level 1

Personal Motivators               Parent's Perception of Invitations  Life Context Variable
                                              to be Involved

· Parental Role Construction for  · General School Invitations        · Parental Knowledge & Skills
   Involvement                    · Specific Invitations from         · Parental Time & Energy
                                                                      · Family Culture
· Parental Efficacy for Helping      Teacher(s)
   Student Succeed in School      · Specific Requests/Invitations

                                     from Student
                                                                                                    DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK | 187

Caregiver motivators are central to Level 1. It asks us to centralize the idea that the caregiver wants the child to
succeed and is seeking opportunities to support them. It identifies outreach and invitation from the school or
teacher as key components for involvement. Hoover-Dempsey and Sandler did not directly link that outreach
and invitation to the cultural capital of the family. However, when we create that theoretical extension, we
honor the caregivers' demands of work and personal life on the time and energy balance for relationship
formation between the caregiver and school/teacher.

Level 1.5

 Parent Involvement Forms

    · Values, Goals, Expectations, Aspirations
    · Involvement Activities at Home
    · Parent/Teacher/School Communication
    · Involvement Activities at School

The invitation is the focus of Level 1.5. Successful caregiver involvement forms when home/school
communication reflects the goals, values, expectations, and aspirations of both the caregiver and the teacher/
school. It assumes that involvement is a result of effective communication between the caregiver and school/
teacher and that both the home and school activities are honored in that communication exchange.

Levels 2 & 3

 Learning Mechanisms Used by Parents during Involvement Activities

    · Encouragement
    · Modeling
    · Reinforcement
    · Instruction

 (Mediated by) Student Perceptions of Learning Mechanisms Used by Parents

    · Encouragement
    · Modeling
    · Reinforcement
    · Instruction
188 | DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK

Level 2 looks at how caregivers are involved. It identifies four primary actions: encouragement, modeling,
reinforcement, and instruction. Effective caregiver and school/teacher communication offers transparent
recruitment into relationship formation by clarifying "how" so that caregivers can balance their time
commitment with responsibilities and also best use their talents and abilities to support the child and the
relationship to the school/teacher. The "how" is mediated by the child's perception of the involvement.

Level 4

 Student Attributes Conducive to Achievement

    · Academic Self-Efficacy
    · Intrinsic Motivation to Learn
    · Self-Regulatory Strategy Knowledge & Use
    · Social Self-Efficacy for Relating to Teachers

Level 4 focuses on the child. It assumes that the child will develop both social and academic self-efficacy,
intrinsic motivation, and self-regulatory behaviors that are influenced by Levels 1 through 3. Level 4 assumes
that effective caregiver and school/teacher collaborations result in a well-supported child who demonstrates
student achievement in Level 5.

 Student Achievement

It is important to note that the Hoover-Dempsey and Sandler model does not put full responsibility for parent
involvement on the parent. It calls into question how parent involvement is defined by a school or community
and how parents are invited or recruited to be involved. For example, if schools and communities do not honor
funds of knowledge, equitable processes, cultural humility, and trust, then movement from Level 1 to Level 2
will not be achieved. Furthermore, in order to achieve family engagement, this model helps us to outline, in
Level 1.5, the critical role of the design of family learning and parent involvement activities.

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
                                                                                              DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK | 189

    1. Review Level 1.5 of the Hooper-Dempsey Sandler model.
   2. What factors must a school or community consider when designing parent/teacher/school

        communications?
   3. What factors must a school or community consider when designing parent involvement or

        family learning activities?
   4. Design a Family Engagement event that will be hosted at a school, hospital, or community

        center. Family and Community Engagement may be a useful article for you to review:
              Describe your event. Who is the target audience? What is the purpose? Where will
                it be held? When and at what time will it be held? Will you invite representatives
                from the micro- or meso- systems outlined in Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Theory?
              Develop a promotional flier for your event that demonstrates your understanding of
                funds of knowledge, equitable processes, cultural humility, and trust.

Case Study (A)

In Massachusetts, the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education requires that a school
district or charter school operating a language acquisition program for English Learners (ELs)
serving 100 or more English Learners or in which English Learners comprise at least five percent of
the district's or charter school's student population, whichever is less, are required to establish an
190 | DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK

     English Language Parent Advisory Council (ELPAC). ELPACs are intended by law to advise school
     districts and schools regarding matters that impact ELs, such as providing advice on English learner
     education programs, meeting regularly with school officials about educational opportunities for
     ELs, and providing input on school or district improvement plans as they relate to ELs.

    You are in your second year of teaching English Learners at a Massachusetts charter
    school and have been invited to join the ELPAC as a teacher representative. You attend
    the first two meetings and are surprised that there are no caregiver representatives at
    the meetings.
    You learn that the school has tried, unsuccessfully, for two years to launch a successful
    ELPAC. It has tried to recruit caregivers via email and phone calls. It has planned in-
    person and Zoom-based meetings. It offers bilingual facilitators and translators. However,
    because there have been many staffing changes since the height of the COVID-19
    pandemic, there has been inconsistent outreach and leadership.
    You value the input and advice of caregivers and are committed to making the ELPAC
    successful. You decide to develop a strategic action plan to improve the ELPAC.

    Review the definitions of Parent Involvement, Family Engagement, and Family Learning
    and apply those concepts to your strategic plan.
    Using the Hoover-Dempsey and Sandler model, along with theoretical extensions of the
    definition of family, cultural capital, and inclusivity, what new strategies will you bring to
    your leadership team?

Dual Capacity-Building Framework

The Dual Capacity-Building Framework was originally developed by Dr. Karen Mapp in 2013 to describe the
objectives and conditions that are essential for effective family-school engagement and collaboration.

          The Framework builds on existing research suggesting that partnerships between home and school
       can only develop and thrive if both families and staff have the requisite collective capacity to engage
       in partnership. Many school and district family-engagement initiatives focus solely on providing
                                                                                                     DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK | 191

       workshops and seminars for families on how to engage more effectively in their children's education.
       This focus on families alone often results in increased tension between families and school staff. Families
       are trained to be more active in their children's schools, only to be met by an unreceptive and
       unwelcoming school climate and resistance from district and school staff to their efforts for more active
       engagement. Therefore, policies and programs directed at improving family engagement must focus on
       building the capacities of both staff and families to engage in partnerships (Mapp & Kuttner 2013).
   In 2019, the Dual Capacity-Building Framework was updated to Version 2 to include Mapp's collaborative
research with Marissa Alberty, Eyal Bergman, and the Institute for Educational Leadership. Its foundational
philosophy underpins the belief that successful engagement requires both educators and family members to
develop essential beliefs, knowledge, skills, confidence, and social relationships that are bound to a shared
understanding of funds of knowledge, equitable processes, cultural humility, and trust. While the framework
is focused on partnerships between educators and families, it does provide useful guidance for partnerships
between educators and youth or between schools and community organizations.

The Dual Capacity-Building Framework for Family-School
Partnerships (Version 2)

   The Dual Capacity Framework builds upon four interrelated categories:
192 | DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK

 1. The Challenge helps us understand the reasons why educators and families have struggled to build
      trusting and effective partnerships.

          Educators: The framework assumes that educators have not been exposed to strong examples of
            family engagement and have received minimal training in this area. As such, they may not
            understand "partnership" and may approach families from a deficit-based model.

          Families: The framework assumes that families are not considered true "partners" in most
            educational institutions. Therefore, families may feel disrespected, unheard, and unvalued,
            resulting in negative experiences with schools.

 2. The Essential Conditions offer research-based guidance for best practice to cultivate and sustain
      partnerships. Our capacity-building process must be relational, asset-based, culturally sustaining,
      collaborative, and interactive. Finally, it must link to learning and development. We must foster
      organizational conditions that are systematically supported by leadership and aligned with strategic
      initiatives. Those conditions must also be sustained via resources and infrastructure.

 3. Policy and Program Goals highlight the goals and outcomes that should emerge for educators and
      families when the Essential Conditions are met. This area of the dual capacity-building framework
      builds and enhances the capacity of educators and families. It seeks to reinforce and honor a shared
      understanding of

          Capabilities
          Connections
          Cognition
          Confidence

 4. Capacity Outcomes show how improvements in capacity lead to educators and families working in
      mutually supportive ways, leading to student and school improvements.

          Educators engage families through culturally sustaining strategies that honor cultural capital and
            funds of knowledge. Educators connect family engagement to learning and development and
            create welcoming school climates and cultures.

          Families co-create learning activities and advocate for the needs of their children in partnership
            with educators. They support the work of the school and of the educator, thereby impacting
            student support and school improvement.
                                                                                                    DUAL CAPACITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK | 193

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it
                   online here:
        https://rotel.pressbooks.pub/children-families-schools-communities/?p=138#h5p-10

     Pause to Reflect!

     Discuss the following questions.
         1. Review The Challenge as described in the Dual Capacity-Building Framework for Family-
             School Partnerships (Version 2).
         2. Interview an educator about their understanding of family engagement. What training have
             they received in this area? Do they approach family engagement as an equitable process?
             Do they approach family engagement from a strengths- or deficit-based process?
         3. Interview a family of a child who attends school about their relationship with the school.
             Have they been invited to contribute to their child's education? What opportunities or
             barriers exist for them to collaborate with the school?
         4. Do those interviews support or negate the assumptions made in the Dual Capacity-Building
             Framework?

Media Attributions

  · Woman lecturing in group © Photo by Antenna on Unsplash is licensed under a Public Domain license
  · Dual Capacity-building Framework © Dual Capacity is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA (Attribution

      NonCommercial ShareAlike) license
194 | FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES

FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE
COMPETENCIES

According to the National Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement, "the purpose of the
Family Engagement Core Competencies is to create a nationally agreed upon and unifying set of professional
competencies for the family engagement field." It contextualizes the role of bias, stereotypes, equity, and social
justice in family engagement and strives to honor funds of knowledge, equitable processes, cultural humility,
and trust. The National Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement challenges family-facing
professionals to self-reflect on their own practices and beliefs as they relate to the four domains of the core
competencies:
FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES | 195
196 | FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES

Family-Facing Professional's Reflection Tool

The Family Engagement Core Competencies from the National Association for Family, School, and
Community Engagement created a self-reflection tool that outlines research-based and effective strategies for
working with families in ways that are culturally relevant, honors funds of knowledge, and center around true
collaboration:
                                                                 FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES | 197

Reflection Questions                     Proficiency             Ways to Improve

How do I respect, value, and honor
families?

Ask yourself: In what ways do I                       1 2 3 4 5
respect and value the cultural and
linguistic diversity of families and
communities? How do I understand
and honor families regarding how
children develop, grow, and change
from birth through adulthood across
settings, and how might these
changes affect families?

How well do I champion equity
through family and community
engagement?

Ask yourself: How do I demonstrate                    1 2 3 4 5
cultural humility? How do I utilize
cognitive flexibility, and perspective-
taking skills to practice anti-bias and
equitable family and community
engagement? In what ways do I see
history and social context influencing
family engagement systems and
practices?

How well do I build trusting
reciprocal relationships with families?

Ask yourself: In what ways do I                       1 2 3 4 5
cultivate mutual trust with families?
How do I communicate with
families? How do I create welcoming
environments? In what ways do I
reach out to families, especially those
who might be most underserved?

How well do I foster community
partnerships for learning and family
well-being?

Ask yourself: What are the                            1 2 3 4 5
community partnerships that support
children and families? How do I
expand ways for families to access
these resources? How am I cultivating
social support networks and
connections among families?
198 | FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES

Reflection Questions                    Proficiency             Ways to Improve

How well do I co-construct learning
opportunities with families?

Ask yourself: How do I build from                    1 2 3 4 5
family knowledge as resources for
learning? How do I join with families
in planning, implementing, and
evaluating learning opportunities and
services?

How well do I link family and
community engagement to learning
and Development?

Ask yourself: How do I ensure that                   1 2 3 4 5
data are accessible to every family?
How do I create conversations
around developmental progressions
and academic progress in clear and
understandable ways? How do I
expand on family learning in the
home and community?

How well do I take part in lifelong
learning?

Ask yourself: How do I identify and                  1 2 3 4 5
participate as a member of the family
engagement profession? How do I
engage in professional learning to
grow my family engagement
knowledge and skills? In what ways
do I use data to assess, evaluate, and
improve family engagement practice?

How well do I advocate with families
for system change?

Ask yourself: How do I identify and                  1 2 3 4 5
examine new and existing policies and
practices to advance family and
community engagement for all
families? In what ways do I champion
equity in my family and community
engagement practice? How do I help
reframe the conversation around
family and community engagement
to expand public understanding?
                   FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES | 199

Pause to Reflect!

Discuss the following questions.

    1. Rate yourself in the Family-Facing Professional's Reflection Tool.
   2. Based on what you have learned from your reading, identify ways that you can develop and

        improve in your collaborative work with children, families, schools, and communities.

Media Attributions

  · Family Engagement Core Competencies © ROTEL adapted by National Association for Family,
      School, and Community Engagement is licensed under a CC BY-SA (Attribution ShareAlike) license
200 | FAMILY ENGAGEMENT CORE COMPETENCIES
                                                                                                FOR INSTRUCTORS: SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS | 201

PART IX

FOR INSTRUCTORS: SAMPLE
ASSIGNMENTS

Introduction

This course examines how children, families, schools, and communities collaborate with and influence one
another. The course explores ecological theory to contextualize diversity and relationships among children,
families, schools, and communities, linkages between family-school-community engagement and student
achievement, and cultivation of culturally sustaining family and community collaboration.

   As you move through this course, I will challenge you to think about your own implicit, explicit, and
confirmation biases about children and families. You will examine, closely, how funds of knowledge and
cultural capital impact collaboration with schools and communities.

   Please watch the following video to further your understanding of the framework for this course:
   Expanding the Definition of Family | Amanda Bastoni & Anthony David | TEDxKeene
202 | FOR INSTRUCTORS: SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS
                                                                                            SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - I. WHAT IS A FAMILY? | 203

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - I. WHAT IS A
FAMILY?

Introduction

This course examines how children, families, schools, and communities collaborate with and influence one
another. The course explores ecological theory to contextualize diversity and relationships among children,
families, schools, and communities, linkages between family-school-community engagement and student
achievement, and cultivation of culturally sustaining family and community collaboration.

   As you move through this course, I will challenge you to think about your own implicit, explicit, and
confirmation biases about children and families. You will examine, closely, how funds of knowledge and
cultural capital impact collaboration with schools and communities.

   Please watch the following video to further your understanding of the framework for this course:
   Expanding the Definition of Family | Amanda Bastoni & Anthony David | TEDxKeene

Discussion

  · Reflect on a time when you experienced or witnessed a micro-aggression in a family, school, or
      community. Describe what happened. What was the hidden message?

Reading Review

 1. Focus on the case studies that contrast the U.S. Census Bureau's definition of family to a modern
      definition of family. Write your own case study that shows this contrast.

 2. Choose three Pause and Reflect questions found in Chapter I. Answer them.

Reflection

 1. Read Chapter I.
 2. Review Table 1: Family Structures. As you answer the following questions, think about implicit,

      explicit, and confirmation bias both for and against the diversity of family structures.
 3. Choose one of the following questions to answer.

          Imagine that you are working with families in a school or community setting. What level of
204 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - I. WHAT IS A FAMILY?

            comfort do you have in working with diverse families? What may be challenging for you? What are
            some strategies that you could use to help you in working on the biases that you may have?
          What judgments or assumptions do I have about different family structures?

Optional Bonus Choice A

 1. Read Public Has Mixed Views on the Modern American Family written by Kim Parker and Rachel
      Minkin from the Pew Research Center.

 2. Identify one data point about the public perception of the Modern American Family that you already
      know or suspected to be true.

 3. Identify one data point that surprised you about the public perception of the Modern American Family
 4. Describe how the diverse views on the future of marriage and family in the United States., as reflected in

      the data, potentially impact early childhood centers or schools or community centers or other family
      support systems.

Optional Bonus Choice B

 1. Identify one official form that a family member may fill out on behalf of a child. Examples might include
      a school district enrollment form, Head Start enrollment form, or a form for a pediatrician or other
      medical professional.

 2. Examine the form for inclusive language. Does it include the parental choices of "mother" and "father"
      or are they more flexible in their labels of parents, guardians, and/or other caregivers? Describe your
      findings.

 3. If the form is not inclusive, edit it by describing how to make them more inclusive and consistent with a
      modern definition of family.
                                               SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - II. THEORIES THAT HELP US UNDERSTAND FAMILIES | 205

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - II. THEORIES
THAT HELP US UNDERSTAND FAMILIES

Introduction

Chapter II is dense with theory. You will focus on five primary theories that help us to frame and understand
how families function and interact with communities and schools. You will find it helpful to review the
following preview videos to pair with your reading:

   Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Systems: 5 Forces Impacting Our Lives
   Bowen Family Systems Therapy: Short Explanation by Dr Kirk Honda
   Functionalism | Society and Culture | MCAT | Khan Academy
   Conflict theory | Society and Culture | MCAT | Khan Academy
   Symbolic interactionism | Society and Culture | MCAT | Khan Academy

Discussion A

 1. Choose one of the theories covered in Chapter II.
 2. What stood out to you and why?
 3. Give two specific examples of how you will use theory to gain a better sense of how to engage with

      families.

 Discussion B:

 1. Think of yourself at a particular time in your childhood (e.g., age 10).
 2. Describe how each system in the bioecological systems theory model directly impacted your

      development. Identify your influencers in each system.

Reading Review

 1. In 1-2 paragraphs, create a profile or case study of a family. This might be your own family, a fictional
      family, or a family that you work with on a professional level. Your profile or case study should include a
      description of each family member, their roles and responsibilities, and any other relevant information
      that helps the reader to visualize your description. Then, in 2-3 paragraphs, analyze the family from one
      of the theories presented in Chapter II. In other words, if we were to consider how the family roles and
206 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - II. THEORIES THAT HELP US UNDERSTAND FAMILIES

      responsibilities were shaped OR how the family engages with communities and schools OR how the
      family influences the child, which theory would apply? Identify the theory and provide a detailed
      description that relates to your case study.
 2. Choose and answer two of the following Pause and Reflect questions in Chapter II.

Reflection

 1. Read the case studies below.
 2. Choose one to examine and analyze closely.
 3. Choose one theory covered in Chapter II that closely relates to the case study.
 4. Analyze the case study from the perspective of that theory.

Case Study 1 :

The mom has six children and has never worked outside of the home. The dad owns a small convenience store
and is almost never home. The children range in age from 5 to 22. The youngest, a 5 year old boy, is preparing
for kindergarten in the fall, but has never attended any kind of program or school outside of the home. The
child is extremely "street smart" but cannot identify his letters or numbers. The other children (a 7 year old
boy, a 9 year old girl, a 13 year old boy, and a 15 year old boy) go to school and then return home to help mom
around the house. The boys go to the business to assist dad, as well. The children are often at the convenience
sstore late at night and struggle to get to school on time. The 9 year old daughter is already learning how to
cook meals, do laundry, and clean the bathrooms and bedrooms. The 22 year old boy assists with the business.
If he ever wants a night with friends, it becomes a struggle with mom and dad because he still lives at home.
They tell him he's not setting a good example for his siblings, that he needs to take care of the family if dad is
still at work, that there's work to do around the house. He was not allowed to enroll in college after high school
because he was expected to continue the family business. He drives a nice vehicle that his dad pays for and has
been told that if he moves out, he will lose the vehicle.

Case Study 2:

In a blended family, there are 8 people. Bob married Kate. They each had 3 children of their own from
previous relationships. The siblings don't use the "step sibling" label. Bob's biological children are Corinne
(age 30), Corey (age 24), and Olivia (age 21). Kate's biological children are Jaylynn (age 20), Jordan (age 17),
and Joey (age 14). While Kate and Bob are the parental figures and caregivers, Corinne, being much older
than her siblings, also fulfills a caregiver role. Joey was 2 when the family started living together. Corinne,
who was 18 at the time, took the initiative with Joey's potty training. She was a mother figure to Joey.
Kate's children's biological father is problematic. His aggressive outbursts required intervention from the
Department of Children and Families.
                SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - II. THEORIES THAT HELP US UNDERSTAND FAMILIES | 207

Case Study 3:

In the Zebo family , the grandparents are the guardians of their grandchildren. The grandchildren are a 5 year
old girl (Zivi) and a 9 year old boy (Ralph). They lost their mother to a drug overdose. Their father is not
present in their lives. The grandparents are from Russia and are raising the children in that culture. Zivi is
angry: she lashes out verbally when things don't go her way. Ralph battles over control and fairness. The
grandfather is easy-going, believing that their behaviors are not problematic and that they are "just being kids."
The grandmother is the disciplinarian.

Optional Bonus

1. Identify a community resource that is available to children and families in your community that
    addresses a system in the bio-ecological systems theory model.

2. Provide the address, phone number, and web site.
3. How does this resource connect to the specific system level?
208 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - III. A CLOSER LOOK AT PARENTING

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - III. A CLOSER
LOOK AT PARENTING

Introduction

Chapter III overviews parenting. Parenting styles influence the development of children's social and emotional
growth. It is a major area of study for developmental psychologists. We will examine a variety of parenting
styles and analyze how culture impacts them. We will also define attachment theory and discuss its application
to our evolving definition of "family" that we explored in Chapters I and II.

   You will find it helpful to review the following preview videos to pair with your reading:
   5 Parenting Styles and Their Effects on Life
   The Attachment Theory: How Childhood Affects Life

Discussion Prompt A:

 1. Read Chapter III
 2. Listen to the following podcast: She wanted to vaccinate their kids against COVID. He didn't. A judge

      had to decide
 3. Consider the co-parenting model and debate presented to the caregivers in the story. Choose 2 of the

      questions below to respond to.

          What questions would you ask the caregivers in this story about their parenting relationships?
          What questions would you ask the caregivers in this story about their co-parenting future?
          What questions would you ask the children in this story?
          What strategies would you offer to this family as it moves forward into the future?

 Discussion Prompt B:

 1. Read Chapter III.
 2. Think back to your own childhood and consider the rules, discipline strategies, warmth, and support of

      your household.
 3. What socioeconomic or cultural factors influenced your childhood experiences with rules, discipline

      strategies, warmth, and/or support in your household?
                      SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - III. A CLOSER LOOK AT PARENTING | 209

Discussion Prompt C:

1. Read Chapter III.
2. Give an example from popular media for each parenting style discussed in Chapter III.

Reading Review

1. Read Chapter III.
2. Choose and answer 2 of the following Pause and Reflect questions.
3. Review Lemaster and Defrain's Model of Parenting.
4. Create a case study or identify a family in popular media that exemplifies one of the categories of

    parenting outlined by Lemaster and Defrain's Model of Parenting.

Reflection

1. Chapter III discusses parenting styles. Refer back to the Bio-Ecological Theory Model from Chapter I
    and think about the connections between this model and the content of Chapter III.

2. Choose one of the following questions:

 Which parenting style were you raised in? How did you determine this? Connect this to a memory.
 If you are a parent now, which style are you? If you are not a parent, which style do you believe you

  will follow? Why?
 How did your parent's parenting style impact you as a child, and as an adult today? Connect this to

  the Bioecological Model.

Optional Bonus

Recommend strategies for educators on how to work with children who display insecure attachments.
210 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - IV. WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - IV. WHAT IS
GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

Introduction

Chapter IV overviews gender. In this chapter, we will explore the social constructs of gender and
intersectionality. Social constructs challenge, and often reinforce, our understanding of human behavior,
leading to dangerous stereotypes, microaggressions, implicit bias, explicit bias, and confirmation bias. We will
determine how our ideas about gender support or harm our collaborative relationships with children, families,
schools, and communities.

   You will find it helpful to review the following preview videos to pair with your reading:
   Pink and Blue: Communicating Gender to Children | Anthony Schullo | TEDxNorthCentralCollege
   Sex vs Gender vs Orientation

Discussion Prompt A

 1. Choose one of the podcasts from the How to Be a Girl series and listen to it.
 2. Summarize the podcast that you listened to, emphasizing your key takeaways.

  · What questions would you ask the caregivers in this story about their parenting relationships?
  · What questions would you ask the children in this story?
  · What strategies would you offer the schools and communities in this story to best support this family as

      it moves forward into the future?

Discussion Prompt B

 1. Listen to Breaking the Binary: Expanding Gender Identity and Expression

  · Reflecting on Nick Alm's journey and experiences as a non-binary individual navigating both personal
      and professional spaces, discuss a time when you had to confront societal expectations or norms that
      didn't align with your authentic self. How did you handle the situation, and what support or resources
      would have been helpful for you during that time?

  · Dr. Angela Kade Goepferd emphasizes the importance of creating inclusive environments for trans and
      non-binary individuals. Share an example of a time when you witnessed or participated in fostering
                                                   SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - IV. WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? | 211

      inclusivity for gender diverse children or caregivers. What actions were taken, and what positive
      outcomes resulted from those efforts?

Reading Review

 1. Read Chapter IV.
 2. Identify and read at least 3 children's book published in the last 10 years that highlight trans or non-

      binary characters.
 3. Summarize each book and describe the main characters.
 4. Are the character(s) story presented from a strengths or deficit based lens?
 5. How is gender or socialization presented in the stories?

Reflection

 1. Choose one of the following questions to answer.

  · Reflect on how microaggressions might manifest in interactions with families that are transgender or
      LGBTQ+. Consider the potential impact of these microaggressions on the children and their families.
      How can early childhood educators create a more inclusive and supportive environment that actively
      counters these subtle forms of discrimination?

  · Reflect on how gender stereotypes influence the way children engage in play. Consider the ways in
      which these stereotypes might limit a child's exploration and expression. How can early childhood
      educators create an environment that encourages all children to explore a diverse range of play activities,
      free from the constraints of traditional gender roles?

Optional Bonus

Girls State and Boy State are leadership and citizenship programs designed for high schoolers girls, typically
rising seniors, in the United States. The programs are sponsored by the American Legion Auxiliary. They aim
high schoolers about government, politics, and civic engagement by immersing them in a mock governmental
environment.

   During Girls State and Boy State, participants (often referred to as "citizens") form their own mock state
government, complete with executive, legislative, and judicial branches. They run for various offices, draft and
debate bills, and learn about the responsibilities and functions of state and local government. The program
usually includes activities such as:

  · Participants run for elected positions, conduct campaigns, and vote in elections.
  · Citizens draft, discuss, and pass mock legislation in a simulated legislative process.
212 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - IV. WHAT IS GENDER AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

  · Attendees learn about the workings of various government offices and agencies.
  · Guest speakers, including elected officials and community leaders, provide insights into government and

      leadership.
  · Participants engage in activities that promote civic responsibility and leadership skills.

The purpose of Girls State and Boy State is to inspire highschoolers to take active roles in their communities
and to provide them with the knowledge and skills necessary for effective leadership. The program also
emphasizes the importance of civic participation and the democratic process and encourages attendees to
become informed and active citizens.

   Girls State and Boys State run as separate programs.

Instructions:

 1. Read A new documentary follows hundreds of high school girls forming a mock government
 2. Optional: If you have access to Apple TV+, watch the documentary Girls State.
 3. Choose one of the following questions to respond to:

       1. Reflect on the differences observed between the Girls State and Boys State programs as highlighted
            in the interview and/or documentary. How do these differences, such as the initial hesitance of the
            girls to engage in political discussions and the gender-specific rules like dress codes and buddy
            systems, illustrate broader societal gender norms and expectations? How can understanding these
            dynamics inform your approach as an educator to foster a more equitable environment for all
            genders?
            SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - V. BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH
                                                                                                                                             DISABILITIES | 213

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - V. BUILDING
COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH
FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES

Introduction

As you move through your degree in education, you will take very specific coursework on teaching children
with exceptionalities- or students with disabilities. Note that both phrases are socially acceptable and are
written in person-first language. This is when we put the person before the adjective. It helps us to first
notice the person BEFORE we place a value judgment on how to describe them. Notice how students
with disabilities changes disabled students. It emphasizes that the student is a student. How that student is
described at the moment is secondary.

   Another popular linguistic prescription is the identity-first language, as in "disabled people." Many use this
style to celebrate disability pride and identity or simply because they prefer this. There is no unanimity on
which is the more respectful style, it comes down to personal preference.

   If someone is willing to disclose their disability, it is best to ask them how they want you to refer to (or not
refer to) their disability. In addition to word choice, it is important to note that people may want different levels
of disclosure. In other words, some people may feel more comfortable discussing their disabilities than others
or may feel differently about disclosure in different situations. One suggested middle-ground is to use these
two styles interchangeably to acknowledge and respect the individual preferences of an exceptionally diverse
group of people.

   We will look at how to best collaborate and support families of children with exceptionalities. All too
often, families are not seen as true collaborators with schools in the Individual Family Service Plan and/or
Individualized Education Plan process. Families act as advocates. They deserve respect to be at the table as
true collaborators. And, children with exceptionalities must be seen from a strengths-based perspective. Their
strengths should center our work with them and their families. As you move through this module, consider
how those perspectives shape our equity work.

   You will find it helpful to review the following preview videos to pair with your reading:
   10 Self-Advocacy Tips for Young People with Disabilities
Parents of Children with Special Needs Have Needs, Too | Debra Vines | TEDxOakParkSalon
214 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - V. BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH
DISABILITIES

Discussion Prompt A

 1. Read Chapter V.
 2. Re-read the introduction.
 3. Identify at least one additional example of disability as a social construct.
 4. Based on what you have learned in Chapter V, describe how microaggressions or bias about a disability

      impacted the ways in which families and schools communicated or collaborated with one another.

Reading Review

 1. Visit or call a school or early childhood center.
 2. Gather information about how families with children with disabilities collaborate with and are included

      in communications, translation, scheduling, etc. Summarize that information in 1-3 paragraphs.
 3. Identify at least two best practices and two challenges that need to be addressed. List them and give a 1-2

      sentence description for each.
 4. Identify at least two additional recommendations to foster inclusive and collaborative relationships with

      families with children with disabilities. List them and give a 1-2 sentence description for each.

Reflection

Reflect on the issue of overrepresentation of students of color in special education programs.

  · How do implicit and explicit biases, as well as structural biases within the education system, contribute
      to this issue?

Consider the role of standardized assessments and their potential biases against students of color.

  · How might these biases influence the identification and labeling processes?

What steps can you, as a future educator or professional, take to address and mitigate these biases to promote
equity in special education?

Optional Bonus

 1. Read Chapter V.
 2. Interview a child with a disability or a family with a child with a disability about the key themes

      presented in the chapter:
       1. How was the child assessed? Was it a biased assessment?
 SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - V. BUILDING COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH
                                                                                                                                  DISABILITIES | 215

2. How does the school collaborate with the child and family to create an inclusive plan?
3. Describe the language used during meetings and on forms. Is the language readable?

    Understandable?
216 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VI. WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VI. WHAT IS
CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?

Introduction

The role of culture in our daily interactions is extraordinary. It frames our body language, our understanding
of one another, and our implied and explicit statements. Culture, cultural differences, and cultural similarities
can make or break the collaboration between children, families, schools, and communities. While this module
is not a comprehensive look at cultural capital, it does offer a glimpse of how important it is in our daily
educational settings to create inclusive spaces for children and families.

   Cultural capital refers to the non-financial social assets that influence an individual's social mobility and
success. These assets include

  · education,
  · intellect,
  · style of speech,
  · dress, and
  · physical appearance.

You will find it helpful to review the following pre-view videos to pair with your reading:
   Cultural Capital
   Learning About a Child's Family Culture

Discussion A

 1. Reflect on your own school experience as either a student or a teacher. Describe a time when culture
      played a significant role in how families, teachers, and students interacted with one another. In your
      description, explore norms, symbols, and language that surfaced during those interactions.

 2. Identify bias during those interactions.
 3. Offer at least one concrete recommendation to improve the interaction.

Reading Review

Discuss the following questions.
                                                  SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VI. WHAT IS CULTURE AND WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? | 217

 1. Reflect on how ethnocentrism and/or xenocentrism affect the dynamics between families and schools.
      How can recognizing and addressing ethnocentrism and/or xenocentrism improve relationships and
      outcomes in the school community?

 2. How do cultural biases and assumptions from both educators and parents influence communication,
      expectations, and the educational experiences of students?

 3. Reflect on a time when cultural humility, cultural capital, and/or funds of knowledge were integral to
      the outcome of a school or community based discussion. Who participated in the discussion? Describe
      the purpose of the discussion. Describe the emotion within the discussion. Was the outcome positive or
      negative? Were all stakeholders collaborative and equitable? Recommend additional strategies for
      highlighting cultural humility, cultural capital, and funds of knowledge in that discussion.

Reflection

 1. Describe two unwritten cultural rules and expectations of your school or community. How do those
      unwritten rules create or dismantle barriers for inclusive collaboration of families and children?

Optional Bonus A

 1. Review the Communications with Families slideshow.
 2. Read Recognizing and Addressing Microaggressions in Teacher-Family Relationships
 3. Choose a microaggression that you have experienced or witnessed in an educational setting:

  · Describe what happened.
  · What is the hidden message?

Optional Bonus B

 1. Read the Anti-Bias Education and Holidays
 2. Review Chapter VI.
 3. Summarize the article.
 4. Identify 2 key takeaways that you will bring into your professional practice.
218 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VII. HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VII. HONORING
LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

Introduction

Linguistic diversity is a reflection of the broader cultural diversity within a community. Community bonds are
strengthened when schools and communities show an understanding and appreciation for different languages.
Families feel connected, welcomed, respected, and are more likely to participate in community activities and
school events. This engagement leads to stronger partnerships between families and schools which fosters a
supportive environment for children's development.

   In this chapter, you will explore linguistic diversity from a strengths based perspective. You will learn about
key legal terms and data that will help you contextualize and frame linguistic diversity in your community.

   You will find it helpful to review the following preview videos to pair with your reading:
   Supporting cultural and linguistic diversity in early childhood
   Embracing Multilingualism and Eradicating Linguistic Bias | Karen Leung | TEDxWWU

Discussion A

 1. Read Celebrating Linguistic Diversity in Your Classroom
 2. Choose one of the following prompts to respond to and discuss:

          Reflect on a meaningful language experience from your life. Describe a moment when language
            played a crucial role in shaping your identity. How did this experience influence your perspective
            on language diversity in your community or classroom?

          Create your own language portrait. Use different mediums such as writing, drawing, or multimedia
            to depict the languages you think in, speak with family and friends, learn, and aspire to learn.
            Reflect on why these languages are important to you and how they contribute to your sense of
            identity and connection with others.

          Imagine organizing a language diversity celebration at your school. Describe what activities,
            performances, or displays you would include to showcase the languages spoken by students and
            their families. How would you involve the entire school community in recognizing and
            appreciating the richness of linguistic diversity?
                SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VII. HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY | 219

Reading Review

1. Read Chapter VII.
2. Identify and read at least 3 children's book published in the last 10 years that highlight linguistically

    diverse characters.

 Summarize each book and describe the main characters.
 Are the character(s) story presented from a strengths or deficit based lens?
 Reflect back to Table A: Terms and Categories for Children from Diverse Linguistic Backgrounds.

  Which category best describes the main characters?

3. Reflect back to Table B: Terms and Categories for Programs for Children from Diverse Linguistic
Backgrounds.

 Research your community or cities and towns in your state for programs for children from diverse
  linguistic backgrounds.

 Identify at least one specific program for each category.
 List the name of the program, its contact information, and its vision or mission statement.

Reflection

The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education uses the Blueprint for English
Learner Success. It's vision statement outlines that "English learners in Massachusetts attend schools in
which all educators share responsibility for their success, engage effectively with their families, and value and
nurture their linguistic and cultural assets. English learners are taught by effective, well-prepared, and culturally
responsive educators who hold them to high standards and have the materials and professional learning they
need to advance students' academic and linguistic development simultaneously. English learners have equitable
access to meaningful and rigorous learning opportunities that build on their cultural and linguistic assets and
the academic, linguistic, social, and emotional supports they need to excel. English learners thrive in high
school and graduate with the knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to be successful in college and/or a career
of their choice, and to contribute to civic life in a global community."

1. Review strategies for the classroom, school, district, and state for Pillar 1: School Culture, Building
    Block 2: Effective Family Engagement.

2. Reflect on your experiences as a child in school, as a parent of a school-age child, or as an educator.
    Describe a time when you witnessed a family and school collaboration that exemplified a strategy
    identified in the classroom, school, district, or state.
220 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VII. HONORING LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY

Optional Bonus A

 1. Work though Teaching English Language Learners: Effective Instructional Practices from the IRIS
      Center Peabody College Vanderbilt University.

 2. Complete the Assessment questions.

Optional Bonus B

 1. Work through one of the following modules from the Virtual Lab School's Supporting Language
      Diversity: Direct Care
       1. Promoting Language Diversity in the Early Years and Beyond
       2. Environments and Experiences to Promote Language Diversity
       3. Engaging Language Diversity in Adults: Families, Coworkers, & Communities

 2. Complete the Apply and Demonstrate sections for the module you chose.
                      SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VIII. EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT | 221

SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VIII. EXPLORING
THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY
ENGAGEMENT

Introduction

This chapter explores frameworks for understanding family engagement as outlined by core competencies.
These core competencies outline the required attitudes, practices, and opportunities that are embedded into
programs that work with families, schools, children, and communities. They lay the framework for how
we interact with one another, and how programs are designed from a strengths-based and collaborative
perspective. There are a variety of core competency models. For this course, you will be introduced to the
National Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement. You will find it helpful to review the
following preview videos to pair with your reading: Dr. Karen Mapp's 3 Prerequisites of Effective Family and
Community Engagement Culturally Responsive & Sustaining Family Engagement Explained in 6 Minutes

Discussion Prompt A:

 1. Read Exploring the Core Competencies of Family Engagement
 2. Interview a family of a child who attends school about their relationship with the school. How have

      they been invited to contribute to their child's education?
 3. Categorize those contributions into parental involvement, family engagement, or family learning.
 4. What opportunities or barriers exist for them to collaborate with the school?
 5. Recommend strategies for the school to increase the number of parental involvement, family

      engagement, and family learning opportunities.

Reading Review

 1. Interview an educator about their understanding of parental involvement, family engagement, and
      family learning.

  · Can they define how these concepts are different from one another?
  · What training have they received in these areas?
  · What strategies do they employ to create an equitable and strengths-based process for parental
222 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VIII. EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT

      involvement, family engagement, and family learning?

2. Compare the interview to what you have learned in Exploring the Core Competencies of Family Engagement.
Where does the interview align or misalign with what you have learned?

Reflection Option A

              1. Rate yourself in the Family-Facing Professional's Reflection Tool.
              2. Based on what you have learned from your reading, identify ways that you can develop and

                  improve in your collaborative work with children, families, schools, and communities.

Reflection Option B

Read Families: An Introduction and choose one of the trainings outlined in the Family Engagement series
from The Virtual Lab School:

                Promoting Family Engagement
                Promoting Family Engagement: Helping Staff Communicate With Families
                Working With Families of Children With Special Needs
                Strengthening and Supporting Military Families and Families Facing Challenges

              1. Determine which activities in the module align with parental involvement, family
                  engagement, and/or family learning.

              2. Reflect on the ways that the module aligns or misaligned with concepts of inclusion, cultural
                  humility, funds of knowledge, and/or cultural capital.

              3. How might you use the module in your own professional or personal life?

Optional Bonus Activity A

              1. Contact an early childhood center or local school.
              2. Conduct an inventory of parent involvement, family engagement, and family learning

                  strategies and events that are facilitated there.
              3. Categorize the strategies and events into "parent involvement", "family engagement", and

                  "family learning".
              4. Is the early childhood center or local school using "parent involvement", "family

                  engagement", and "family learning" correctly?
                      SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VIII. EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT | 223

Optional Bonus Activity B

Complete the self-paced module Cultural and Linguistic Differences: What Teachers Should Know from the
IRIS Center Peabody College Vanderbilt University. Turn in your answers to the Assessment section.
224 | SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS - VIII. EXPLORING THE CORE COMPETENCIES OF FAMILY ENGAGEMENT
                                                                                REFERENCES | 225

REFERENCES

Chapter I.
What Is A Family?

Amato, P. R. (n.d.). What is a Family?. National Council on Family Relations. https://www.ncfr.org/ncfr-report/past-
      issues/summer-2014/what-family

American Psychological Association, E. B. (n.d.). APA Dictionary of Psychology. American Psychological Association.
      https://dictionary.apa.org/bias

Benokraitis, N. V. (2015). Marriages & Families: Changes, choices, and constraints. Pearson.
Flam, Faye. 2007. "Separated Twins Shed Light on Identity Issues." The Philadelphia Inquirer, December 9. Retrieved

      January 31, 2012 (http://www.megafoundation.org/CTMU/Press/TheSmartGuy.pdf)
Spratling, Cassandra. 2007. "Nature and Nurture." Detroit Free Press. November 25. Retrieved January 31, 2012

      (http://articles.southbendtribune.com/2007-11-25/news/26786902_1_twins-adoption-identical-strangers)
U.S. Census Bureau. (2019, August 7). Subject Definitions. census.gov. https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps/

      technical-documentation/subject-definitions.html#family

Additional OER Sources used in Chapter 1 for adaptation

Laff, R., & Ruiz, W. (2022). Diversity of Families. In Child, Family, Community: The Socialization of Diverse Children.

LibreTexts.                    https://socialsci.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Early_Childhood_Education/

Child_Family_Community%3A_The_Socialization_of_Diverse_Children/03%3A_What_is_a_Family/

3.01%3A_Diversity_of_Families

Open Stax. (2022). Navigating the Diversity Landscape. In College Success. Open Stax. https://openstax.org/books/

college-success/pages/9-3-navigating-the-diversity-landscapehttps://www.ncfr.org/ncfr-report/past-issues/

summer-2014/what-family

Open Stax. (2022). Psychology, 2e. Open Stax. https://openstax.org/books/psychology-2e/pages/12-5-prejudice-and-

discrimination

Open Stax. (2021). Introduction to Sociology, 3e. Open Stax. https://openstax.org/details/books/introduction-

sociology-3e

Pearce, E. B. (n.d.). The Family: A Socially Constructed Idea. In CONTEMPORARY FAMILIES: AN EQUITY LENS.

Open Oregon Educational Resources. https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/families/
226 | REFERENCES

Chapter II.
Theories That Help Us Understand Families

Blood, R. O., Jr., & Wolfe, D. M. (1960). Husbands and wives: The dynamics of family living. Free Press Glencoe.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (2006). The Bioecological Model of Human Development. In R. M. Lerner & W.

      Damon (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical models of human development (pp. 793-828). John
      Wiley & Sons Inc.
Coltrane, S. (2000). Research on Household Labor: Modeling and Measuring the Social Embeddedness of Routine Family
      Work. Journal of Marriage and Family, 62(4), 1208-1233. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1566732
Lang, D. (n.d.). Introduction to the Eight Concepts. The Bowen Center for the Study of the Family.
      https://www.thebowencenter.org/introduction-eight-concepts
LaRossa, R., & Reitzes, D. C. (1993). Symbolic interactionism and family studies. In P. G. Boss, W. J. Doherty, R. LaRossa,
      W. R. Schumm, & S. K. Steinmetz (Eds.), Sourcebook of family theories and methods: A contextual approach (pp.
      135-166). Plenum Press. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-85764-0_6
Lee, Gary. ()1982. Family Structure and Interaction: A Comparative Analysis. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
      Press.

Additional OER Sources used in Chapter 2 for adaptation

Child Family Community: The Socialization of Diverse Children. (2022). LibreText.
Lang, D. (2021). 1970s: Bronfenbrenner. In Parenting and Family Diversity Issues. Iowa State University.

      https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/parentingfamilydiversity/chapter/bronfenbrenner/#footnote-50-7
Sociology (Boundless). (2020). LibreText.
Sociological Perspectives on the Family. (2010). In INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY: UNDERSTANDING AND

      CHANGING THE SOCIAL WORLD. Pressbooks. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.24926/8668.2401
Variations in Family Life. (2022). In Introduction to Sociology 2e. OpenEd CUNY. https://opened.cuny.edu/courseware/

      module/175/student/?task=6

Chapter III.
A Closer Look at Parenting

Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the
      strange situation. Lawrence Erlbaum.

Barber, B. K. (1996). Parental Psychological Control: Revisiting a Neglected Construct. Child Development, 67(6),
      3296-3319. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131780
                                                                                                                                            REFERENCES | 227

Baumrind, D. (1991). The influence of parenting style on adolescent competence and substance use. The Journal of Early
      Adolescence, 11(1), 56-95. https://doi.org/10.1177/0272431691111004

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: A process model. Child Development, 55(1), 83-96. https://doi.org/
      10.2307/1129836

Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Retrospect and prospect. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 52(4), 664-678.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1939-0025.1982.tb01456.x

Ainsworth, M. D., & Bell, S. M. (1970). Attachment, exploration, and separation: Illustrated by the behavior of one-year-
      olds in a strange situation. Child Development, 41(1), 49-67. https://doi.org/10.2307/1127388

Breiding, M., Basile, K. C., Smith, S. G., Black, M. C., & Mahendra, Reshma R. (2015). Intimate partner violence
      surveillance : uniform definitions and recommended data elements. Version 2.0. Cdc.gov. https://stacks.cdc.gov/
      view/cdc/31292

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1989). Ecological systems theory. Annals of Child Development, 6, 187-249.
Burton, L. (2007). Childhood Adultification in Economically Disadvantaged Families: A Conceptual Model. Family

      Relations, 56(4), 329-345. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4541675
Chao, R. K. (1994). Beyond parental control and authoritarian parenting style: Understanding Chinese parenting through

      the cultural notion of training. Child Development, 65(4), 1111-1119. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131308
Clark, L. A., Kochanska, G., & Ready, R. (2000). Mothers' personality and its interaction with child temperament as

      predictors of parenting behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(2), 274-285. https://doi.org/
      10.1037/0022-3514.79.2.274
Conger, R. D., & Conger, K. J. (2002). Resilience in Midwestern families: Selected findings from the first decade of
      a prospective, longitudinal study. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64(2), 361-373. https://doi.org/10.1111/
      j.1741-3737.2002.00361.x
Darling, N., & Steinberg, L. (1993). Parenting style as context: An integrative model. Psychological Bulletin, 113(3),
      487-496. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.113.3.487
Demick, J. (2006). Effects of Children on Adult Development and Learning: Parenthood and Beyond. In C. Hoare (Ed.),
      Handbook of adult development and learning (pp. 329-343). Oxford University Press.
Denham, M. A., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2013). Beyond Words: Using Nonverbal Communication Data in Research
      to Enhance Thick Description and Interpretation. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 12(1), 670-696.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/160940691301200137
Depanfilis, Diane. (2006). Child Neglect: A Guide for Prevention, Assessment, and Intervention.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health
      Statistics, 2012
Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. K. (1994). Economic deprivation and early childhood development. Child
      Development, 65(2), 296-318. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131385
Dye, J.L. (2010). Fertility of American women: 2008. Current Population Records P20-563. Retrieved on May 12, 2012
      from www.census.gov/prod/2010pubs/p20-563.pdf
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R.A., Shepard, S.A., Guthrie, I.K., Murphy, B.C. and Reiser, M. (1999), Parental Reactions to
228 | REFERENCES

      Children's Negative Emotions: Longitudinal Relations to Quality of Children's Social Functioning. Child
      Development, 70: 513-534. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00037
Eisenberg, Nancy & Sulik, Michael. (2012). Emotion-Related Self-Regulation in Children. Teaching of Psychology. 39.
      77-83. 10.1177/0098628311430172.
Else-Quest, Nicole & Hyde, Janet & Goldsmith, Harold & Van Hulle, Carol. (2006). Gender Differences in Temperament:
      A Meta-Analysis. Psychological bulletin. 132. 33-72. 10.1037/0033-2909.132.1.33.
Furstenberg, F. F., Jr., & Harris, K. M. (1993). When fathers matter/why fathers matter: The impact of paternal
      involvement on the offspring of adolescent mothers. In A. Lawson & D. L. Rhode (Eds.), The politics of pregnancy:
      Adolescent sexuality and public policy (pp. 189-215). Yale University Press.
Galinsky, E. (1987). The six stages of parenthood. Perseus Books.
Gallup, G., Jr., & Newport, T. (1990). Virtually all adults want children, but many of the reasons are intangible. Gallup
      Poll Monthly (June): 8-22.
Gervai, Judit. (2009). Environmental and genetic influences on early attachment. Child and adolescent psychiatry and
      mental health. 3. 25. 10.1186/1753-2000-3-25.
Gonzales NA, Coxe S, Roosa MW, White RM, Knight GP, Zeiders KH, Saenz D. Economic hardship, neighborhood
      context, and parenting: prospective effects on Mexican-American adolescent's mental health. Am J Community
      Psychol. 2011 Mar;47(1-2):98-113. doi: 10.1007/s10464-010-9366-1. PMID: 21103925; PMCID: PMC3169846.
Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Ventura SJ. Births: preliminary data for 2011. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2012 Oct 3;61(5):1-18.
      PMID: 24979973.
Harlow, H. F. (1958). The nature of love. American Psychologist, 13(12), 673-685. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0047884
Harris, J. R. (1998). The nurture assumption: Why children turn out the way they do. Free Press.
Harvey, John & Fine, Mark. (2004). Children of Divorce: Stories of Loss and Growth. Children of Divorce: Stories of Loss
      and Growth. 1-165. 10.4324/9781410610133.
Kerr, D. C. R., Capaldi, D. M., Pears, K. C., & Owen, L. D. (2009). A prospective three generational study of fathers'
      constructive parenting: Influences from family of origin, adolescent adjustment, and offspring temperament.
      Developmental Psychology, 45(5), 1257-1275. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015863
Kiff, Cara & Lengua, Liliana & Zalewski, Maureen. (2011). Nature and Nurturing: Parenting in the Context of Child
      Temperament. Clinical child and family psychology review. 14. 251-301. 10.1007/s10567-011-0093-4.
LeMasters, E. E., & DeFrain, J. D. (1989). Parents in contemporary America: a sympathetic view. Belmont, CA:
      Wadsworth.
Leventhal, T., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2000). The neighborhoods they live in: The effects of neighborhood residence on child
      and adolescent outcomes. Psychological Bulletin, 126(2), 309-337. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.126.2.309
Maccoby, E. E., & Martin, J. A. (1983). Socialization in the Context of the Family: Parent-Child Interaction. In P. H.
      Mussen, & E. M. Hetherington (Eds.), Handbook of Child Psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization, Personality, and Social
      Development (pp. 1-101). New York: Wiley.
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants as disorganized/disoriented during the Ainsworth
                                                                                                                                           REFERENCES | 229

      Strange Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings (Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years:
      Theory, research, and intervention (pp. 121-160). The University of Chicago Press.
Martinez, G., Daniels, K., & Chandra, A., Fertility of men and women aged 15-44 years in the United States: National
      survey of family growth, 2006-2010 (2012). Hyattsville, MD; Dept. of Health and Human Services, Centers for
      Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics.
Middlebrooks, J. S., & Audage, N. C. (2008). The Effects of Childhood Stress on Health across the Lifespan. Atlanta, GA:
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control.
http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/6978
Miller, N. B., Cowan, P. A., Cowan, C. P., Hetherington, E. M., & Clingempeel, W. G. (1993). Externalizing in
      preschoolers and early adolescents: A cross-study repli- cation of a family model. Developmental Psychology, 29, 3-18.
Murphy, K. (2017, January). Yes, It's Your Parents' Fault. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/07/
      opinion/sunday/yes-its-your-parents-fault.html
Nauck, Bernhard. (2007). Value of Children and the Framing of Fertility: Results from a Cross-cultural Comparative
      Survey in 10 Societies. European Sociological Review. 23. 10.1093/esr/jcm028.
O'Connor, T. G., & Zeanah, C. H. (2003). Attachment disorders: Assessment strategies and treatment approaches.
      Attachment & Human Development, 5(3), 223-244. https://doi.org/10.1080/14616730310001593974
Ogbu, J. U. (1981). Origins of human competence: A cultural-ecological perspective. Child Development, 52(2), 413-429.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/1129158
Pescosolido BA. The public stigma of mental illness: what do we think; what do we know; what can we prove? J Health
      Soc Behav. 2013 Mar;54(1):1-21. doi: 10.1177/0022146512471197. Epub 2013 Jan 16. PMID: 23325423; PMCID:
      PMC4437625.
Prinzie P, Stams GJ, Dekovi M, Reijntjes AH, Belsky J. The relations between parents' Big Five personality factors
      and parenting: a meta-analytic review. J Pers Soc Psychol. 2009 Aug;97(2):351-62. doi: 10.1037/a0015823. PMID:
      19634980.
Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. (2000). Attachment and culture: Security in the United States
      and Japan. American Psychologist, 55(10), 1093-1104. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.10.1093
Selman, Peter. (2009). The Rise and Fall of Intercountry Adoption in the 21st Century. International Social Work - INT
      SOC WORK. 52. 575-594. 10.1177/0020872809337681.
Soronen, R. L. (2013). National Foster Care Adoption Attitudes Survey. Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption
      conducted by Harris Interactive.
Steinberg, L., Dornbusch, S. M., & Brown, B. B. (1992). Ethnic differences in adolescent achievement: An ecological
      perspective. American Psychologist, 47(6), 723-729. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.47.6.723
Steinberg, L., Darling, N. E., & Fletcher, A. C. (1995). Authoritative parenting and adolescent adjustment: An ecological
      journey. In P. Moen, G. H. Elder, Jr., & K. Lüscher (Eds.), Examining lives in context: Perspectives on the ecology of
      human development (pp. 423-466). American Psychological Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/10176-012
Tamis-LeMonda, C.S., Way, N., Hughes, D., Yoshikawa, H., Kalman, R.K. and Niwa, E.Y. (2008), Parents' Goals for
230 | REFERENCES

      Children: The Dynamic Coexistence of Individualism and Collectivism in Cultures and Individuals. Social
      Development, 17: 183-209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9507.2007.00419.x
Trends in U.S. adoptions: 2008-2012 - child welfare. (n.d.). Retrieved March 10, 2023, from
      https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/adopted0812.pdf
van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi-Schwartz, A. (2008). Cross-cultural patterns of attachment: Universal and contextual
      dimensions. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications
      (pp. 880-905). The Guilford Press.
Weiss, L. H., & Schwarz, J. C. (1996). The Relationship between Parenting Types and Older Adolescents' Personality,
      Academic Achievement, Adjustment, and Substance Use. Child Development, 67(5), 2101-2114. https://doi.org/
      10.2307/1131612

Additional OER Sources used in Chapter III for adaptation

Lally, M., & Valentine-French, S. (2020). Parenthood. In Human Development. LibreText. https://socialsci.libretexts.org/
      Courses/Hawaii_Community_College_at_Palamanui/FamR_230_-_Human_Development/
      11%3A_Young_Adulhood/11.08%3A_Parenthood

Lifespan Development. (2020). LibreText. https://socialsci.libretexts.org/Courses/Foothill_College/
      Psych_40%3A_Lifespan_Development_(Pilati)

Murphy, K. (2021). Child Growth and Development. Pressbooks.
Murphy, M. (n.d.). The Developing Parent. PSY 110 - Lifespan Development - Textbook.

      https://guides.hostos.cuny.edu/PSY110_Lifespan_Development/10#s-lg-box-25585670

Chapter IV.
What Is Gender and Why is it Important?

(2011). Our America with Lisa Ling (J. Lastres, D. Mermelstein, G. Gruetzmacher, & J. Siefer, Eds.) [Review of Our
      America with Lisa Ling].

Begley, S. (2012). The Plastic Mind. Hachette UK.
Berheide, C. W. (1995). [Review of Gender Play: Girls and Boys in School, by B. Thorne]. Gender and Society, 9(3),

      385-387. http://www.jstor.org/stable/190063
Bos, Henny & Sandfort, Theo. (2010). Children's Gender Identity in Lesbian and Heterosexual Two-Parent Families. Sex

      roles. 62. 114-126. 10.1007/s11199-009-9704-7.
Diamond, M. (2002). Sex and gender are different: Sexual identity and gender identity are different. Clinical Child

      Psychology and Psychiatry, 7(3), 320-334. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359104502007003002
Eliot, L. (2009). Pink brain, blue brain : how small differences grow into troublesome gaps-and what we can do about it.

      Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
                                                                                                                                            REFERENCES | 231

Hines, S., & Sanger, T. (2010). Transgender Identities : Towards a Social Analysis of Gender Diversity. In library.oapen.org.
      Taylor & Francis. https://library.oapen.org/handle/20.500.12657/37306

Human Rights Campaign. (2015, January 28). Transgender Children & Youth: Understanding the Basics | Human
      Rights Campaign. Human Rights Campaign. https://www.hrc.org/resources/transgender-children-and-youth-
      understanding-the-basics

Jacobs, S.-E., Thomas, W., & Lang, S. (1997). Two spirit people: Native american gender identity, sexuality, and spirituality.
      University of Illinois Press.

King, W. C., Miles, E. W., & Kniska, J. (1991). Boys will be boys (and girls will be girls): The attribution of gender role
      stereotypes in a gaming situation. Sex Roles: A Journal of Research, 25(11-12), 607-623. https://doi.org/10.1007/
      BF00289567

Klein, Howard & Heuser, Aden. (2008). The learning of socialization content: A framework for researching orientating
      practices. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management. 27. 279-336. 10.1016/
      S0742-7301(08)27007-6.

Lever, J. (1978). Sex Differences in the Complexity of Children's Play and Games. American Sociological Review, 43(4),
      471-483. https://doi.org/10.2307/2094773

Lindsey, Linda. (2010). Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective. 10.4324/9781315664095.
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2019). Homepage. National Human Genome Research Institute

      (NHGRI); Genome.gov. https://www.genome.gov/
Poasa, K. (1992). The Samoan fa'afafine: One case study and discussion of transsexualism. Journal of Psychology & Human

      Sexuality, 5(3), 39-51.
Sadker, M., & Sadker, D. (1994). Failing at Fairness: How America's Schools Cheat Girls. New York: MacMillan.
Weiss J. (2011). Reflective paper: GL versus BT: The archaeology of biphobia and transphobia within the U.S. gay and

      lesbian community. Journal of Bisexuality, 11, 498-502.
World Health Organization. (2019). Gender and health. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/health-topics/

      gender#tab=tab_1

Additional OER Sources used in Chapter IV for adaptation

Intersex. (2022, October 10). Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intersex
Little, W., & Little, W. (2014). Chapter 12. Gender, Sex, and Sexuality. In Introduction to Sociology - 1st Canadian

      Edition. Pressbooks. https://opentextbc.ca/introductiontosociology/chapter/chapter12-gender-sex-and-sexuality/
Sociology (Boundless). (2020). LibreTexts. https://socialsci.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Sociology/

      Introduction_to_Sociology/Book%3A_Sociology_(Boundless)

Chapter V.
Building Collaborative Relationships with Families of
232 | REFERENCES

Children with Disabilities

Baglieri, S., & Lalvani, P. (2019). Undoing ableism: Teaching about disability in K-12 classrooms. Routledge.
Cavendish, W., Connor, D., Gonzalez, T., Jean-Pierre, P., & Card, K. (2020). Troubling "the problem" of racial

      overrepresentation in special education: A commentary and call to rethink research. Educational Review
      (Birmingham), 72(5), 567-582. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2018.1550055
Fish, W. W. (2008). The IEP meeting: Perceptions of parents of students who receive special education services. Preventing
      School Failure, 53(1), 8-14. https://doi.org/10.3200/PSFL.53.1.8-14
Fitzgerald, J. L., & Watkins, M. W. (2006). Parents' Rights in Special Education: The Readability of Procedural Safeguards.
      Exceptional Children, 72(4), 497-510. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440290607200407
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Social construct. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Retrieved October 3, 2022, from
      https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/social%20construct
Rossetti, Z., Sauer, J. S., Bui, O., & Ou, S. (2017). Developing collaborative
partnerships with culturally and linguistically diverse families during the IEP process. Teaching Exceptional Children,
      49(5), 328-338. https://doi.org/10.1177/0040059916680103
U.S. Department of Education (2022). Forty-third Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals
      with Disabilities Education Act, 2021. Washington, D.C.

Chapter VI.
What is Culture and Why is it Important?

Sumner, W. G. (2008). Folkways a study of the sociological importance of usages, manners, customs, mores, and morals.
      Project Gutenberg.

Weber, C., Johnson, M. and Arceneaux, K. (2011), Genetics, Personality, and Group Identity. Social Science Quarterly, 92:
      1314-1337. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6237.2011.00820.x

Additional OER Sources used in Chapter 6 for adaptation
Open Stax. (2022). Introduction to Sociology 2e. OpenStax. https://openstax.org/books/introduction-sociology-2e/

      pages/1-introduction-to-sociology

Chapter VII
Honoring Linguistic Diversity

(n.d.). Chapter 1: Tools and Resources for Identifying All English Learners. U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved June
      15, 2024, from https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/chap1.pdf
                                                                                                                                           REFERENCES | 233

(n.d.). Chapter 10: Tools and Resources for Identifying All English Learners. U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved
      June 15, 2024, from https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/chap10.pdf

(n.d.). Ensuring English Learner Students Can Participate Meaningfully and Equally in Educational Programs. United
      States Department of Education. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/
      dcl-factsheet-el-students-201501.pdf

(n.d.). Guidance for Providing Trained Interpreters in Schools. Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary
      Education. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from https://www.doe.mass.edu/language-access/interpreters/district-
      guidance.docx

(2023, August 10). I Speak Statement Cards. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from
      https://www.fns.usda.gov/civil-rights/ispeak

(2024, May 3). Lev Vygotsky. Wikipedia. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lev_Vygotsky
Love, J., Dr., & Gardner, L. (n.d.). Equity Through Language Access: Best Practices for Collaborating with Interpreters.

      Colorin Colorado. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from https://www.colorincolorado.org/article/equity-through-
      language-access-best-practices-collaborating-interpreters
Mohamed, N. (2023, January 11). Terminology Matters: What Do You Call Your (English) Learners? TESOL. Retrieved
      June 15, 2024, from https://www.tesol.org/blog/posts/terminology-matters-what-do-you-call-your-english-learners/
National Center for Education Statistics. (2024). English Learners in Public Schools. Condition of Education. U.S.
      Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences. Retrieved [date], from https://nces.ed.gov/programs/
      coe/indicator/cgf.
Ramirez, R. (2023). To Speak or Not To Speak My Language: Supporting Families' Home Language Practices. Teaching
      Young Children, 17(1).
Schurin, Z. D. (2023, September 1). 2023 Legislation Focus: New Translation Requirements for Multilingual Education.
      Education Law and Notes. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from https://www.pullcom.com/education-law-notes/
      2023-legislation-focus-new-translation-requirements-for-multilingual-education
(n.d.). Where we Stand on Responding to Linguistic and Cultural Diversity. NAEYC. Retrieved June 15, 2024, from
      https://www.naeyc.org/sites/default/files/globally-shared/downloads/PDFs/resources/position-statements/
      diversity.pdf

Additional OER Sources used in Chapter VII for adaptation

Esquivel, K., Elam, E., Paris, J., & Tafoya, M. (2021). The Role of Equity and Diversity in Early Childhood Education.
      College of the Canyons. https://socialsci.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Early_Childhood_Education/
      The_Role_of_Equity_and_Diversity_in_Early_Childhood_Education_(Esquivel_Elam_Paris_and_Tafoya)

Chapter VIII
Exploring the Core Competencies of Family
234 | REFERENCES

Engagement

Family Engagement Core Competencies: A Body of Knowledge, Skills, and Dispositions for Family-Facing Professionals.
      (n.d.). National Association for Family, School, and Community Engagement. https://nafsce.org/page/
      CoreCompetencies

Hoover-Dempsey, K. V., & Sandler, H. M. (1995). Parental involvement in children's education: Why does it make a
      difference? Teachers College Record, 97(2), 310-331.

Mapp, K. L. & Bergman, E. (2019). Dual capacity-building framework for family-school partnerships (Version 2).
      Retrieved from: www.dualcapacity.org

Mapp, K. & Kuttner, P. (2013). Partners in Education: A Dual Capacity-Building Framework for Family-School
      Partnerships. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory in association with the U.S. Department
      of Education.
                                                    ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 235

ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES,
SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

Advocacy Project Overview

This semester-long project is designed to help you link course content to your understanding of how to
enhance collaborative relationships between families, schools, children, and community. You will identify an
issue at your school or community that needs solving or highlighting. You will

  · draft an advocacy statement,
  · interview stakeholders,
  · research the issue, and
  · create a public service announcement or op-ed piece that demonstrates what you have learned.

The project is scaffolded into four assignments, each building off of each other:

 1. Advocacy Statement (10 points)
 2. Stakeholder Interviews (25 points)
 3. Annotated Bibliography (30 points)
 4. Fostering Support (35 points)

After each assignment, you will receive significant feedback. The success of each individual assignment and
final project depends on your positive response to and ongoing improvement based on that feedback.

   Examples of successful Advocacy Projects from previous semesters include

  · Convincing the city council to set aside funds to install an additional crosswalk and traffic light in front
      of a preschool located in a high traffic area;

  · Requesting funds from the school administrator to purchase children's books in multiple languages;
  · Creating a grant proposal from an after-school program that sought to create a program to send dinner

      home to families in danger of food insecurity;
  · Developing protocols for events at a community center that outlined, clearly, the food selection,

      preferences, allergies, and religious observances of community members;
  · Petitioning a school to offer Individual Education Plan meetings in the evenings, weekends, and/or via

      Zoom to increase access for families.
236 | ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

Note that you are not required to implement your Advocacy Project this semester. This renewable assignment is
designed to help you brainstorm a project, and develop resources around it prior to implementation. Many prior
students in this course have implemented their projects at the end of the semester in their communities or places of
employment. Implementation, not required but recommended, is not part of your final grade.

Step One: Advocacy Statement

  · Due approximately ¼ of the way into a semester
  · 10 point total

The purpose of your Advocacy Project is to

  · examine areas of strength and needed improvements within communities, schools, and families.
  · identify relevant intervention strategies to support strengths and weaknesses.
  · develop an advocacy statement that supports the intervention strategy.

Instructions:

 1. Determine if you will create an Advocacy Project for your community, school, or family structure.
 2. Identify three strengths of that community, school, or family structure.
 3. Identify three areas of needed improvement for that community, school, or family structure.
 4. In one-two sentences, define your advocacy statement.
 5. Your total submission for Assignment #1 should not exceed two, double-spaced pages or a 3-minute or

      less video.
 6. After receiving feedback, you have the option to revise and resubmit your work if you received 8 or fewer

      points.

Grading:

Your Advocacy Statement is worth a total of 10 points toward your semester-long project.
ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 237

Criteria                                  Points  Comments
                                            /4
Student concisely indicated and             /4
explained 3 accurate strengths              /2

Student concisely indicated and             /2
explained 3 accurate areas of needed
improvement;

Student identified a clear and precise
advocacy statement that connects to
strengths and areas of needed
improvement.

If applicable if a student receives 8 or
less points: Student revised the
assignment based on instructor
feedback in any of the criteria listed
above.

Step Two: Stakeholder Perspective

  · Due approximately 1/2 of the way into a semester
  · 25 point total

Instructions:

 1. Review your Advocacy Statement and relevant instructor feedback.
 2. Interview a minimum of three community stakeholders that are important for your project.

      Stakeholders are individuals who have a "stake" in the outcome of a debate or project. They range from
      direct users, to business people, to politicians, etc. Your task in this assignment is to collect qualitative
      data about the strengths and weaknesses of your Advocacy Statement. Interviews will help you to
      answer

       1. Has this work already been done and you just don't know about it?
       2. Would the community support your idea?
       3. Would the community outright reject your idea?
       4. What are the angles that you have not yet considered?
 3. You may also gather data on stakeholder support or debate about your advocacy statement through
      attendance at community meetings, reputable news sources, or reputable social media posts.
 4. Your interviews or attendance at community meetings should last approximately 45 minutes- 1 hour
      each.
238 | ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

 5. For each interview or data collection source, submit the name, contact information, and a maximum
      two-page, double-spaced summary of what you learned.

 6. You will submit your assignment in a single document, ensuring that each interview is separated by a
      header. I will provide feedback on your document, so watch for a graded, annotated file.

 7. After receiving feedback, you have the option to revise and resubmit your work if you received 20 or
      fewer points.

Grading:

                Criteria                   Points     Comments
                                        /2
Names and contact information           /2
included for each stakeholder.
                                        /21
Maximum of 2 double-spaced pages
for each stakeholder interview.

Summary from each stakeholder of
what you learned that identifies

 At least one key theme from
each interview that helps you confirm
the strengths and areas of needed
improvement that you identified in
the first assignment.

    At least two quotes from each
interview that helps you confirm the
strengths and areas of needed
improvement that you identified in
the first assignment.

   (7 points per interview)

If applicable if a student receives 20
or less points: Student revised the
assignment based on instructor
feedback in any of the criteria listed
above.

Step Three: Annotated Bibliography

  · Due approximately 3/4 of the way into a semester
  · 35 point total
               ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 239

Instructions:

1. Review your Advocacy Statement and relevant instructor feedback.
2. Review the data you collected in your Stakeholder Interviews and relevant instructor feedback.
3. Research information relevant to your Advocacy Statement. Your research must originate in the

    college Library databases and other reputable sources. Simple Google searches will not suffice.
4. Begin your submission by placing your Advocacy Statement at the top of your document.
5. Turn your Advocacy Statement into a Research Question. Place this directly under your Advocacy

    Statement at the top of your document.
6. Write an Annotated Bibliography in APA 7th edition format with a minimum of three research-

    based sources related to your Advocacy Statement and stakeholder interviews. Each annotation
    must include a summary, evaluation and reflection on your source. Each annotation should be
    approximately one page in length, or approximately 4-8 sentences. Your Annotated Bibliography
    must be double-spaced.

      1. The OWL Writing Center at Purdue University offers fuller explanations and examples of
          annotated bibliographies if you are unfamiliar with this format.

      2. Your college Librarian can also be helpful for this assignment!
      3. Check out this interactive slideshow tutorial if you need additional guidance with APA

          formatting.
      4. Check out this interactive tool if you need additional guidance with the anatomy of an

          annotated bibliography.
      5. After receiving feedback, you have the option to revise and resubmit your work if you received

          24 or fewer points.

Step Four: Fostering Support

   Due at the end of a semester
   35 point total

Instructions:

 1. Review your Advocacy Statement and relevant instructor feedback.
 2. Review the data you collected in your Stakeholder Interviews and relevant instructor

      feedback.
 3. Review the research you outlined in your Annotated Bibliography and relevant instructor

      feedback.
240 | ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES

              4. Your task is to foster community support for your Advocacy Project. Create a video-based
                  Public Service Announcement or a Letter to the Editor or Op-Ed about your Advocacy
                  Statement. Your Public Service Announcement must be no longer than 3 minutes and must
                  include a mixture of image and voice. Your Letter to the Editor or Op-Ed must be no longer
                  than 600 words.

                Penn State University offers examples and a description of elements to consider when creating
                  a Public Service Announcement.

                Tips for writing effective Op Ed pieces
                More tips for writing effective Op Ed pieces, with step by step instructions

            You must include evidence from Assignments 1, 2, and 3 in your Public Service Announcement or
            Letter to the Editor or Op-Ed. Think carefully about how to integrate qualitative, quantitative, and
            research-based evidence into your outreach for support and funding. You must include an APA
            style Works Cited page.
          ADVOCACY PROJECT: CHILDREN, FAMILIES, SCHOOLS, AND COMMUNITIES | 241

Grading:

              Criteria                 Points  Comments
                                     /3
Student adheres to length            /8
guidelines and includes a properly   /8
formatted Works Cited page in        /8
APA or MLA style.
                                     /8
Student includes evidence from
Advocacy Statement. This             /7
should include the statement
itself, strengths, areas of needed
improvement, or some
combination of those above.

Student include evidence from
Stakeholder Perspective. This
should include at least one direct
quote or paraphrase from
stakeholder(s).

Student includes evidence from
Annotated Bibliography. This
should include at least two direct
quotes, paraphrases, or data
points from your research.

Public Service Announcement or
Letter to the Editor or Op-Ed
engages with a specific audience
or stakeholder type. This is
evidenced by the images,
language, and messaging used to
convey the advocacy statement
and key convincing points.

If applicable if a student receives
28 or less points: Student revised
the assignment based on
instructor feedback in any of the
criteria listed above.
242 | NOTE TO INSTRUCTORS: ABOUT THE ADVOCACY PROJECT

NOTE TO INSTRUCTORS: ABOUT THE
ADVOCACY PROJECT

                                       Note to Instructors
                                        Advocacy Project:
                        Children, Families, Schools, Communities

       This semester-long, scaffolded project is designed to synthesize content, debates, explorations,
       and student-choice, and student-interest. It addresses the following course-level learning
       outcomes:

            · Understand how children, families, schools, and communities collaborate with and
                influence one another;

            · Identify strengths-based approaches to creating culturally sustaining collaborations.
       Please note that this assignment and assessment checklists were designed for a course using
       an "un-grading" strategy. Rubrics are not used in this particular course. The checklists are
       designed to guide students on areas of priority and needed improvement. All assignments in
       this project can be revised and resubmitted based on instructor feedback.
                   GRANT INFORMATION | 243

GRANT INFORMATION

The U.S. Department of Education, the granting agency for the ROTEL (Remixing Open Textbooks through
an Equity Lens) project, requires information about the grant be included in the back matter. The text for this
section is provided below.

   The ROTEL (Remixing Open Textbooks through an Equity Lens) Project is 100% funded by the U.S.
Department of Education's grant from the Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education, (FIPSE).
The contents of the OERs do not necessarily represent the policy of the Department of Education, and an
endorsement by the Federal Government should not be assumed.

   For more information about the ROTEL Project, please visit our project website.
244 | VERSION HISTORY

VERSION HISTORY

Below is the version history for Children, Families, Schools, and Communities

Version                                   Publication Date Changes
First Edition: link to first edition
                                                             Version History
Revised Edition: link to revised edition
                                          March 6, 2023

                                          November 13, 2024  Added:

                                                               · Chapter IIV - Honoring Linguistic Diversity
                                                               · Chapter IX. For Instructors: Sample Assignments
                                                               · Advocacy Project with a Note for Instructors

                                                             New References:

                                                               · To support additional quoted materials and added rec

                                                             Stylistic improvements throughout
