Confident Supervisors: Creating
   Independent Researchers
CONFIDENT SUPERVISORS: CREATING
INDEPENDENT RESEARCHERS

EDITED BY SUSAN GASSON, JILLIAN BLACKER, IAN STOODLEY,
ABBE WINTER AND CHRISTINE BRUCE

James Cook University
Confident Supervisors: Creating Independent Researchers Copyright © 2023 by James Cook University is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Disclaimer

Note that corporate logos (such as the JCU shield, and the logos of any other company represented) and branding are
specifically excluded from the Creative Commons Licence of this work, and may not be reproduced under any
circumstances without the express written permission of the copyright holders.

Individual images, videos and animations may have different licences applied. Check the licence for individual materials
and contact the copyright holders for express permission if you wish to use them outside of the conditions stated.

This edition is copyright James Cook University. For each chapter, copyright is held by the author/s of the
individual chapters or their employers as appropriate.

First published in 2023 by James Cook University

eISBN: 978-0-6459516-3-9

How to cite this eBook:

Gasson, S., Blacker, J., Stoodley, I., Winter, A., & Bruce, C. (Eds.). (2023). Confident supervisors: Creating independent
researchers. James Cook University. https://doi.org/10.25120/rcxy-jsfm

How to cite a chapter of this edited eBook:

McAlpine, A. (2023). Empowering higher degree researchers career planning. In S. Gasson, J. Blacker, I. Stoodley, A.
Winter, & C. Bruce (Eds.), Confident supervisors: Creating independent researchers. James Cook University.
https://doi.org/10.25120/wte4-6tk0

Cover Design by Amber Swayn.
CONTENTS

Acknowledgement of Country                                                  vii

About the Authors and Editors                                               ix

Preface                                                                     xxiii

Introduction                                                                1

Abbe Winter and Jillian Blacker

Higher Degree Researcher Reflections                                        5

Translate this Book                                                         xi

Collaborative Approaches

1. Approaches to Supervision                                                14

Christine Bruce; Ian Stoodley; and Susan Gasson

2. Supervision: Accounting for Time                                         25

Susan Gasson

3. Collaboration as a Supervisory Practice                                  33

Christine Bruce and Susan Gasson

Capacity Building

4. Establishing a Sustainable HDR Writing Ecology                           47

Juliet Lum and Susan Mowbray

5. Early Intervention: Helping Higher Degree Researchers Thrive throughout  59

Candidature

Anna Kokavec
Diverse Research Environments

6. Creating Successful Higher Degree Researcher Pathways in a Developing Country -    71

Papua New Guinea

Dora Jimela Kialo; Frieda Siaguru; Imelda Ambelye; Jillian Blacker; Lydia Yalambing;
Mirzi Betasolo; Rachel Aisoli-Orake; Sogoing Denano; Susan Gasson; and Veronica
Bue

7. Supervision of Indigenous Research and Higher Degree Researchers                   89

Ailie McDowall; Sana Nakata; Martin Nakata; and Felecia Watkin-Lui

8. Supervising International Higher Degree Researchers from Non-English Speaking      101

Countries

Santosh Jatrana and Susan Gasson

Future Focus

9. Building Literacies for the Research Lifecycle                                     119

Claire Ovaska; Stephen Anderson; and Annette Messell

10. Empowering Research Supervisors: Developing Information Literacy in Higher        140

Degree Researchers

Lyndelle Gunton; Sal Kleine; and Stephanie Bradbury

11. Empowering Higher Degree Researchers' Career Planning                             149

Alan McAlpine

12. Building Research Integrity                                                       159

Helen Titchener and Bronwyn Greene

13. Supervising for Societal Impact: A Holistic Approach to Higher Degree by Research 170
Support

Wade Kelly and Lisa M. Given

Conclusion                                                                            183

Abbe Winter; Jillian Blacker; and Lauren Woodlands

Glossary                                                                              189

Accessibility Statement                                                               192

Version History                                                                       193
                                                                                                      ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COUNTRY | VII

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COUNTRY

At James Cook University we acknowledge with respect the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
as the first peoples, educators and innovators of this country. We acknowledge that Country was never
ceded, and value the accumulation of knowledge and traditions that reflect the wisdom of ancestral lines
going back some 60,000 years, and recognise the significance of this in the ways that Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples are custodians of Country. As a University, we will continue to learn ways to care for
and be responsible for Country, and we will collectively seek to build a future that is based on truth-telling,
mutual understanding, hope, empowerment, and self-determination.
VIII | ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COUNTRY

Kassandra Savage (JCU Alumni), `Coming Together and Respecting Difference', acrylic on canvas, 2014,
90cm x 90cm. © Kassandra Savage, reproduced with permission of the artist
                                                                                                      ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | IX

ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS
X | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Editorial Team

                            Susan Gasson

                            Susan's research focuses on research education and development, research collaboration,
                            and employability. Adopting qualitative approaches including narrative inquiry her
                            research has benefited from years spent working in higher education, and building strong
                            national and global networks. She held the role of Coordinator HDR Advisor
                            Development, Graduate Research School, James Cook University while writing for and
                            editing this book. She is a Senior Fellow of Advance HE.

                            Christine Bruce

                            Christine's research and scholarship is focused on information literacy, higher education
                            learning and teaching, postgraduate study and supervision and research collaboration. She
                            regularly presents keynote addresses on these matters. Her research is multidisciplinary and
                            transdisciplinary stemming from an interpretivist qualitative research perspective informed
                            by phenomenography and phenomenographic pedagogy. Christine is a Principal Fellow of
                            Advance HE and a member of the International Federation of National Teaching Fellows.

                            Ian Stoodley

                            Ian is an information manager, higher education researcher and project manager. He has
                            managed libraries and trained librarians in Australia, Cameroon, France, Kosovo, Tajikistan
                            and Yemen. His research has embraced the experience of learning, higher degree research
                            supervision, information technology research, and professional ethics. His project
                            management has included multi-institution, nationally funded projects investigating the
                            student experience and institutional practices aimed at enhancing that experience.

                            Jillian Blacker

                            Jill is an innovative administrative manager with over 15 years' experience in the higher
                            education sector working across many different areas including action research projects
                            focused on the widening participation agenda. She has extensive experience providing
                            support to researchers, supervisors, and academic leaders on all aspects of higher degree
                            research; and has a proven track record of resolving complex cases to ensure mutually
                            agreeable outcomes. She is a confident mentor and coach and has been drawn to learning
                            about mental health practices and strategies to provide support to researchers and
                            supervisors. Building relationships and working collaboratively and creatively is a key
                            component of her professional practice. She is a Fellow of Advance HE.

                            Abigail Winter

                            Abbe is a results-driven writing specialist, collaborative mentor, and independent
                            researcher, skilled in the analysis of words and data for user needs. Abbe is a researcher
                            trainer, leader, and mentor, with over 20 years' experience in quality assurance, and change
                            and project management. While her PhD focused on what helps workers in higher
                            education cope with large-scale organisational change, and she was part of the small team
                            that created and developed the concept of academagogy (the scholarly leadership of
                            learning), her more recent research has focussed upon professional identity, developing
                            writing skills, and reflective practice.
         ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | XI

Authors

Chapter 1: Approaches to Supervision

         Susan Gasson

         Susan's research focuses on research education and development, research collaboration,
         and employability. Adopting qualitative approaches including narrative inquiry her
         research has benefited from years spent working in higher education, and building strong
         national and global networks. She held the role of Coordinator HDR Advisor
         Development, Graduate Research School, James Cook University while writing for and
         editing this book. She is a Senior Fellow of Advance HE.

         Christine Bruce

         Christine's research and scholarship is focused on information literacy, higher education
         learning and teaching, postgraduate study and supervision and research collaboration. She
         regularly presents keynote addresses on these matters. Her research is multidisciplinary
         and transdisciplinary stemming from an interpretivist qualitative research perspective
         informed by phenomenography and phenomenographic pedagogy. Christine is a Principal
         Fellow of Advance HE and a member of the International Federation of National
         Teaching Fellows.

         Ian Stoodley

         Ian is an information manager, higher education researcher and project manager. He has
         managed libraries and trained librarians in Australia, Cameroon, France, Kosovo,
         Tajikistan and Yemen. His research has embraced the experience of learning, higher degree
         research supervision, information technology research, and professional ethics. His project
         management has included multi-institution, nationally funded projects investigating the
         student experience and institutional practices aimed at enhancing that experience.

Chapter 2: Supervision: Accounting for Time

                          Susan Gasson

                          Susan's research focuses on research education and development, research collaboration, and
                          employability. Adopting qualitative approaches including narrative inquiry her research has
                          benefited from years spent working in higher education, and building strong national and
                          global networks. She held the role of Coordinator HDR Advisor Development, Graduate
                          Research School, James Cook University while writing for and editing this book. She is a
                          Senior Fellow of Advance HE.
XII | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Chapter 3: Collaboration as a Supervisory Practice

                             Susan Gasson

                             Susan's research focuses on research education and development, research collaboration,
                             and employability. Adopting qualitative approaches including narrative inquiry her
                             research has benefited from years spent working in higher education, and building strong
                             national and global networks. She held the role of Coordinator HDR Advisor
                             Development, Graduate Research School, James Cook University while writing for and
                             editing this book. She is a Senior Fellow of Advance HE.

                             Christine Bruce

                             Christine's research and scholarship is focused on information literacy, higher education
                             learning and teaching, postgraduate study and supervision and research collaboration. She
                             regularly presents keynote addresses on these matters. Her research is multidisciplinary
                             and transdisciplinary stemming from an interpretivist qualitative research perspective
                             informed by phenomenography and phenomenographic pedagogy. Christine is a Principal
                             Fellow of Advance HE and a member of the International Federation of National
                             Teaching Fellows.

Chapter 4: Establishing a Sustainable HDR Writing
Ecology

                              Dr Juliet Lum

                              Juliet is the Graduate Research Development Manager at Macquarie University's
                              Graduate Research Academy. Juliet has over fifteen years' experience as a PhD educator
                              with research and teaching expertise in doctoral communication.

                              Dr Susan Mowbray

                              Susan is the Academic Literacy Advisor for the Graduate Research School at Western
                              Sydney University. In this role, Susan works alongside higher degree researchers to help
                              them develop and strengthen their academic writing skill; this may be through regular
                              avenues of support or 1:1. Susan's research interests include doctoral writing and doctoral
                              candidates' experiences of learning, as reflected in her publications.

                              Juliet and Susan facilitate and co-host bimonthly online discussions for the Doctoral
                              Writing SIG Community. This initiative has grown since it was instigated at the Doctoral
                              Writing SIG meeting at the 2018 Quality in Postgraduate Research (QPR) conference.
                              The discussions aim to build community and has members from across Australia, New
                              Zealand, Canada, South Africa, United Kingdom and the United States.
                                                                                                     ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | XIII

Chapter 5: Early Intervention: Helping Higher Degree
Researchers Thrive Throughout Candidature

                           Dr Anna Kokavec

                           Anna is a registered psychologist, mental health educator, and addiction researcher. She has
                           extensive experience working with young adults in academic, organizational, and clinical
                           settings and is currently a Senior Lecturer in Medical Education, Student Support and
                           Professionalism and Academic Lead Student Support in the College of Medicine and
                           Dentistry at James Cook University. Anna's research activities are largely focused in the
                           human psychoneuroendocrinoimmunology area - or, in other words, the interactions
                           between human behaviour, brain, hormones, and immune system. In particular, she is
                           interested in investigating the effect of commercially available alcohol on the inter-
                           relationship between steroid hormones, energy metabolism, and immune function in young
                           adults. Other projects that Anna has been involved in include determining the efficacy of
                           nutritional therapy in prevention of migraine; identifying the psycho-social predictors of
                           drug and alcohol consumption in young adults; and developing community-based
                           psychosocial support for cancer survivors.
XIV | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Chapter 6: Creating Successful Higher Degree
Researcher Pathways in a Developing Country - Papua
New Guinea
                                                                 ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | XV

Rachel Aisoli-Orake

Rachel attained her MLitt and PhD degrees in the areas of ESL Writing Feedback and
Writing Pedagogy from ANU and University of Newcastle, respectively. She has taught at
different education institutions in PNG during her career and holds leadership roles in the
academy and as convenor of the Women in Higher Education Significant Interest Group.

Veronica Bue

Veronica is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Agriculture, Papua New Guinea
University of Technology with over 10 years of teaching experience specialising in
Agriculture Extension and Rural Development. She is actively involved in the supervision
and mentoring of postgraduate students in research areas including: smallholder
livelihoods, household food security, evaluation and impact assessments of agriculture
extension programs and gender studies. She is also involved in ACIAR (Australian Centre
for International Agriculture Research) collaborative research projects with Universities
in Australia such as Curtin and Canberra University.

Mirzi Betasolo

Mirzi is a Filipino and registered Civil and Geodetic Engineer in the Philippines who has
24 years of teaching experience in 4 countries. She currently holds the role of Head
(Chair) of the Department of Civil Engineering.

Lydia Yalambing

Lydia is Head of the Department of Applied Sciences, PNGUoT (Papua New Guinea
University of Technology). She is an active member of the Women in Higher Education
Significant Interest Group and contributes to their research into academic workload.

Imelda Ambelye

Imelda, an educator and researcher with over a decade of experience in communication for
development studies, currently serves as a Ph.D. candidate at James Cook University.
Having dedicated more than 10 years to teaching at the PNG University of Technology,
Imelda has shaped the minds of numerous students, contributing to discussions on
communication strategies for positive societal change. Her research is in critical areas such
as education and youth empowerment, reflecting a deep commitment to understanding
and alleviating challenges in these sectors. Her interest is in social development and
impact, specifically focusing on rural and community development to address spatial
inequality.

Sogoing Denano

Sogoing has been a lecturer at PNGUoT for nearly 20 years. She has completed a Master
of Science at the University of Reading.

Dora Jimela Kialo

Dora holds a Master of Educational Leadership Degree from the Divine Word University,
Madang, PNG. She also holds a Bachelor of Education majoring in Teaching Secondary
English Language and Literature and Social Sciences from the University of Goroka. She
has been a Lecturer at the Papua New Guinea University of Technology- Taraka Campus
Teaching & Learning Methods Unit since 2014. She is currently a PhD Student at the
University of Goroka, EHP, PNG from 2020-2023. Dora is an innovative Trainer of
Trainers in Problem & Project Based Learning.
XVI | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

                              Frieda Siaguru

                              Frieda is a Senior Lecturer at PNG University of Technology.

                              Jillian Blacker

                              Jill is an innovative administrative manager with over 15 years' experience in the higher
                              education sector working across many different areas including action research projects
                              focused on the widening participation agenda. She has extensive experience providing
                              support to researchers, supervisors, and academic leaders on all aspects of higher degree
                              research; and has a proven track record of resolving complex cases to ensure mutually
                              agreeable outcomes. She is a confident mentor and coach and has been drawn to learning
                              about mental health practices and strategies to provide support to researchers and
                              supervisors. Building relationships and working collaboratively and creatively is a key
                              component of her professional practice. She is a Fellow of Advance HE.

                              Susan Gasson

                              Susan's research focuses on research education and development, research collaboration,
                              and employability. Adopting qualitative approaches including narrative inquiry her
                              research has benefited from years spent working in higher education, and building strong
                              national and global networks. She held the role of Coordinator HDR Advisor
                              Development, Graduate Research School, James Cook University while writing for and
                              editing this book. She is a Senior Fellow of Advance HE.
                                                                                                    ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | XVII

Chapter 7: Supervision of Indigenous Research and
Higher Degree Researchers

                            Ailie McDowell
                            Ailie is an education and Indigenous Studies academic at James Cook University. Ailie
                            currently teaches undergraduate and postgraduate coursework, and coordinates the
                            Indigenous Education and Research Centre's Master of Philosophy (Indigenous) program
                            as well as the Graduate Certificate of Indigenous Studies.

                            Sana Nakata
                            Sana is Associate Professor and Principal Research Fellow at the Indigenous Education and
                            Research Centre, James Cook University. She is trained in the law and political theory of
                            the Western tradition, and her research focuses upon the politics of childhood, Indigenous
                            policy and governance.

                            Martin Nakata
                            Prof Nakata is Deputy Vice-Chancellor Indigenous Education & Strategy at James Cook
                            University. He is a leading Indigenous academic in Australia, and the first Torres Strait
                            Islander to graduate with a PhD.

                            Felecia Watkin Lui
                            Felecia is a Torres Strait Islander woman with giz from Erub and Mabuiag. She is an
                            Associate Professor of Indigenous Studies in the Indigenous Education and Research
                            Centre and Thematic Convenor of Indigenous Futures for the Cairns Institute, James
                            Cook University.
XVIII | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Chapter 8: Supervising International Higher Degree
Researchers from Non-English Speaking Countries

                           Santosh Jatrana

                           Associate Professor Santosh Jatrana is the Senior Principal Research Fellow and Research
                           Head at the Murtupuni Centre for Rural and Remote Health. She currently holds an
                           Honorary Associate Professor position at the Australian National University, a Conjoint
                           position at Deakin University. She also had an Honorary Senior Research Fellow position at
                           the University of Otago, New Zealand (2011-2021). Santosh holds a PhD in Demography
                           from the Australian National University, and a postgraduate diploma in Public Health from
                           the University of Otago.

                           Her publications include2 edited books, 11 book chapters, 65 peer-reviewed articles, 2
                           letters, 9 working papers/ opinion pieces, 8 research reports. She has given more than 70
                           presentations, including many invited seminars. Among the prestigious publishers of her
                           research include key journals such as Demography, Social Science and Medicine, European
                           Journal of Population, International Journal of Epidemiology, BMJ Open, Journal of
                           Epidemiology and Community Health, PLos One and high-profile university press (e.g.,
                           Cambridge) and leading independent academic publisher (e.g., Routledge).

                           Susan Gasson

                           Susan's research focuses on research education and development, research collaboration, and
                           employability. Adopting qualitative approaches including narrative inquiry her research has
                           benefited from years spent working in higher education, and building strong national and
                           global networks. She held the role of Coordinator HDR Advisor Development, Graduate
                           Research School, James Cook University while writing for and editing this book. She is a
                           Senior Fellow of Advance HE.
                                                                                                    ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | XIX

Chapter 9: Building Literacies for the Research Lifecycle

                           Claire Ovaska

                           Claire is a Research and Learning Librarian at James Cook University Library, Australia.
                           Claire supports supervisors and their higher degree researchers (HDRs) and has expertise
                           supporting education, science, engineering, business, humanities, social sciences, and more.
                           Claire is constantly amazed by the value and importance of the research projects of their
                           HDRs and are humbled that her job is to help them attain their goals.

                           Stephen Anderson

                           Stephen is a Research and Learning Librarian at James Cook University Library, Australia.
                           Stephen supports supervisors and their higher degree researchers (HDRs) and has expertise
                           supporting research in medicine, pharmacy, veterinary sciences, nursing, and allied health
                           disciplines. Stephen is constantly amazed by the value and importance of the research
                           projects of their HDRs and is humbled that his job is to help them attain their goals.

                           Annette Messell

                           Annette is a Research and Learning Librarian at James Cook University Library. Annette
                           supports supervisors and their higher degree researchers (HDRs) and has expertise
                           supporting research in law, business, humanities and social sciences, education and allied
                           health. Annette is passionate about helping students understand the importance of robust
                           research and enjoys supporting them on their journey.
XX | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Chapter 10: Empowering Research Supervisors:
Developing Information Literacy in Higher Degree
Researchers

                             Stephanie Bradbury

                             Stephanie is the Manager, Scholarly Communication Services, Office for Scholarly
                             Communications at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) Library. She works
                             with her team of scholarly communications experts to deliver a range of targeted services to
                             support QUT's research community in copyright, research data management, information
                             literacy, publishing, open access publishing options, journal management, and publication
                             metrics.

                             Lyndelle Gunton

                             Lyndelle is the Coordinator, Information Research Skills, Office for Scholarly
                             Communications at Queensland University of Technology Library, and the Unit
                             Coordinator for AIRS - Advanced Information Research Skills. Lyndelle is an academic
                             librarian with a passion for fostering information literacy in higher education. With more
                             than 20 years of experience in Australian academic libraries, Lyndelle has dedicated her
                             career to equipping students, researchers, and educators with the tools they need to
                             navigate the complex landscape of information in the digital age.

                             Sal Kleine

                             Sal is a Liaison Librarian in the Faculty of Business and Law at Queensland University of
                             Technology Library. As an advocate of lifelong learning, Sal supports higher degree
                             researchers to develop the information literacy skills required to successfully progress
                             through their research program and beyond.
                                                                                                    ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS | XXI

Chapter 11: Empowering Higher Degree Researcher
Career Planning

                          Alan McAlpine

                          Alan is the Deputy Director, Student Success, at Curtin University. Alan looks after teams
                          who provide support for careers, deliver co-curricular experiences, volunteering and
                          leadership. Student Success also comprises a co-curricular awards program and delivers the
                          University Orientation and First Year Experience. However, that is a far cry from where he
                          started. He completed a bachelor's degree and PhD in the sciences, Biochemistry to be
                          broadly specific. He has published in both the sciences and career development literature. He
                          was a post-doc in four separate institutions before making a career change.

                          Alan's career took him into a private consultancy as a career practitioner before returning to
                          the higher education sector. He has a master's degree in counseling and has been nationally
                          and internationally active in the career field for over 20 years. It took him a while to connect
                          all the dots, between his previous and current careers, but the curiosity factor was (and is)
                          always there. In his current stage of life and career, he has shifted from hands-on practitioner
                          (career counsellor for Higher degree researchers) to manager and national leader. He is
                          extremely passionate about providing quality support to students (all levels) to ensure they
                          can make the best-informed decisions about their future direction and help them understand
                          how they can contribute to that future.

Chapter 12: Building Research Integrity

                            Helen Titchener

                            Helen has more than twenty years' experience of managing, leading, and advocating for
                            higher degree research across government, universities, and peak bodies. She has worked in
                            a number of universities including the Australian National University, James Cook
                            University, and the University of Canberra. Helen has previously been actively involved
                            with the Australian Council of Graduate Studies and the Australian Research
                            Management Society. Her research work focuses on academic integrity.

                            Bronwyn Greene

                            Bronwyn has held senior positions in the area of research management and integrity for
                            over twenty-five years. She is the Director, Conduct & Integrity at UNSW Sydney, and is a
                            sector leader in preventing and responding to academic integrity, research integrity, public
                            interest disclosures, student conduct, gendered violence, and complex complaints. She is a
                            Co-Chair of the NSW Universities Public Interest Disclosures Practitioners Network and
                            former chair of the Go8 Research Ethics and Integrity Committee.
XXII | ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Chapter 13: Supervising for Societal Impact: A Holistic
Approach to Higher Degree by Research Support

                           Wade Kelly

                           Dr Wade Kelly (Senior Lecturer, Researcher Development, Researcher Development
                           Academy, Deakin University) works at the nexus of engagement and impact. He advises
                           university leadership, faculties, and institutes on strategically embedding impact into
                           university culture. His scholarly foundations provide the underpinnings of the engagement
                           and impact development and cultural change approaches. In 2022, his edited book, The
                           Impactful Academic: Building a Research Career That Makes a Difference, was released by
                           Emerald Publishing.

                           Lisa M. Given

                           Lisa M. Given, PhD, FASSA, is Director, Social Change Enabling Impact Platform, and
                           Professor of Information Sciences at RMIT University (Melbourne). Her interdisciplinary
                           research in human information behaviour brings a critical, social research lens to studies of
                           technology use and user-focused design. Her studies embed social change, focusing on
                           diverse settings and populations, and methodological innovations across disciplines. A
                           former President of the Association for Information Science and Technology, Prof Given is
                           a Fellow of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and has served on the Australian
                           Research Council's (ARC's) College of Experts. She holds numerous grants funded by
                           ARC, Canadian Institutes for Health Research, and Canada's Social Sciences and
                           Humanities Research Council, working with university and community partners across
                           disciplines. She is Editor-in-Chief of the Annual Review of Information Science and
                           Technology and lead author of Looking for Information: Examining Research on How People
                           Engage with Information (2023).

Technical Team

Sincere acknowledgement and thanks are given to the following colleagues for their valuable contributions
during the production of this eBook:

  · Alice Luetchford, Sharon Bryan, Deborah King (Open Education Team, James Cook University
      Library)

  · Adrian Van Rossum (Digital Media Support Officer, James Cook University)
         PREFACE | XXIII

PREFACE

Here is a book written by higher degree research supervisors for higher degree research supervisors. It is a
timely gift for novice and experienced supervisors alike as we navigate changing research environments and
dynamic higher education systems; whilst constantly seeking to guide those we supervise along the path of
achieving not only research qualifications, but also research excellence, innovation and independence on a
global stage.

All contributors to this volume are well qualified as researchers, research administrators, developers, and
supervisors. They share their experience in ways that are thought provoking, engaging, and illuminating,
prompting readers to consider implications for their current circumstances.

You will find in this volume stories and ideas to guide and remind that our experience of supervision is a
shared one. We are never alone. Working with other supervisors as we support students provides a unique
space for building networks and engaging in rich research discussions. Wherever we are, we are working
in community -- within supervisory teams and research groups, with internal and external stakeholders.
Our communities enable collaborations with many colleagues and our higher degree researchers to make
possible research education environments that will create new generations of researchers dedicated to
bringing about a better world.

We all want our higher degree researchers (HDRs) to thrive, while studying and beyond. Here is an
open access, contemporary volume that explores the role of supervisors as we support our students, while
highlighting the vital role of collaboration in all research and research education, and especially in these
turbulent times for higher degree researchers (HDRs). It is a volume that will raise our awareness of our
own approaches to supervision and the role(s) of the wider community. It is a book that aims to make
confident supervision possible for all walking alongside others on their journey of becoming researchers.

When writing this preface, some members of the book team asked me to add a "window to my supervisory
world". It has been a privilege for me to share the research journeys of at least fifty doctoral and masters
researchers, with most as principal supervisor, a journey that has often continued beyond their doctoral
experience; several have become close colleagues. I have seen many of them become award-winning
researchers, win fellowships and senior positions in academia and industry, build their own research teams,
and have an amazing impact in their sphere of influence, all over the world.

My supervisory perspectives have been heavily influenced by my own candidates and colleagues, as we have
worked in different kinds of collaborative communities. I have been able to experience different cultures
and perspectives through opportunities to visit other universities and serve in leadership positions for
research education at school, faculty, and university levels as well as through an Australian learning and
XXIV | PREFACE

teaching fellowship awarded in 2008. I have continued to learn beyond measure through being involved in
the development of this book.
It is a privilege and a pleasure to commend to you this volume, its authors and editors, and the approaches,
frameworks, and perspectives they offer.

                                              Professor Christine Bruce
                                     Australian Learning and Teaching Fellow

                                         Principal Fellow UK, Advance HE
                        Member, International Federation of National Teaching Fellows

                                  Editorial Advisor, JCU Advisor E-book project.
                                    INTRODUCTION | 1

INTRODUCTION

   Abbe Winter and Jillian Blacker

Confident Supervisors is intended to be both a textbook and a professional development resource for HDR
supervisors and researcher developers involved in providing workshops and resources to support research
supervisors in their practice. Throughout this book, authors introduce different theoretical frameworks
and concepts to provide supervisors with tools and strategies for responding to the challenges and
opportunities associated with research supervision. It contains chapters written by current supervisors and
research support partners who are engaged in the scholarship of supervision and can share the practical and
theoretical constructs they employ in their practice. The authors have been drawn from a broad range of
higher education and research contexts and contribute understandings of local and global relevance.

This book responds to turbulent times in higher education, offering practical tips and suggestions for
supervisors to pivot to changing contexts. We thank our friends and colleagues who have joined us in
creating this resource. Throughout this book we will refer to Masters by Research, Doctor of Philosophy,
and Professional Doctorate students as higher degree researchers.

Why are we writing this book?

Supervisors are essential in guiding higher degree researchers and their projects. Academics, in accepting
the role, relish the chance to share their expertise, engage with new thinking, and support the creation of
the next generation of researchers. Because of the critical role of supervisors, well-resourced universities
and research organisations have introduced registration systems and professional development programs to
support good supervisory practices, and those who have such resources available to them should make good
use of them. This book has been written as a virtual community of practice resource, offering perspectives
from a range of contexts, and providing professional development to enhance supervisory practices.

Supervisors supported by a community of practice

The chapters in this book reflect the extensive and diverse experiences of the authors as supervisors and
researchers. It's a great handbook for new supervisors as well as those with years of experience as researchers.
Our book covers a range of contemporary issues that require an increasingly collaborative and inclusive
approach to research and supervision.

The changing landscape - what makes research
2 | INTRODUCTION

different?

The book is designed to be accessible to researchers from diverse contexts. It acknowledges also that the
population of higher degree researchers is becoming increasingly diverse, and projects and styles of thesis
continue to evolve, as the quest to create independent researchers continues.

With the continuing emergence of online learning technologies, changing research funding modules,
refinements to research codes of conduct, increased calls for industry-engaged research, and metrics-driven
research excellence tools, supervisors may find the dynamic nature of the research education confronting.
This book may be the first in a series of editions that will allow the resource to remain current and relevant.
It opens up the potential for sharing of practice and engagement across the research education community
of supervisors and their various research services partners, including librarians, research officers, and
learning and career advisors.

In an area of practice where each candidate and project, as well as the constantly changing context,
challenging supervisors to continue to evolve and refine their practice, it is our intention that this book will
provide support, and point toward further resources, as well as encouraging engagement with communities
of research and supervision.

Contextual scene-setting: Research supervisors

This book has been written with a view of applying a research lens and further developing your own
practice. It therefore has relevance for those engaged in formal coursework, professional development,
and independent life-long learning. The intention is to enable supervisors to reflect on their own practice
(Schön, 1983), as well as learning from the examples provided from others' practice, to build their own self-
efficacy (Bandura, 1977, 1997) as a research supervisor.

The book is also a support mechanism for building community. While research by its nature can be
isolating, you can't do it in isolation. So, this book is the beginning of a community of practice reaching
into the future and across the globe. The context for this book is the encouragement of open access
knowledge-sharing and community-building in researcher education.

Each chapter is structured similarly, to allow easy access to materials in a concise way. This ensures that
each chapter contains information that is relevant, practical, and easily understood by diverse readers across
the world. Topics covered in the book range from frameworks to support supervision through to more
nuanced advice on specific supervisory practices.

The book is broken into four main sections - Collaborative Approaches, Capacity Building, Diverse
Research Environments, and Future Focus. In addition, we have a Preface from Professor Christine Bruce
and reflections from three HDR students on what they learned from their experiences as higher researchers.
                                                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION | 3

The first three chapters in the Collaborative Approaches section offer approaches, frameworks, and
perspectives to help supervisors build great relationships with higher degree researchers, guide their
development, and inform their careers as independent researchers. The work builds on Professor Christine
Bruce's Australian Research Council project on supervision. These chapters are based on the authors'
decades of working with hundreds of supervisors and their higher degree researchers. Chapter 1 -
Approaches to Supervision - introduces scaffolding, direction-setting, and relationship building as three
possible approaches to the supervisory relationship. Chapter 2 - Supervision: Accounting for Time -
discusses six ways of considering and using time in a research supervision relationship. Chapter 3 -
Collaboration as a Supervisory Practice - introduces the roots, fields, and fruits model of working with
others in research projects.

The Capacity Building section offers strategies for developing writing capacity and enhancing student
well-being. Learning ecologies are introduced that encourage writing, reviewing, and editing. Practices
and tools to enable early intervention and higher degree researcher empowerment are shown to lead to
sustainable supervision. These chapters will help you support your higher degree researcher's writing and
well-being. Chapter 4 - Establishing a Sustainable HDR Writing Ecology - discusses the resources beyond
the immediate supervisor(s) that can help a higher degree research student with their writing needs across
their candidature. Chapter 5 - Early Intervention: Helping Higher Degree Researchers Thrive through
Candidature - introduces the Graduate Research Engagement Assessment Tool (GREAT) which can help
supervisors and their HDRs to self-assess, and risk manage communication issues.

The Diverse Research Environments section provides an understanding of the diverse international and
institutional contexts faced by researchers and supervisors. It explores contexts and resources for researchers
and supervisors in developing countries, supervising researchers from non-English speaking countries as
they transition to studies in Australia, and supervision of Indigenous research and researchers. It also
explains the preparation of postgraduate researchers to navigate the boundaries of Indigenous and non-
Indigenous knowledge standpoints. Chapter 6 - Creating Successful Higher Degree Researcher Pathways
in a Developing Country - Papua New Guinea, Chapter 7 - Supervision of Indigenous Research and
Higher Degree Researchers and Chapter 8 - Supervising International Higher Degree Researchers from Non-
English-Speaking Countries all discuss ways to support higher degree researchers from diverse backgrounds
and in developing countries to progress to completion.

The Future Focus section invites supervisors to build a higher degree researcher's information literacy,
which contributes to their successful project completion then forms a basis for independence in their
working life. This section then presents views on career planning which prepares a higher degree researcher
for their transition into the working world. It also explores research integrity, which guides a higher
degree researcher to conduct their project with rigour and according to code of conduct requirements and
prepares them to be a professional researcher in the future. The content of this section is integral to both
a higher degree researcher's project and their future research career. Chapter 9 - Building Literacies for the
Researcher Lifecycle - discusses the help that university librarians can provide for HDR students. Chapter
10 - Empowering Research Supervisors Developing Information Literacy in Higher Degree Researchers -
4 | INTRODUCTION

introduces the Advanced Information Research Skills (AIRS) program for HDR students. Chapter 11 -
Empowering Higher Degree Researchers' Career Planning - discusses the ways that supervisors can use their
own experiences to help their HDR students with career decisions and introduces two models - Systems
Theory and Chaos Theory - that might inform career conversations. Chapter 12 - Building Research
Integrity - discusses the importance of the responsible and ethical conduct of research. Chapter 13 -
Supervising for Societal Impact: A Holistic Approach to Higher Degree by Research Support- explores the
supervisor's role in working with a student across the nexus of engagement and impact. The authors speak
of their experiences as both students and supervisors in framing a candidature to realise a candidate's career
goals.
The book ends with a Conclusion chapter that provides a thematic analysis of the topics covered across the
book.
Navigating highs and lows is part of being a research supervisor. We learn by failure (our own and others')
just as much as success. This book is a guideline for success, built on all of the authors' knowledge and
experience in the field of research supervision. We hope this book will help by supporting you with the
wisdom and experience of all the authors who have contributed to it.

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. W.H. Freeman and Company.
Schön, D.A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. Temple Smith.
                                                                                           HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER REFLECTIONS | 5

HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER
REFLECTIONS

                Reflections of a doctoral researcher for a PhD exploring aging well in the Torres
                Strait
                Rachel Quigley
                PhD Candidate, Medicine and Dentistry
                Senior Research Fellow, Healthy Ageing Research Team, College of Medicine and Dentistry
                James Cook University

       I appreciate that every PhD journey is a different one, and experiences vary. To appreciate
       my expectations and experiences of supervision I will provide some context. I am a mature
       age candidate with a clinical background in health, now working within a supportive
       research team based at the same university where I am doing my PhD on a part-time basis. I
       have been involved in health research for several years, so I bring to my PhD fundamental
       research skills and topic knowledge. Furthermore, I came into this PhD journey off the back
       of a Master of Philosophy that I completed at a different university, so again had some idea
       of what was in store!
       That said, the supervisory panel that I have remains invaluable. I appreciate that my
       supervisors recognise my experience in research, tailoring their input to my specific needs. I
       was definitely looking for a mentor and not a teacher. I think I would have been offended if I
       was treated the same way as someone who did not have the experience that I brought.
       What I did find useful at the beginning of my candidature was completing the "Ingrid Moses
       Expectations of Candidates and their Advisory Team" checklist. The main benefit of the tool
       for me was using it as a building block to establish trust and clarify what my supervisory
       needs specifically were. Having both mine and my supervisor's expectations clearly
       articulated from the beginning gave peace of mind.
       Another valuable aspect that my supervisors bring, especially in the early days of
       candidature, relates to the practicalities of navigating the PhD enrolment and university
6 | HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER REFLECTIONS

       requirements. Having someone to go to for advice and guidance, to ensure the appropriate
       paperwork has been submitted, and the correct mandatory training completed etc., made
       the prospect of the PhD less daunting. I like to be assured that I am doing the right thing
       and haven't missed some crucial piece of administrative paperwork or training. Knowing my
       supervisors are there to guide me through the milestones is reassuring.

       I am confident in my ability to conduct the practical side of my PhD, going out in the field to
       do data collection. However, where I benefit from input from my supervisors, is from the
       philosophical side and the deep thinking required in a PhD. I have appreciated my
       supervisors pushing me outside of my comfort zone, encouraging critical thinking, and
       challenging my ideas and thinking (in a constructive manner). I appreciated the literature my
       supervisor guided me towards and the encouragement to be an independent thinker.

       The regular supervisory meetings, although at times seem too frequent, keep me
       accountable and on task. Setting deadlines especially for the writing components has kept
       momentum and the writing flowing. Without those goals and deadlines, the writing would
       have been pushed aside in lieu of the practical side of the research. In this sense, my
       supervisors have kept me grounded in the fact that it is a PhD and not just a research
       project that I am doing.

       I am fortunate that my supervisors have always been accessible both for booked
       supervision sessions and for ad hoc catchups. I feel valued and appreciate that I can reach
       out whenever I need advice or feedback and am promptly replied to when I send emails.
       Feedback is timely and thoughtful. I genuinely feel there is an interest in my research, and I
       am supported when presenting my work, which is definitely an encouragement.

       Lastly, I value the personal dimension that my supervisors bring. They are empathetic and
       understand the aspects of my "outside" life that may impact on my progression. There is no
       judgment but just support, understanding and encouragement. There is a genuine desire to
       see me succeed whilst providing opportunities to broaden my horizons and develop my
       career during my PhD journey.
                                                                                  HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER REFLECTIONS | 7

       Reflections of a PhD student on HDR supervision in a developing university
       research culture
       Dora Jimela Kialo
       PhD Student, Educational Leadership
       University of Goroka, PNG
       Lecturer-Deputy Director, Teaching and Learning Methods Unit
       Papua New Guinea University of Technology

Carrying out research, writing up research proposals and research write up reports is a
complicated task that requires elaborate writing skills. Scientific Writing Skills, as we know
in academic writing are made up of many different subroutines, all of which are learned
through practices that are integrated and connected appropriately with intricate step by
step supervision at the initial stage. In research, we are trying to achieve many different
goals all at the same time. The difficulties that face postgraduate students have become
prominent in recent years. There are so many difficulties we encountered along the way,
especially for those of us who have been out in the field for far too long before re-entering
universities to study at the postgraduate level have become more prominent in recent years.
In particular, attention is focused on completion rate of those doing PhD postgraduate
studies in Papua New Guinea Universities. We students expect professional expertise and
guidance from our principal supervisors with additional support from co-supervisors. We
want our supervisors to be interested in and be enthusiastic about our work. Many times
we find the supervisor is not well organized and readily available for discussion and help,
especially online collaboration. It would be much easier if we did virtual collaborations in real
time, but it is in reality not so.
Of the little research into Higher Education research practices in Papua New Guinea
Universities, a high proportion of it (research) is done by students or by academics operating
on behalf of the institutions and its management. I am arguing here that the lecturer in the
School of Postgraduate Studies can raise their normal pattern of their classroom enquiries
into a valuable contribution to educational research. I am arguing that the best research is
done when associated with the development of educational practice as a research student.
Indeed, I am arguing that together with other factors, it is distance from realities of
classroom life that have rendered so much research sterile.

    1. How much educational research is done in my institution, by whom and to what
8 | HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER REFLECTIONS

                effect?
           2. How can I make my own educational enquiries more systematic and thorough with

                very little supervision?

       Undertaking research with a view to increasing knowledge, or influencing practice is very
       significant in building on some already existing knowledge and adding more, for example,
       with the technology use and the worth of the existing knowledge. I have gone to the
       existing libraries but I could not find any latest Journals on the research into Online
       Education nor any on learning management systems such as Google Classroom. This leaves
       me with more questions on how to re-interpret earlier results, compare predictive values,
       apply new methodology, and produce an application of an idea and so on.

       I do understand that, in order to establish the purpose of a piece of educational research,
       one first has to locate it in the literature. But, where there is no old writing on that topic of
       research, how do I do the literature review?

       I, therefore, strongly argue that the School of Postgraduate studies should employ full time
       lecturers to support Postgraduate students, many of whom have no research background or
       have forgotten the research skills that were handwritten a long time ago and that may have
       already been discarded.

       In some other instances, some face to face contacts were made. But those contacts were
       sometime irrelevant and unnecessary. For example, in the first instant, some Principal
       supervisors do not give specific criteria such as the proposal guidelines or an outline of the
       thesis structure with required number of pages and or words for the first paragraph. There
       is so much mismatch between my supervisor and I in terms of real time collaboration as my
       study is geared towards technology oriented research or online ethnography. It has become
       very challenging to print and send every chapter, sometimes more than five times. It is
       challenging because I see a big gap between myself and my supervisor in terms of digital
       technological literacy and usage.

       There are some supervisors who are very meticulous in their supervisory jobs which often
       see a successful passing and graduation of their students.

       My supervisor's style of supervision was direct in the initial and final stages of the research
       period with a lengthy quiescence in the middle.

       I have tried to stay on course without additional support tailored for my specification- an
       online auto ethnography.
                                                                                  HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER REFLECTIONS | 9

       "We are on this journey together": Reflections of a doctoral researcher learning
       and growing with his advisory panel
       Muhamad Alif Bin Ibrahim
       PhD Student, Society & Culture
       James Cook University

"We are on this journey together". Reflecting on my journey as a third-year PhD candidate
at James Cook University (JCU), these words from my primary advisor early on in my
candidature still resonate with me today. My personal growth as an individual and my
journey as a researcher today would not have been possible without my advisory panel's
guidance, encouragement, and support.
Making Decisions as a Team
Since embarking on my candidature with JCU, I have always felt like part of a team with my
supervisors. We would deliberate and make decisions collectively about the research
questions and studies required for my PhD. This collaborative manner of making decisions
also grounded the ways in which I navigated my PhD milestones and various challenges
that arose during the candidature. These included the various times when I had to make
changes to my initial plans and studies due to new findings arising from the literature or
empirical research, as well as considering the time and resources we had when I had to take
some time away to deal with health and personal issues that impacted my family. My
supervisors were there every step of the way, providing me with support and
encouragement. As a result, I wasn't made to feel like I was navigating and negotiating this
PhD journey all on my own.
Sense of Trust and Psychological Safety
There was also a sense of trust and psychological safety that was established with my
advisory panel at the beginning and that still remains today. My advisory panel always
welcomed my questions, and I never felt afraid to highlight my worries regarding the PhD. If
I had concerns about whether a particular analytical method would work or if my data
collection would go according to plan, I could voice these without fear of reprisal.
I felt that the advisory panel valued all my contributions and work, no matter how small.
Every PhD milestone I achieved and every piece of writing I accomplished were regarded as
important, valuable aspects that contributed to my growth as a researcher. These included
10 | HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER REFLECTIONS

       the coursework modules I undertook during my PhD and presentations at small-scale
       seminars and big conferences. I could also openly discuss my future aspirations and career
       needs with the advisory panel, whether these were about doing a postdoctoral fellowship
       overseas at well-known institutions or seeking advice on academic and teaching positions.
       Discussion also included advice regarding the types of funding available and the universities
       I could consider, as these institutions were very strong in the research areas, I was
       interested in.

       Because of this sense of trust and psychological safety, I also did not view feedback and
       comments that I received on my written work as negative. On the contrary, I always looked
       forward to receiving my supervisor's input as I saw how their perspectives and comments
       value added to my research work. Their feedback was insightful as they highlighted various
       points and views that I may not have thoroughly considered while writing my papers.
       Furthermore, their comments and feedback were always well-considered, respectful, and
       thoughtful. Hence, I saw them as ways my supervisors were lifting me up to become a
       better writer and researcher.

       Learning and Growing Together

       Lastly, I felt my supervisors were open to learning and growing together with me
       throughout my candidature. While I would formally meet my supervisors once a month to
       update them on my research findings and challenges that arose, I also had informal
       meetings and discussions with my primary supervisor every two weeks or so. These
       catchups enabled me to discuss any challenges that I was facing in a particular week or
       simply just share what I would be doing with my partner over the weekends and holidays. If
       any issues needed to be escalated further, my primary supervisor would proactively seek
       advice and guidance from the other panel members or research deans. These formal and
       informal meetings were valuable in ensuring they remained accessible to me as a PhD
       candidate. My supervisors were also willing to try different ways of collecting and analysing
       data, being open to any surprises that I found as part of my research findings, and adapting
       my research to these emergent findings. Knowing that my supervisors were there to learn
       and grow with me has helped allay my fears and anxiety about the uncertainty I faced in
       doing research as part of my PhD candidature.
                     TRANSLATE THIS BOOK | 11

TRANSLATE THIS BOOK

Translate this book
To translate each page of this book into your language, click the button above and select your language
from the banner at the top of the page. You will need to select the language each time you load into a new
page.

           Please note that Google Translate is a useful tool, but will not produce perfect translation.

Instructions

Once you click on the "Translate this book" button, the book will open in a new tab with a Google
Translate banner. On the left-hand side (highlighted red box in figure below), click on the blue line.

Click on the blue line highlighted

From here you will be given a list of languages to choose from. Select your desired language. You will need
to complete this step every time you click on a new page.
12 | TRANSLATE THIS BOOK

Choose your language

In the following image, Arabic was chosen as the language.

After language was chosen
                                                                                                              COLLABORATIVE APPROACHES | 13

COLLABORATIVE APPROACHES
14 | 1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

   Christine Bruce; Ian Stoodley; and Susan Gasson

     Why read this chapter?

     In this chapter we explore three approaches to supervision of higher degrees by research as the
     highest form of learning and teaching:

          · Scaffolding - building detailed plans that guide research progress
          · Direction setting - taking a big picture view of the outcomes to be realised
          · Relationship - building a rapport that will let everyone endure the challenges and thrive

             during candidature.
     Three different perspectives on the approaches are also explored:

          · Higher Degree Researcher perspectives - learning and developing as a researcher,
             accounting for prior experience

          · Supervisor perspectives - maintaining research standards, building supervisory capacity,
             and imparting expertise

          · Wider community perspectives - making original contributions through broader
             engagement.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=70

The approaches outlined below are the outcome of research involving interviews with supervisors within
a science and engineering research education community (Bruce & Stoodley, 2013). The research was
funded as part of an Australian Learning and Teaching Council grant.
Familiarity with the approaches may allow supervisors to consciously select their preferred approach for a
                                                                                                           1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION | 15

particular context and broaden their repertoire of approaches to enable healthy and holistic candidature
experiences.

Approaches to supervision

In this chapter we introduce three approaches that accommodate a range of supervisor and candidate
contexts. These approaches have been adopted by supervisors working with higher degree researchers, who
each come to studies with a unique set of skills and abilities, life circumstances, as well as expectations of
their research education experience.

As supervisors, you are encouraged to come to this chapter ready to reflect on your own supervisory
experiences as you engage with the approaches and perspectives described. The approaches offer alternative
practices, and perspectives, and may support you in reflecting on your supervision of higher degree
researchers. In doing this you may wish to account for broader considerations such as the expectations
of key stakeholders including employers, industry, or community partners in supporting your higher
degree researcher's career aspirations. You may also examine the relationships between the higher degree
researcher's project and your broader body of research (see also Chapter 3).

Approach One - Scaffolding

 The idea

The first approach to consider is scaffolding- building detailed plans to guide the higher degree researcher.
Your selection of an approach will be informed by what is happening in the supervisory process. When
supervisors adopt a scaffolding approach, higher degree researchers will be encouraged to make systematic,
planned progress.

A project management approach, for example, may support higher degree researchers' engagement with
the research process. The scaffolding may also involve negotiating a project plan that clearly sets out the
respective roles of higher degree researchers and supervisors in the project. In this approach, the focus is
on acquiring research skills and capabilities and defining tasks and responsibilities that will be required at
various points along the way. Such exposition of roles can inform the creation of a plan, perhaps including
monthly, or even weekly outputs during critical phases. When scaffolding supervisors build into plans
expectations for reporting on progress toward completion. Plans create an opportunity for discussion of
deliverables. Deliverables might include aspects of the research process (e.g., data collection and analysis),
required elements (e.g., candidature milestones), research outputs (e.g., journal or conference papers),
or research compliance requirements (e.g., ethics applications, data management plans and intellectual
property agreements).
16 | 1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

 When to use this approach?

Supervisors can use the scaffolding approach to great effect at the start of candidature when introducing
higher degree researchers to the notion of evolving a researcher identity. Establishing shared expectations
can give higher degree researchers direction, helping them establish a pattern of work. Sharing expectations
will also help them to avoid confusion or misunderstanding that can confound progress (see also Tracking
Postgraduate Research Tool [Word document]). Scaffolding can also be applied to realise key objectives
such as confirmation and publication deadlines, or thesis submission. The project plan may need to be
set out in more detail toward the end of the candidature. A shared completion project plan will ensure
that supervisors incorporate the final review of the thesis into their busy calendars and that details for
finalisation of intellectual property, authorship, and data storage are taken into account. In using the
scaffolding approach, it is important to empower higher degree researchers to take ownership of their
projects, and responsibility for planning as the candidature unfolds.

Approach Two - Direction setting

 The idea

The application of direction setting requires supervisors to take a big-picture view of the research project
being undertaken. Adoption of this approach helps higher degree researchers understand the work
required in creating a significant and original contribution to knowledge. Supervisors can contribute
to direction setting because of their deep understanding of the nature of the thesis genre within their
discipline. That understanding comes from the experience of completing their own higher degree studies
and working as supervisors and examiners of higher degree researchers. Direction setting involves higher
degree researchers realising the scope and focus of their knowledge contribution. Higher degree researchers
can struggle to identify the aspect of their life's work to be addressed in the confines of the thesis experience.
Direction setting can also be a way of identifying where project plans need additional development, or
research questions/hypotheses are poorly defined. Direction setting requires supervisors to emphasise the
need for a reasonable set of research objectives, and methods, and theories that can appropriately inform
the work. As the scope and focus of projects are established, higher degree researchers' career plans should
also be influential. For those seeking academic careers, for example, projects may involve basic research,
conference attendance, and authorship of journal articles. For those wishing to return to their professions,
thesis work may be more applied and inform presentations to professional associations, and engagement
with industry mentors (see also Chapter 11 and Chapter 13).

Supervisors can use this approach to establish the scope and focus of higher degree researchers' projects.
The outcome of direction setting discussions can be establishing research questions, or approaching
industry or community groups to assist with data collection. By pointing higher degree researchers in the
right direction, they can become more proactive in progressing their research. Adoption of this approach
helps higher degree researchers to clarify their research goals.
                                                                                                           1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION | 17

Direction setting may involve consideration of the methods to be used, the funding required, and the
theoretical or conceptual framework for the work. Selecting the domain where the work will occur helps
the higher degree researcher to navigate the literature that will inform their work and identify the networks
that may become part of their research community into the future. Discussion needs to account for the
higher degree researcher's interests and skills, and the expertise and experience of the supervisors.

Contingency plans can be discussed as part of the direction setting. There are many reasons for requiring
a Plan B. If higher degree researchers' approaches require expertise, skills, or resources beyond the range of
the supervisory panel, discuss amending or augmenting the panel. If resource requirements are ambitious,
or their provision is doubtful, a contingency plan should be considered. When ethics approval for access
to the desired participant group may be complex and time consuming, consideration of alternative ways of
gathering data may be needed. When the method or theory to be used is not clear, supervisors may ask their
higher degree researcher to source additional readings. In selecting methods and theoretical approaches
alignment with supervisors prioritised disciplinary or professional perspectives or expertise should be
accounted for.

 When to use this approach?

Supervisors may find direction setting valuable at the start of candidature, but it may also be relevant if
projects do not progress as planned. Contingency planning is a routine part of research work, as outcomes
are necessarily uncertain. At moments of uncertainty, direction setting can help identification of a way
forward, accounting for shared interests in research outcomes and resource constraints (see also Tracking
Postgraduate Research Tool [Word document]).

Approach Three - Relationship

 The idea

Supervisors can use the relationship approach to build rapport that will help everyone endure higher degree
challenges and thrive through candidature. Relationship building provides an opportunity for supervisors
to focus on establishing a learning community, support networks, and personal interactions. Learning
together, building working relationships with other higher degree research cohorts and industry partners,
or maintaining collaborations with researcher communities are best progressed using Relationships. This
approach fundamentally involves seeing the higher degree researcher as a colleague, and adapting processes
and directions according to needs and circumstances of all parties involved.

Where supervisors and higher degree researchers already know each other there may be less need to establish
a relationship. Where higher degree researchers are coming to study from another university, city, or
country, then establishing a learning community will be more imperative. In both cases, relationships can
allow supervisors to devote time to establishing expectations of all involved.
18 | 1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

A holistic approach is required to build a relationship of trust and respect, and establish a safe space for
research collaboration. As adults with life, work, and family commitments; it is not unusual for higher
degree researchers to experience significant life events. Supervisors are not expected to be counsellors or
health care providers. It can be challenging to know how to respond when higher degree researchers report
life changing events that will impact project progress. Changes may be positive or negative. Even positive
changes, such as the offer of a job or starting a family, will require the review of expectations. Where the
change is more negative - financial, marital, or wellness concerns - a first response may be an empathetic
referral to support services.

In contrast to teaching coursework studies where engagement lasts for an 8-13 week semester, supervising
research degrees involves maintaining a relationship for years. Completing a research degree for many
higher degree researchers involves negotiating time and financial imposts on their family and workplace.
Families and employers have vested interests in higher degree researchers' progress and completion.
Accounting for these interests allows supervisors to be more sensitive in their support and guidance of the
higher degree researcher.

The pressure of candidature builds gradually through the degree. After the first spring of delight at
admission, the pleasure of immersion in an area of passion can last for much of the candidature. But there
are many challenges and demands. Helping the higher degree researcher build resilience to adversity, and
persistence in the face of ongoing pressure, is part of the work of the supervisor. Toward completion, higher
degree researchers can face numerous conflicting pressure beyond finalising the thesis, such as transitioning
to work, and aligning thesis submission with visa, lease, and scholarship end dates (see also Chapter 2).

One challenge for supervisors is how to motivate higher degree researchers to stay on track. This may
require focused skills and capacity building, intense one-on-one support, or referrals to professional services
or research networks. Sometimes providing timely feedback, taking time for a coffee catch up, or
supporting submission for a journal article can get a candidature back on track.

In extreme cases, a higher degree researcher's life circumstances may present a major barrier to progress.
Ensuring that higher degree researchers appreciate the high levels of cognitive attention vital to their
management of limited resources can help them prioritise and work through adversity. Strong relationships
will ensure supervisors are aware of concerns and can support applications for leave or time away from
higher degree research as required to address pressing concerns (see also Chapter 3 to further explore the
role of supervisors in building collaborative research cultures and collaborative capacity).

 When to use this approach?

Collegial relationships with their higher degree researchers, university administration, and others
frequently allows supervisors to smooth wrinkles in candidatures. Helping higher degree researchers build
learning communities and support networks can be a wonderful strategy. This approach allows supervisors
to delegate some work. Creating peer-to-peer writing groups allows higher degree researchers to get
                                                                                                           1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION | 19

feedback on early drafts, see the quality of the work of others, and gain experience as reviewers. At cohort
gatherings, higher degree researchers can practice presentations and share their challenges and successes.
These conversations help higher degree researchers to normalise some of the research difficulties they will
face day to day. Industry mentors can help higher degree researchers explore career objectives and also
consider how their research may have social impact into the future. Contact with industry can open up
access to resources, and create internship, and job opportunities.

The final stages of candidature, when scholarships and visas may be coming to an end, present a particularly
demanding time both academically and personally. While needing to focus on completion, the higher
degree researcher can be distracted by the need to find work, or return to their home country, or apply
for extensions to fund additional time required to complete. Being aware of these demands and pressures
is essential. Discussions with your higher degree researcher can help reveal who in the university or
community can assist with concerning issues. Resolving financial and career concerns can be key to
finalising the thesis for submission (see also Chapter 3).

Perspectives on applying the approaches to
supervision

Supervisors tend to have familiar or preferred ways of thinking about teaching in the research context.
Their thinking may vary depending on the phase of candidature, or the nature of the research process. Ways
of thinking may be informed by role models or past practices. Table 1.1, below, provides a menu that you
can call on to extend your practice. This may be in response to a new challenge, or the desire to develop
your practice further.
20 | 1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

Table 1.1: Supervisors' ways of thinking about teaching in the research context (adapted from Bruce &
                                                      Stoodley, 2009)

Focus                     Content                    Supervisor's intention      Supervisor's
                                                                                 strategy

                                   Teaching in the research context is viewed as:

Supervisor perspectives              1                             4                       7

                          Upholding academic         Promoting the supervisor's  Imparting academic
                                standards                    development               expertise

Higher degree researcher              2                       5                             8
perspectives
                          Promoting learning to      Enabling student               Drawing upon
                                  research             development                 student expertise

Wider community                         3                        6                         9
perspectives                                         Contributing to society
                          Venturing into unexplored                              Forming productive
                                    territory                                       communities

Supervisor perspectives

Ensuring the rigour and quality of the research generated by higher degree researchers requires the
application of disciplinary standards and research knowledge. These perspectives may be particularly
relevant or useful as higher degree researchers approach milestone events such as the submission of a
publication, or ethics application. Your higher degree researchers have probably selected you because of the
expertise and knowledge you bring to the process. They look for your role modelling and will be interested
in your research outputs, and practices. Encourage them to participate in your institution's professional
development events, and to engage with your research community to acculturate them to your discipline
and research culture.

Higher degree researcher perspectives

Particularly at the start of candidature, it can be useful for supervisors to adopt a higher degree researcher
perspective. These perspectives open up connections, allowing supervisors to get to know higher degree
researchers and explore their readiness for the research journey. By being aware of what they know already,
what has prompted them to engage in research, and their expectations of research studies, supervisors can
guide their experiences. Being empathetic to their concerns and responsive to their needs, supervisors can
guide their transition to research studies and beyond.
                                                                                                           1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION | 21

      Conversation starters

       What methodologies have you used previously?
       How might this research design impact your work-life balance?
       What research approaches are you keen to pursue, and why?
       How can we build your confidence in the execution of your research design?

Wider community perspectives

Broader communities can support your higher degree researcher's development and their research. They
may be able to provide the data or site for the research work. They may be able to provide infrastructure to
facilitate the research work. They may be able to provide research expertise to enable the implementation
of the research work. Identifying suitable communities and engaging with them meaningfully to realise
outcomes that can build relationships and partnerships are critical for the success of a project and longer-
term research activities. Mentors from business, government, and the community can also help higher
degree researchers build connections and skills that will influence their future career.

      Conversation starters

       How might this work help you in the future?
       How might (a field leader) respond to this idea?
       Who might benefit from the findings from your study?
       How might you better engage the research partners with your research?

     Activity

     Table 1.1 above describes different teaching contexts and perspectives on research education.
22 | 1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

     Work through each row to consider how different supervisory approaches could help you to
     navigate different contexts. Consider how these approaches allow your expertise to inform the
     context. Consider using or sharing the workshop and brochure reference materials provided
     below (see Reference Materials).

     Reference Materials

        The following materials were developed as part of a Higher Degree Researcher-focused
        Australian Learning and Teaching Council (ALTC) Grant:
        Bruce, C. S. & Stoodley, I. D. (2009). Student resources for the use of supervisors.
        https://eprints.qut.edu.au/28585/
        Bruce, C. S., & Stoodley, I. D. (2010). Science and technology supervision resources: Towards a
        pedagogy of supervision in the technology disciplines. Australian Learning and Teaching
        Council. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/38456/
        Bruce, C. S. & Stoodley, I. D. (2012). Resources to assist research student supervision
        [Unpublished manuscript]. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/50553/
        Bruce, C. S. & Stoodley, I. D. (2013). Experiencing higher degree research supervision as
        teaching. Studies in Higher Education, 38(2), 226-241. https://doi.org/10.1080/
        03075079.2011.576338

     Additional Resources

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.
                                                                                                     1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION | 23

   Bøgelund. P. (2015). How supervisors perceive PhD supervision - And how they practice it.
  International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 10, 39-55.

   Boud, D. & Lee, A. (2005). Peer learning' as pedagogic discourse for research education,
  Studies in Higher Education, 30(5), 501-516. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075070500249138

Delamont, S., Atkinson, P., & Parry, O. (2004). Supervising the doctorate: A guide to success.
McGraw-Hill Education.

Denholm, C., & Evans, T. (2012). Doctorates downunder (2nd ed.). ACER Press.

   Fillery-Travis, A. & Robinson, L. (2018). Making the familiar strange - A research pedagogy for
  practice, Studies in Higher Education, 43(5), 841-853. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   03075079.2018.1438098

  Halbert, K. (2015) Students' perceptions of a `quality' advisory relationship, Quality in Higher
  Education, 21(1), 26-37. https://doi.org/10.1080/13538322.2015.1049439

  Hands, A. & Buchanan, S. (Eds). (2024). The self-determined doctorate. Brill.

   Huet, I. & Casanova, D. (2021). Exploring the professional development of online and distance
  doctoral supervisors, Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 58(4), 430-440.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2020.1742764

   Johansson, C., & Yerrabati, S. (2017). A review of the literature on professional doctorate
  supervisory styles. Management in Education, 31(4), 166-171. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   0892020617734821

   McCulloch, A., Kumar, V. van Schalkwyk, S. & Wisker, G. (2016). Excellence in doctoral
   supervision: An examination of authoritative sources across four countries in search of
  performance higher than competence. Quality in Higher Education, 22(1), 64-77.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/13538322.2016.1144904

  National Academy of Sciences. (2019). The science of effective mentorship in STEMM. Online
  Guide V1.0. https://nap.nationalacademies.org/resource/25568/interactive/

   Robertson, M. J. (2017). Trust: the power that binds in team supervision of doctoral students.
  Higher Education Research & Development, 36(7), 1463-1475. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   07294360.2017.1325853

   Sagers, J. (2019, April, 4). Five reasons to do an internship during your PhD programme.
  Nature. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01087-9

   Taylor, R., Vitale, T., Tapoler, C. & Whaley, K. (2018). Desirable qualities of modern doctorate
   advisors in the USA: A view through the lenses of candidates, graduates, and academic
  advisors. Studies in Higher Education, 43(5), 854-866. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   03075079.2018.1438104
24 | 1. APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION

        Taylor, S., Kiley, M., & Humphrey, R. (2017). A handbook for doctoral supervisors. Taylor &
        Francis. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315559650

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Bruce, C. S. & Stoodley, I. D. (2009). Student resources for the use of supervisors. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/
   28585/

Bruce, C. S., & Stoodley, I. D. (2010). Science and technology supervision resources: Towards a pedagogy
   of supervision in the technology disciplines. Australian Learning and Teaching Council.
   https://eprints.qut.edu.au/38456/

Bruce, C. S. & Stoodley, I. D. (2012). Resources to assist research student supervision [Unpublished
   manuscript]. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/50553/

Bruce, C. S. & Stoodley, I. D. (2013). Experiencing higher degree research supervision as teaching. Studies
   in Higher Education, 38(2), 226-241. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2011.576338
                                                                                                2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME | 25

2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME

   Susan Gasson

     Why read this chapter?

     Time is an ever-present concern during candidature for all stakeholders involved. The six
     concepts of time provide perspectives to enable supervisors to build effective working
     relationships and realise mutually agreed outcomes with their higher degree researchers.
     Sharing the concepts of time can help higher degree researchers to build resilience and make
     progress.
     The six concepts of time are:

          · Life time - impact of life events on researcher experiences
          · Career time - influence of career phase on researcher experiences
          · Supervisor time - role of supervisor in realising researcher development
          · Opportunity time - place of optional events in researcher development
          · Candidature time - understand degree requirements
          · Time management - plan progress through a candidature
     We will look at strategic applications of these concepts of time which will help supervisors to
     manage:
          · workloads
          · work-life balance
          · the research education experience
          · research progress
     and realise:
          · impactful research outcomes for higher degree researchers and supervisors.
          · independent researcher practices
          · higher degree researchers' future careers.
26 | 2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=81

Concepts of time in doctoral studies

Six concepts of time were identified in a narrative research study (Gasson, 2023). The research was aimed
at understanding the nature of the early career researcher pathway. These concepts of time emerged as key
to the doctoral experience and transitions to work.

Life time

By being aware of higher degree researchers' life times, supervisors can negotiate arrangements to ensure
that sufficient time is set aside for research studies. Supervisors can explain time requirements so that higher
degree researchers are realistic about the demands of candidature. Higher degree researchers will then be
able to decide if they are prepared to make any necessary compromises at home or at work. Compromises
to accommodate research studies will vary depending on individual circumstances.

As past higher degree researchers, supervisors understand the costs and benefits of time spent enrolled
in research education. Most will remember the time taken in preparing to begin studies. That may have
involved talking to family and friends, seeking out suitable supervisors, and applying for admission and
scholarship funding. For some supervisors research studies were prompted by a passion for a topic, for
others it was necessary for their pursuit of a research career.

Like their supervisors before them, most higher degree researchers come to research studies with family
and work commitments. These commitments can delay studies commencing or impact on research
progression. Some may intend to pursue an academic pathway, others may be trying to avoid stagnating in
a role.

Career time

Higher degree researchers often enrol to advance or accelerate their career progress. Talking to higher degree
researchers about their career expectations will help them to use that knowledge to guide the scope and
focus of research projects. Together supervisors and higher degree researchers can discuss how best to
shape the project to accommodate commitments that may come with career plans. Commitments may
include university teaching or industry engagement. Aligning projects to account for career expectations
can provide the additional incentives needed to support higher degree researchers to timely completion.
                                                                                                2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME | 27

Another value-add for supervisors in discussing career time with higher degree researchers is that it builds
a stronger picture of the skills, capacities and resources they bring to candidature. Knowing the research
work they have previously conducted, jobs they have held, infrastructure or data sets they have access to
through their work or service, can prompt discussion not only about the project, but also about how it
may be conducted. Perhaps they have a familiarity with methods gained from work in a sector, or skills
and knowledge about particular techniques and instruments, or connections with industry networks who
might fund projects or provide resources. Discussions can be critical to optimising the shape of the project.

Understanding career time can also raise challenges. An executive worker with a very demanding work role
may underestimate the demands of the program. Discussing the time commitments of their work situation
can reveal their preparedness and capacity to engage in research education. A mid-career worker managing
competing work and candidature commitments may identify ways to align their project with work related
priorities. A part-time worker might be able to combine the demands of work with the challenges of
research education. Useful discussions between supervisors and higher degree researchers could potentially
revolve around considering time consuming tasks that may either be mutually beneficial or confounding
to the realisation of research outcomes. Full-time higher degree researchers hungry to get a leg up to start
their career, may wish to discuss how they may use time in candidature to gain work experience, and how
best to frame their expected research outcomes to meet the potential demands of future employers (see also
Chapter 11).

Supervisor time

Higher degree researchers require the support of their supervisors. As a result, access to suitable supervisory
capacity is usually a condition of admission and ongoing candidature. While practices vary globally, at least
two supervisors are often appointed to a higher degree researcher. At many universities, supervisors receive
professional development and are required to conform with agreed policy frameworks in the conduct of
supervisions.

The negotiation of time and the quality of contact and engagement is the concern of supervisory time.
Each higher degree researcher will have varying needs over the term of candidature. Supervisors can enable
and facilitate the higher degree researcher in a range of ways. When supervisory time is agreed to the mutual
satisfaction of everyone involved, it supports ongoing good relationships through to completion.

Higher degree researchers identify supervisors in a range of ways. Sometimes they have previously met with
academics, and after becoming familiar with their work requested their support in making an application.
Other higher degree researchers may make ad hoc approaches to potential supervisors at their university
of choice. In agreeing to supervise higher degree researchers, most supervisors are required to indicate
that they have assessed the higher degree researcher as suitable, will continue the supervision through
candidature, and feel confident to supervise the proposed research. Before agreeing to take on a new higher
degree researcher, it is important to consider the time available based on the current workload.
28 | 2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME

The demands on supervisors during candidature can vary. At the start of candidature, most supervisors will
discuss expectations with higher degree researchers. They will agree on how often they will meet, and how
they will manage the review of work and progress. Over time the level of contact and roles of the various
supervisors can change.

Supervisors and higher degree researchers may wish to renegotiate roles over time as higher degree
researchers become more independent and phases of work roll out. This usually leads to conversations
around who will take the lead on key tasks such as supporting the development of laboratory techniques,
accessing resources and samples, reviewing key literature, consideration of methods, and development of
methodology.

One of the key concerns for higher degree researchers is receiving timely and relevant feedback on research
and written work. Be clear about the time required for the review of work, and the role of each supervisor
in the process. Discuss how these timelines may vary depending on the amount and frequency of requests
for work to be reviewed.

Candidature time

Supervisors are responsible for explaining to higher degree researchers how to manage their candidature
time in line with college or university award requirements. As researchers, you will also need to consider
relevant compliance and progress requirements. Management of candidature time can be supported
through the use of project management tools such as timelines, publication plans, and compliance
checklists.

Discussions between supervisors and higher degree researchers about candidature time are vital when there
are any concerns about progress to completion. Normally, the expected term of candidature is set out by the
awarding university. However, as supervisors, you may have a preferred approach to achieving completion.
You also need to account for any expectations of higher degree researchers about candidature time based on
their personal circumstances or future plans or commitments.

Evaluation of progress needs to be a routine and transparent part of managing candidature time (see
also Time Management below). If progress is slow, supervisors should carefully consider if higher degree
researchers need to be pushed to continue to make progress or be encouraged to take a break. Supervisors
often develop an ability to celebrate little wins along the way that encourage progress, and craft feedback
to recognise effort. It can help to work from an early stage with your higher degree researchers to normalise
expectations of high levels of critical feedback designed to stimulate deeper thinking and quality outputs.

Time management

Supervisors will often use a timeline to assist with higher degree researcher time management. Universities
                                                                                                2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME | 29

usually expect higher degree researchers to establish and maintain a living timeline for completion that can
be shared regularly and discussed with supervisors. Progress evaluation cycles can act as a prompt to update
timelines. The elements included in the timeline may change over time and all parties should be open to
reviewing and revising requirements as circumstances of the candidature change.

Timelines articulate the steps involved in realising completion. Supervisors are aware of the steps involved
and the time that each requires. Higher degree researchers need to know if supervisors think they have not
allocated enough time on their timeline for ethics approval, or completion of a cycle of data collection or
analysis, or if something is missing. Commonly time for reviewing work, and editing may be left out, but
should be a consideration in the timeline.

Timelines can be used to encourage students to generate writing from the very start of their candidature.
"Writing up" at the end is a risky practice and impractical for those pursuing a thesis by published paper.
Continuous writing throughout the candidature allows for iterative skills development. Written tasks need
to be featured within timelines. Higher degree researchers can be helped to appreciate that thesis writing
involves writing and reviewing by making time review cycles visible on their timelines.

The sharing of time constraints is an important feature of time management (see Life time above). Key
time constraints to record on the timeline are maximum candidature, scholarship, and visa duration.
Supervisors leave and workload can impact their availability to support higher degree researchers.
Informing higher degree researchers of times of potentially reduced availability will help them to manage
their timelines more effectively. Equally, higher degree researchers should record their own holiday plans
and other commitments and build these into their progression plans. An average of four weeks leave per
year for all is strongly encouraged.

Opportune time

Opportunities will arise for higher degree researchers during candidature. The challenge is to take the
opportunities that align best with candidature priorities. Together supervisors and higher degree
researchers should plan out the best use of opportunity time. Supervisors can help in the identification of
the opportunities that will advance higher degree researchers' research projects, capacity development, and
preparation for transition for work after graduation.

Opportunities can offer direct and indirect benefits for the higher degree researcher's project. Direct
benefits come from such things as attending induction sessions, engaging with supervisors, and
participating in research meetings and seminars. Those with less direct benefit might include joining article
publication review groups, representing students on committees, and giving tutorials or guest lectures.

Industry engaged research education is popular globally. Higher degree researchers in some countries are
prompted by funded programs to consider internships and work-based mentoring programs. There is
usually flexibility and capacity for supervisors and higher degree researchers to plan the nature and timing
30 | 2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME

of internships. Supervisors may be influential in identifying suitable mentors, internships, or industry
linked projects. Such opportunities can help higher degree researchers to build their own research
networks and communities.
Supervisors can help higher degree researchers find the right balance between engaging in extension
opportunities and getting the research done. They assess the value of opportunities for higher degree
researchers' development while accounting for their candidature and career progress. While encouraging
higher degree researchers to enhance their resumes and develop new skills is important; this always needs to
be balanced against time to completion.

Apply these ideas in your practice

A workbook is provided below that allows you to document your experiences of the six concepts of time.
Below we offer some ways that you might wish to use this workbook in your supervisory practice.
In the Reference Materials box below, use the workbook to:

  · think about what the concepts of time mean for you
  · invite one of your higher degree researchers to complete the workbook
  · discuss with your higher degree researcher a concept of time of concern
  · consider the best use of your supervisory time.

     Reference Materials

          · Workbook - Notions of time and HDR supervision [PDF document]

     Additional Resources
                                                                                          2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME | 31

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Articles
   Devos, C., Boudrenghien, G., Van der Linden, N., Azzi, A., Frenay, M., Galand, B., & Klein, O.
   (2017). Doctoral students' experiences leading to completion or attrition: A matter of sense,
  progress and distress. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 32(1), 61-77.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10212-016-0290-0
   Friedrich-Nel, H. & Mac Kinnon, J. (2019) The quality culture in doctoral education:
  Establishing the critical role of the doctoral supervisor. Innovations in Education and Teaching
  International, 56(2), 140-149. http://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2017.1371059
   Gravett, K. (2021), Disrupting the doctoral journey: Re-imagining doctoral pedagogies and
  temporal practices in higher education.Teaching in Higher Education, 26(3), 293-305.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1853694
   Kaslow, N. J., Bangasser, D. A., Grus, C. L., McCutcheon, S. R., & Fowler, G. A. (2018).
  Facilitating pipeline progress from doctoral degree to first job. American Psychologist, 73(1),
   47-62. https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000120
   Kendal, E. & Waterhouse-Watson, D. (2022). I'm a unicorn, ask me how! What the rise of `quit
  lit' and `staypieces' says about higher education and academia. Studies in Higher Education,
  47(3), 560-571. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2020.1770714
   Mawson, K., & Abbott, I. (2017). Supervising the professional doctoral student: Less process
  and progress, more peripheral participation and personal identity. Management in
  Education, 31(4), 187-193. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892020617738182
   Pilerot, O. (2016), A practice-based exploration of the enactment of information literacy
  among PhD students in an interdisciplinary research field. Journal of Documentation, 72(3),
   414-434. https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-05-2015-0056
   Skakni, I. (2018) Doctoral studies as an initiatory trial: Expected and taken-for-granted
  practices that impede PhD students' progress. Teaching in Higher Education, 23(8), 927-944.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2018.1449742
  Yue, H., Fu, X. (2017) Rethinking graduation and time to degree: A fresh perspective. Research
  in Higher Education, 58, 184-213. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-016-9420-4

Websites
32 | 2. SUPERVISION: ACCOUNTING FOR TIME

     9 things you should consider before embarking on a PhD
     10 tips to finishing your PhD faster
     Trainee Tuesday: Treat your PhD like a job
     Treat Graduate School like it's your day job

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Gasson, S. C. (2023). Early career researcher pathways: A narrative inquiry. Queensland University of
Technology. https://eprints.qut.edu.au/239442/
                                                                                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 33

3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY
PRACTICE

   Christine Bruce and Susan Gasson

     Why read this chapter?

     Collaboration is a key to successful supervision, ensuring rich engagement and exchange.
     Discover how to initiate and maintain strong collaborative research networks using the
     elements of a collaborative research framework, including:

          · trust and respect
          · informal, formal and sanctioned networks
          · inclusive, innovative, inspiring and informing outcomes.
     Then, consider building the two elements of collaborative capacity in your higher degree
     researchers:
          · distributed leadership
          · seven faces of the informed researcher.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=77

This chapter is informed by a collaborative research culture framework that the authors developed and
have applied in recent years (Gasson et al, 2020). The framework has been used in workshops locally and
globally, with collaborative capacity being the most recent addition to the framework (Aisoli-Orake et
al; Maybee et al, 2022). Familiarity with the framework will allow you to consider collaborative practices
that may enhance supervisory relationships, the higher degree researcher experience and the progress of the
project.
34 | 3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE

Elements of the collaborative research culture
framework

In this chapter, we introduce and illustrate the elements of the collaborative research culture framework,
and provide examples of its application in supervisory practices. These practices are designed to enhance
the research education experiences of your higher degree researchers and allow you to manage some of the
workload challenges associated with supervision. Through discussion of examples, you may see practices
that you are already using, or that you would like to try in the future. Figure 3.1 illustrates the elements of
the framework to be discussed.
                                                                                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 35

    Figure 3.1 The Elements of the Collaborative Research Framework by Susan Gasson and Christine
    Bruce, used under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

The roots of collaboration - Trust and respect

The capacity to build trust and respect with your candidates is a valuable supervisory practice. In this
36 | 3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE

section, we explore how supervisors can build trust and respect to maintain a long-lasting relationship. This
will ensure that you and your candidate(s) harness the power of your combined knowledge and expertise to
realise the richest possible outcomes. These qualities are equally important in other research collaborations.

Establishing trust and respect involves providing a shared safe space where you and your higher degree
researchers can engage in research discussions and activities. Establishing shared understandings and
negotiating expectations will assist in realising that space. Potential candidates and supervisory panel
members can be found in your immediate work or research environment as well as beyond. Good
collaborators value sharing research ideas, finding value in others' interests and ideas, and having different
perspectives inform their evolving research and supervisory practices.

Collaborators from other disciplines may be needed on the supervisory team. You will need to work
with them to find a common language that allows you to meaningfully share ideas and concepts.
Multidisciplinary supervisory panels will be alert, and ready to address variations in the use of syntax,
methodologies, literature, etc. Supervisory panel members can also offer statistical, technical, or other
specialist expertise. Consider the need to augment panels with those external to the academy. These external
supervisors may be approached at professional conferences or industry seminars or other industry engaged
research contexts.

Not every person will be suitable as a supervisor, or candidate, or offer new or relevant research
opportunities. To explore collaborative opportunities explore expectations for what you might do together
and when. Be realistic about the supervision capacity available to invest in the research proposed. Look
for reciprocity, evidenced by an equal commitment to the research. Perhaps you take turns setting up
meetings, exchanging information, or responding to draft proposals. Be open about the process you follow
in considering a new candidate or supervisory panel member. And, be honest if you are not interested in
progressing the connection, or do not wish to follow up further.

The fields of collaboration - Informal, formal and
sanctioned

Supervisors have opportunities to welcome higher degree researchers into a range of networks. They
in turn may have networks that may be of value to you. In planning to build networks with a higher
degree researcher it may be useful to consider the three fields of collaboration (i.e., informal, formal, and
sanctioned).

The informal field can be a single casual conversation, with no expectation of further contact. Such
conversations may be wide ranging. If considerations are of interest, and contact is easy to maintain,
they may continue over weeks, months or years as you explore topics of interest as time allows. Strong
friendships can result from contact within the informal field.

Formal fields include regular meetings or gatherings. Weekly catch ups with your lab group, cohort
                                                                                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 37

meetings of researchers, and peer reading groups. Formal discussions are usually based on agreed agenda
items or terms of reference. Because of agendas and meeting protocols you can be assured that those
attending have a shared purpose for the gatherings, and expected topics of interest.

Sanctioned networks are those that are informed by signed agreements. A Cotutelle or double degree
agreement that guides engagement with a higher degree researcher enrolled across two universities would be
an example of this. Another would be a grant or scholarship agreement that may guide the terms of funding
and managing a research collaboration. Such agreements may define the scope of work, the participants,
and the dissemination of research outcomes. While there is always latitude in meeting and collaborating a
sanctioned network will be informed by agreed timelines, budgets, collaborators, and contributions.

Most researchers are likely to work across all of these fields, and perhaps work with the same or different
researchers as you move across the three fields. In some disciplines, supervisors will routinely enable new
researchers to participate across these fields. In other disciplines, supervisors may manage participation in
fields in a more measured or incremental way.

Granting or being granted access to fields may be related to the acculturation of health and safety protocols,
codes of conduct or other research related expectations. Supervisory capacity to guide others in making
collaborative connections and contributions is important. Explaining expectations about authorship or
storage of data or licensing of access to findings should occur when relevant and timely. In formal and
sanctioned fields consider your role in guiding the alignment of higher degree researcher contributions
within the broader agendas. Ensure the higher degree researcher understands their role in contributing to
agendas and informs progress of their research interests.

In inviting a higher degree researcher to join a network encourage them to take time to look up and review
research outputs of key stakeholders in that network. Discuss with them how outputs frame researchers'
teaching, and grant funding profiles. Consider together what being in a network means for their research
and researcher development.

The fruits of collaboration - Inspiration, innovation and
inclusivity

The fruits - inspiration, innovation, and inclusivity - describe the wide range of outcomes including
grants and publication. Supervisors take time to explain to higher degree researchers the benefits and
responsibilities that come with being associated with collaborative fruits. While many look forward to the
publications and grants generated, the framework encourages accounting for less tangible fruits that the
collaborative process will bring.

Inspiration and innovation are key fruits realised by the opportunity to participate in a community and
engage in discussion. Discussions can generate inspiration, new energy and enthusiasm for the work at
hand. Discussing ideas with others from disparate backgrounds, or with differing interests, can prompt
38 | 3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE

innovation, new approaches to the work and fresh ways of looking at a problem. By introducing higher
degree researchers to a network, supervisors provide them with the chance to reach out and engage with
wider communities.

By encouraging a spirit of inclusivity within a network, you can create opportunities for participation in
research. As a key member of a network, you can ensure it is open to the ideas and contributions of all
members. Inclusivity informs the negotiation of authorship and citation - enabling the fruits.

Collaborative capacity - Distributed leadership and the
seven faces of the informed researcher

Supervisors can model collaborative capacity for higher degree researchers. Collaborative capacity involves
two elements that make the researcher an active agent in the collaborative process. These elements are
distributed leadership and the seven faces of the informed researcher.

Distributed leadership (Aisoli-Orake et al., 2022) is the first element of collaborative capacity. It is a form
of leadership that overcomes power imbalances, empowering deeper engagement, and acknowledgment
of contributions. Supervisors adopting a distributed leadership model can support others to demonstrate
their areas of strength and delegate responsibility for leading activities that require those skills. Distributed
leadership can be used to create opportunities to expose team members to different methods, conceptual
frameworks, and practices.

The second collaborative capacity element is the informed researcher (Maybee, 2022). There are seven faces
of the informed researcher detailed in Table 3.1.

                       Table 3.1 Seven faces of the informed researcher (Maybee, 2022)

Faces                     Descriptions

Field Awareness and       Communicating appropriately within professional networks in research
Communication             communities

Information Sources       Appropriating relevant information from a range of formal and informal sources to
                          inform research

Information Processes     Adapting information processes to inform personal and collaborative research
                          needs

Information Organization  Organizing information to establish connections between research and
                          information sources

Knowledge Base            Engaging critically with information to understand areas of research
Construction

Knowledge Creation        Generating innovations and creating new knowledge through research, including
                          approaches and solutions

Research Gifts            Making wise use of research for the benefit of society
                                                                                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 39

These faces were adapted from the Seven Faces of Informed Learning (Bruce, 1987). They each speak to a
different aspect of information experience in the research context. Researchers may operate across all seven
faces. Others will use different faces in response to phases of their work, or in interaction with different
people.

  · The Field awareness and communication face is one to be kept in mind when trying to reach out
      across disciplinary silos or sectors. It is a chance to reframe existing information in ways that ensure
      accessibility and meaning for others.

  · The Information sources face prompts consideration of a diverse range of information from forms of
      printed media to music, art and other cultural artefacts as well as digital resources.

  · The Information process face invites thinking about the personal heuristics of research collaborators.
      What are their styles and preferences as they engage with information? This may lead to different
      mechanisms in the research process. Perhaps information artefacts are placed in a common space so
      everyone can view them, or in a drop box that is set up for sharing.

  · Information organisation is concerned with ensuring that stored information is easy to find and
      understand, and connected to relevant projects. In the digital world this may be about setting up files
      and file names that can be pulled together into folders that make information easy to find.

  · Knowledge base construction is concerned with taking existing information and considering its
      meaning and relevance within a particular area of interest. An example of this would be collecting
      patient files. The construction aspect may account for an interest in the age range of patients and the
      term of their illness. This would allow for analysis to answer a question about age as a factor in
      predicting the severity of a patient's illness.

  · The Knowledge creation face is concerned with taking the results of analysis and finding novel ways
      to interpret them to realise solutions or findings. Here the ability to review the outcomes of analysis
      and to share that across a diversity of scholars may prompt new approaches. A geographer may
      suggest revisiting the spread of a disease based on their having been able to access information about
      patterns of travel amongst those who contracted that disease. This may reveal different strains of the
      disease that may, in addition to age, impact the severity of the illness.

  · Research gifts can take numerous forms; their purpose is to transform new knowledge in ways that
      realise social benefits. Examples of gifts include a new application that delivers weather alerts
      effectively, new prescription drugs, or an improved electric car design.

As supervisors, we need to think about how to use these faces. Discuss with your higher degree researcher
and other panel members' faces that may assist with their current phase of candidature. Explore with the
higher degree researcher and supervisory panel their experiences of the faces, or concerns about how the
faces may play into the research plan. Be ready to prompt them to try out a face or to acknowledge where
one has been used to good effect.
40 | 3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE

So what now?

As supervisors, you will make many decisions in working with a higher degree researcher. By
conceptualising the supervisory process as a formal research network you can create opportunities for
higher degree researchers to engage with different fields. Use available opportunities to introduce them to
other higher degree researchers and other academics. Use engagements with other supervisory panels to
extend your practices, and ensure that supervisor panel members work together to manage the workload
associated with the higher degree researcher.

Peer-to-peer writing groups can raise higher degree researcher awareness of the standards of writing
expected at different stages of candidature. This also provides a mechanism for the review of early drafts,
giving others the chance to learn to critique and releasing you for higher level critique.

Research community meetings will allow access to other supervisory panels, giving higher degree
researchers a chance to see different supervisory styles and other perspectives on research work.
Normalising the process of receiving critical feedback from a range of perspectives can improve rapport
and the responsiveness of a higher degree researcher to the iterative and recursive process of developing a
research thesis.

Building collaborative capacity in your higher degree researcher will empower the student and build their
confidence, giving them tools needed to realise research independence. While ensuring that networking
does not distract them from their research and timeline, you can mentor them to engage with broader
networks. Perhaps they hope to work overseas on graduation or to conduct further studies in other
contexts. Help them to consider how to build networks to facilitate their current research but also to
prepare for their transition into the workforce as a researcher on graduation.

Your role as supervisors is not to introduce higher degree researchers to all your networks, or to source all
possible people that might assist them. However, supervisors ensure higher degree researchers realise the
power of networking, and have the confidence and skills to engage in networking as they need to.

The faces of the informed researcher can assist when a higher degree researcher is struggling to progress
their work. Perhaps they need to consider using another face, or have applied a face poorly and need to
revisit the work. Appreciating the information literacy tools available to inform their research work can be
empowering, encouraging independence and the analytical problem solving skills essential for generating
quality research outcomes. Encourage them to take full advantage of their informed research network by
drawing on the service providers from the library, information technology, and e-research team (see also
Chapter 9 and Chapter 10).
                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 41

Some applications

Creating cohorts

Supervisors encourage cohort meetings (groups of higher degree students and supervisors) where research
higher degree researchers can discuss common interests with a range of academic staff. The size of cohorts
varies, but larger cohorts have greater potential capacity to serve the needs of their members. To grow a
cohort, colleagues might agree to focus on common topics, common methods, and researchers drawn from
beyond the immediate university or research education context.

Cohorts come in many shapes and sizes. They can operate successfully face-to-face, virtually or within a
hybrid model. By making cohorts visible they can attract new members and build capacity. Simple things
like naming the cohort and badging its program of activities will give the cohort a presence. Members will
engage better if they are involved in the design of the program of activities. Rules for the cohort can be
shared that ensure members realise it is a safe space where novice researchers and untried ideas can be tested.

A rule might be that members need to share and celebrate successes and failures. Failures are to be treated
positively as learning opportunities and evidence of members' pursuit of excellence. To encourage this you
could normalise members' sharing of their research work. Dedicate time during each meeting for members
to share updates on their research progress. Sharing progress will allow members to learn about others'
research experiences, and help them to benchmark their own performance.

Mentoring and internship

Mentoring and internships allow researchers to access networks in industry, government and the
community. Many higher degree researchers will pursue careers beyond the academy and all researchers
will seek social impact. Connections made through mentorships and internships can help higher degree
researchers learn about different workplaces and identify new research opportunities.

Mentees are encouraged to look actively for and engage with a range of people, open to new mentoring
contexts. Mentors might offer to meet once to discuss career prospects or may engage longer term
facilitating different opportunities. Ideally, institutions will provide resources and/or training to explain
the roles and responsibilities of mentees and mentors and facilitate engagements.

Research degree designers and policymakers around the world are increasingly encouraging higher degree
researcher to engage in internships (McGagh, 2015; Valencia-Forrester, 2019). Internships differ from paid
work in that they involve the researcher engaging in activities that would not normally be the province
of paid staff or be essential to the continuity of the workplace. Well-resourced programs may source and
advertise internship opportunities, others may provide advice to supervisors and higher degree researcher
on establishing internships. One internship model involves three months of full-time work. The program
42 | 3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE

of work designated for the internship allows the researcher to apply their research skills within an industry,
government or community workplace. Arrangements for the payment for and acknowledgement of
internships vary.

Peer reading and writing networks

The research education experience can be a very isolating and lonely time. In pursuing an individual
contribution to knowledge, the novice researcher can feel alienated from family and friends as they focus
on completing their work under severe time constraints. Building peer networks with other higher degree
researchers can be a valuable source of community. In such networks, the higher degree researcher begins
to normalise the unique demands of their candidature journey. Shared experiences and understandings can
create supportive contexts that allow peers to bond and establish valuable learning communities of practice.

Peer networks can offer novice researchers their first opportunities to review others' work. Not only does
this provide a chance to learn to review, but also to gain exposure to others' research and benchmark
performance. Reading or methods networks can provide a way for researchers to share what they have
learned. Network sessions can be designed to allow members to hone their teaching skills, and rehearse
debates and discussions they wish to have with their supervisors. Exposure to different disciplines,
methodologies and literature in network sessions can help researchers to build a deeper appreciation of the
range of approaches that can lead to the creation of new knowledge.

Authorship and publication

Opportunities for the dissemination of research findings or to raise awareness of the work underway to
encourage review and support are to be encouraged. As supervisors speak early and as often as needed
about authorship arrangements. Ensure students understand the requirements and stipulations around
being an author and the responsibilities associated with being an author. Acknowledgement of
contribution is part of the code of practice for research and is key to collaborative sustainability.

Now do it

Use the framework provided in Figure 3.1 to map out your current key research networks. Think about the
health of those networks by considering the levels of trust and respect demonstrated within those networks.
What fields are you and your students working in? How could you transition between fields should you
wish to? What inspires you or your students? How can you ensure that your research team is open and
inclusive? Is there more you can do to build rapport?

If you are looking to build capacity, consider what networks are available to you, or those you might
find useful, and consider building new or refining current networks. Create a plan to form a mentoring
                                                                                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 43

community or peer-to-peer reading group, to help you make time to prioritise your research and work
through any challenges that may be hindering your progress.

Use this What happens if I collaborate workbook to document your collaborations and to facilitate
discussions with your higher degree researchers about building collaborative capacity.

     Additional Resources

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

        Bozeman, B., Gaughan, M., Youtie, J., Slade, C., & Rimes, H. (2016). Research collaboration
        experiences, good and bad: Dispatches from the front lines. Science and Public Policy, 43(2),
        226-244. https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scv035
        Dodgson, M. (1993). Learning, trust, and technological collaboration. Human Relations, 46(1),
        77.
        Gasson, S. C., & Bruce, C. S. (2018, April 17-19). Supporting higher degree research
        collaboration: A reflection. QPR 2018: 13th Biennial Quality in Postgraduate Research
        Conference, Adelaide, Australia.
        Gazni, A., & Didegah, F. (2011). Investigating different types of research collaboration and
        citation impact: A case study of Harvard University's publications. Scientometrics 87(2),
        251-265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-011-0343-8
        Lemon, N., & Salmons, J. (2020). Collaboration fundamentals. In N. Lemon & J. Salmons (Eds.),
        Reframing and Rethinking Collaboration in Higher Education and Beyond. Taylor & Francis.
        Pare, A. (2019). Scholarship as collaboration: Towards a generous rhetoric. Doctoral Writing
        Significant Interest Group.
        Puljak, L., & Vari, S. (2014). Significance of research networking for enhancing collaboration
        and research productivity. Croatian Medical Journal, 55(3), 181-183. https://doi.org/10.3325/
        cmj.2014.55.181
        Scaffidi, A., & Berman, J. (2011). A positive postdoctoral experience is related to quality
        supervision and career mentoring, collaborations, networking and a nurturing research
        environment. Higher Education, 62(6), 685-698. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-011-9407-1
44 | 3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE

        Shrum, W., Chompalov, I., & Genuth, J. (2001). Trust, conflict and performance in scientific
        collaborations. Social Studies of Science, 31(5), 681-730. https://www.jstor.org/stable/3183103
        Strengers, Y. (2012). Interdisciplinarity and industry collaboration in doctoral candidature:
        Tensions within and between discourses. Studies in Higher Education, 39(4), 1-14.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2012.709498
     Websites
        AJE - Journal Experts. (2019, 14 December 2022). Collaboration in Research [Video]. YouTube.
        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y0cOCZrdyik.
        Blanchard, K. (2011). Collaboration - Affect/Possibility: Ken Blanchard at TEDx in San Diego
        [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HKGkBRk1kSo

References

    While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
    lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Aisoli-Orake, R., Bue, V., Aisi, M., Ambelye, I., Betasolo, M., Nuru, T., Dora K., Akanda, S., Denano, S.,
   Yalambing L., Gasson, S., Spencer, E., Bruce, C. & Roberts, N. (2022) Creating sustainable networks to
   enhance women's participation in higher education in Papua New Guinea. Journal of Higher Education
   Policy and Management, 44(2), pp. 208-220.

Bruce, C. S., & Gasson, S. C. (2017). What happens if I collaborate? Queensland University of Technology.
   https://eprints.qut.edu.au/115549/

Gasson, S. C., & Bruce, C. (2021). Collaborative research culture framework V5. Queensland University

of          Technology.                          https://eprints.qut.edu.au/227055/1/

Collaborative_Research_Culture_Framework_V5.pdf

Gasson, S. C., Bruce, C. S., & Maybee, C. (2020). Creating collaborative capacity in early career research
   writers. TEXT: Journal of Writing and Writing Programs, Special Issues Series, 59(1), 1-14.

Maybee, C., Gasson, S. C., Bruce, C. S., & Somerville, M. (2022). Faces of the informed researcher:
                                                                                   3. COLLABORATION AS A SUPERVISORY PRACTICE | 45

   Enabling research collaboration. Journal of Information Literacy, 16(1), 91-107. https://doi.org/
   10.11645/16.1.3101

McGagh, J., Marsh, H., Western, M., Thomas, P., Hastings, A., Mihailova, M., & Wenham, M. (2015).
   Review of Australia's research training system. Report for the Australian Council of Learned
   Academies. Accessed July 2023. https://acola.org/

Valencia-Forrester, F. (2019). Internships and the PhD: Is this the future direction of work-integrated
   learning in Australia? International Journal of Work - Integrated Learning, 20(4), 389-400.
   https://www.ijwil.org/files/IJWIL_20_4_389_400.pdf
46 | CAPACITY BUILDING

CAPACITY BUILDING
                                                                       4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY | 47

4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR
WRITING ECOLOGY

   Juliet Lum and Susan Mowbray

     Why read this chapter?

     Writing is an integral aspect of candidature; it's also an area many Higher Degree Researchers,
     and supervisors, find challenging. This chapter presents academic or research writing
     development within a broader ecological model of higher education. It outlines several
     initiatives you, as a supervisor, can offer or recommend as additional avenues to help
     strengthen your Higher Degree Researchers' writing and engagement. These avenues sit at
     different strata of the writing ecology and include:

          · providing co-authoring opportunities
          · facilitating writing groups
          · developing peer-led groups
          · running writing retreats
          · developing an `always available' bank of online resources.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=92

Introduction

Traditionally, Higher Degree Researchers (HDRs) would rely almost exclusively on their supervisors to
provide all the guidance, training, advice and feedback needed to complete their degrees, particularly
in those jurisdictions where the PhD has no coursework component. Today, however, Higher Degree
Researchers have access to a much broader range of support, traversing departmental, institutional, and
  48 | 4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY

  national boundaries. In this chapter, and drawing on the work of Bronfenbrenner (1977), we conceive this
  broader range of supports as being part of a wider writing ecology. For us, an ecological model of academic
  writing support recognises the importance of establishing social avenues of writing support. These avenues
  can promote a sense of belonging and community; they can also facilitate Higher Degree Researchers'
  engagement and progression. Here we describe five avenues you, as a supervisor, may implement as
  additional avenues to help strengthen Higher Degree Researcher' writing and engagement.

 Introducing Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Systems
 Model

  As Graduate Researcher Developers, we see supervisors and ourselves as part of a larger learning - and
  more specifically, writing - ecology (Bronfenbrenner, 1977), of which the Higher Degree Researcher is
  at the centre. Our notion of a writing ecology is informed by Bronfenbrenner's (1977) ecological model
  of development.1 In his model, Bronfenbrenner positions the individual at the centre of four interrelated
  and nested systems - the micro-, meso-, exo- and macro-systems. These complex, interacting systems
  capture the two-way inter-relationships and interactions of the individual within their immediate and
  wider contexts. The micro-system denotes the individual's immediate context i.e. the home, family, place of
  work, school, and community. The meso-system captures the interactions between and across two or more
  micro-systems e.g. home and work. The exo-system relates to contexts that are more removed from the
  individual but may still be influential on or influenced by the individual e.g. wider societal factors/policies.
  The macrosystem, as the broadest context in the model, encompasses the institutional systems of society
  (e.g. economic, educational, political and legal), as depicted in Figure 4.1 (Rosa & Tudge, 2013).

1. Bronfenbrenner's ecological system model evolved over time from the Ecological Systems Model to the Bioecological Model, as detailed in Rosa
  and Tudge (2013).
                                                                       4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY | 49

    Figure 4.1 Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Theory Model by Abbey Elder, used under CC BY-SA 4.0
    licence

Here, we conceptualise these interrelated systems within the context of doctoral education and Higher
Degree Researchers. Specifically, we see the micro-system as Higher Degree Researchers' interpersonal
connections (e.g. Supervisor(s), Graduate Researcher Developers, peers); we see the meso-system as the
institutional supports available to Higher Degree Researchers (e.g. 24/7 online resources, writing retreats,
Show Up & Write sessions, Thesis Writing Groups, workshops, collaborative writing); and we see the
exo-system as the wider doctoral writing community (e.g. (inter)national conferences, blogs, symposiums,
Special Interest Groups/Communities of Practice), with Doctoral Education policies and higher education
values and expectations overarching each system as the macro-system (see Figure 4.2). Separately and in
combination these areas (in)form the writing ecology in which we work.
50 | 4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY

Figure 4.2 HDR Writing Ecology by Juliet Lum and Susan Mowbray, used under a CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 licence

Developing a supportive writing ecology

The initiatives we describe below have proven to optimise the writing support provided to Higher Degree
Researchers at our institutions. As a supervisor, and depending on your context, you may have more or less
capacity to make these supports available to your Higher Degree Researchers. For instance, some of these
initiatives will be accessible to Higher Degree Researchers regardless of location or institution; others may
require some initial set up by institutional staff; and yet others may run as special events on a semi-regular
basis, e.g. annually or once a semester. In the absence of dedicated Graduate Researcher Developers to run
more frequent events or facilitate regular groups, we recommend that you collaborate with colleagues such
as fellow supervisors, department/faculty Higher Degree Researcher directors, library or writing centre
staff; namely, others who make up your Higher Degree Researchers' writing ecology.

Co-authoring as part of the micro-system

Publishing is important, especially for Higher Degree Researchers aiming for academic positions post-
PhD and co-authoring publications are recognised as a very effective way to fast-track Higher Degree
Researchers' writing confidence and identification as fully-fledged researchers (Inouye & McAlpine, 2019;
Kamler, 2008; Mantai, 2017; Thomson & Kamler, 2012). Co-authoring with supervisor(s) is a natural way
to expose Higher Degree Researchers with no academic publishing experience to steps in the publishing
process such as selecting journals, complying with author guidelines, negotiating author order, dealing with
                                                                       4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY | 51

rejection, corresponding with editors, responding to reviewers' comments, and proofing galley copies. You
may also consider providing opportunities for your Higher Degree Researchers to co-author with other
Higher Degree Researchers, which has been proven to increase their writing and collaboration skills and
foster their personal epistemology (Lam et al., 2018).

Facilitated writing groups as part of the
meso-system

Synchronous (real-time) online gatherings enable groups of geographically dispersed Higher Degree
Researchers to meet, see and hear each other, and to jointly compose and comment on documents in
real time. Videoconferencing and webinar tools such as Zoom, Skype, Google Meet, and Microsoft Teams
mean Higher Degree Researchers who were previously unable or unwilling to meet in person can now join
any kind of group that would traditionally meet in face-to-face mode.

Videoconferencing software is particularly well suited to small (fewer than 8) group meetings, such as
doctoral writing groups, group supervision meetings, reading groups/journal clubs, and peer
accountability groups. Online Higher Degree Researcher groups that meet regularly in real time tend to be
more effective in delivering learning benefits because all members are expected to contribute in some way,
such as preparing a draft for peer feedback, responding to that feedback, contributing to a discussion of
a set reading, responding to another member's text, announcing and reporting on one's own work goals,
giving advice or sharing experiences on a particular candidature issue, and so on. Real-time video access also
discourages `lurking' (passively observing without ever contributing) during gatherings or turning up only
when one feels like it; in other words, synchronous online group meetings promote engagement.

Both of our institutions run online writing groups for doctoral students. Participants value the
opportunity to share their work with other members in a familiar and comfortable space and have reported
that they experience "less negative judgment and criticism." The opportunities to have productive
discussions, give and receive helpful feedback and "learn from peers" while "being accountable to each
other by reading through our writing and pinning our advice to specific needs of each student" are
key aspects and opportunities gained from participating in the sessions. In addition to benefitting from
peers' feedback, gaining different perspectives on their writing, and reviewing others' work, online group
participants value learning with and from fellow Higher Degree Researchers, rather than alone with
an online video or 1:1 with their supervisor. Online writing groups also help to reduce isolation while
simultaneously promoting Higher Degree Researchers' sensibilities of the expectations of academic
writing.

Many of the members of the online Higher Degree Researcher groups we run are part-time Higher
Degree Researchers due to full-time work and/or parenting/carer duties. These candidates have even
fewer opportunities than on-campus Higher Degree Researchers to come into contact with peers; for
these students, interacting regularly with other Higher Degree Researchers who can empathise with the
52 | 4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY

challenges of juggling research with other responsibilities is particularly rewarding. It is also worth noting
the online Higher Degree Researcher groups are not restricted to running in business hours or to
candidates who identify as off-campus. Nor are they limited to one format; facilitated writing groups at our
institutions include fortnightly Thesis Writing Groups (TWGs) and weekly (two hour) and first Saturday
of the month and daily Show Up & Write sessions. Flexibility in delivery time, mode and group make-up
are key factors in sustaining the momentum of each group and/or session.

Peer-led groups as part of the meso-system

Enabling Higher Degree Researchers to run their own `engagement rings' such as peer support/
accountability groups, study groups, writing groups and/or reading groups also supports Higher Degree
Researchers' engagement. Kumar and Atkinson (2017) report that peer study groups promote social
networks and safe spaces to ask "beginner questions...how to structure the writing, how to write a lit
review...which they would not ask their supervisors" (p. 7). A member of an online peer accountability
group at one of our institutions reported on "`Aha!' moments" stating that even though she had received
similar advice from her supervisor, "it wasn't until [another group member] mentioned it because she had
just come off interviewing a whole bunch of people so she was sort of at that phase of her thesis, [that] it
made more sense."

Peer groups run by HDRs will often form organically once students from the same department or with
similar research interests or candidature experiences meet each other at seminars, conferences, writing
retreats and other events. However, for part-time Higher Degree Researchers and/or those rarely on
campus, such opportunities to encounter peers are rare. Additionally, some may attend Higher Degree
Researcher events and seminars but lack the confidence or cultural capital to form a peer learning group.
In these cases, the institution or you as a Supervisor can play an important role in initiating such groups.
For some groups, all that is needed to initiate the group is to introduce Higher Degree Researchers to each
other and provide a tool kit (such as this one for writing groups or this one for accountability groups)
with instructions on running the group; for other groups, you or a Graduate Researcher Developer at your
institution can facilitate the first 2-3 meetings and then let the Higher Degree Researchers run the group
themselves.

Writing retreats/intensives as part of the
meso-system

Writing Retreats/Intensives provide Higher Degree Researchers with an extended dedicated time and
space to significantly progress their thinking and writing. Writing retreats/intensives aim to minimise
distractions and maximise quiet time for Higher Degree Researchers to write in an environment that
includes opportunities to stimulate thinking and productivity. Writing retreats can be structured or
                                                                       4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY | 53

unstructured, and can be a residential (overnight), on campus, or online experience. A structured writing
retreat, for example, may include the following: sessions at the beginning, middle, and end of each day
where Higher Degree Researchers report and reflect on their goals for each session; workshops on a
particular aspect of doctoral writing e.g. making your argument, thesis structure, writing a strong
introduction; bookable 1:1 consultation times; and scheduled breaks for Higher Degree Researchers to
socialise. The workshops may be mandatory or optional and/or offered alongside the independent writing
sessions. In unstructured writing retreats, the focus is on Higher Degree Researchers independently
progressing their work in morning and afternoon writing sessions. Regardless of the writing retreat's form,
it's important to offer short activities to refresh Higher Degree Researchers' energy levels in between the
independent writing sessions. These may include a mindfulness/meditation session, a walk, wrist yoga,
exercise session or similar.

Facilitating online writing retreats can be a more cost-effective and inclusive option than running
residential retreats. One of our institutions ran several 3-day online writing retreats over Zoom during the
COVID-19 pandemic. While "retreat" may be a misnomer if participants are joining from their regular
study location, extended online events can nevertheless provide an institutionally sanctioned reason/
permission for participants to retreat from regular activities to work on their thesis, encouraging them to
activate an out-of-office email auto-response, and to cancel appointments for the duration of the retreat as
they would for an out-of-town conference. This provides the headspace to devote to writing. The success
of writing retreats lies in the co-presence of others engaged in the act of writing and the opportunity to
normalise one's experience by interacting with other Higher Degree Researchers; these can be achieved at
online writing retreats by requesting that all participants leave their videos on during writing hours and
by increasing the social elements of the event, such as "lucky door prizes" drawn at random points in the
retreat with prizes such as thesis writing books, introducing facilitators in a less-formal way (e.g. showing a
pet on screen, sharing a life hack), and facilitated group fitness and/or mindfulness sessions before or after
the lunch break.

Online resource banks as part of the meso- and
exo-systems

All of these avenues can be supplemented with a bank of online resources. Making resources available
online 24/7 provides Higher Degree Researchers with an `always available' point of reference; it can
also promote Higher Degree Researchers' autonomy. Developing a `bank' of free-to-access static training
materials such as online manuals, video tutorials, `banks' of collated materials on key areas such as the
methodology, literature review and discussion chapters and recorded lectures can provide much-needed,
easily accessible instructional material. Some helpful sites include The University of Manchester's
Academic Phrasebank, Purdue University's Online Writing Lab (OWL), and research guides at your own
university, such as Macquarie University's Subject and Research Guides. Similarly, PhD-focused blogs and
social media groups can function as a proxy for a community of practice, as advice and individual PhD
54 | 4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY

research experiences can be shared and commented on by others engaged in the same endeavour (Guerin,
Aitchison, & Carter, 2020). Subscribing to popular PhD-focused blogs ensures the latest post is delivered
straight to your email. These blogs also curate their content so you can easily find all the relevant posts to a
particular area in one click. Some of the blogs we regularly access are Patter, Doctoral Writing, Explorations
of Style, and Research Whisperer. Links to other blogs and video collections relevant to doctoral study/
supervision can be found at the end of this chapter.

Caveats and challenges

Creating opportunities for social and peer learning that acknowledge and cater for the different locations,
schedules, preferences, and degrees of access of today's Higher Degree Researchers is feasible but comes
with its own set of challenges. Sufficient staff need to be willing and available to work to facilitate online
writing sessions, groups and retreats and out-of-hours meetings. Similarly, it can prove very difficult to
find a mutually convenient meeting time for online groups comprised of Higher Degree Researchers
who are full-time workers or located in very different time-zones. Running webinars and live-streaming
presentations may require someone (e.g. another staff member or perhaps a non-participating student) in
addition to the facilitator to attend to the technology and online attendees' activity, particularly for hybrid
sessions where there are some Higher Degree Researchers attending in person and others online. It can also
be challenging to build up a network of presenters to reliably deliver monthly information sessions. This
means alternative plans need to be ready. Communicating via videoconference can prove challenging in
larger groups and when there are connection issues. Peer-led groups require a certain amount of training or
at least briefing of participants and tend to work only with Higher Degree Researchers who are pro-active,
self-disciplined and committed to each other's progress to keep groups actively engaged beyond the first
few meetings.

Offering the kinds of writing support suggested above may be challenging for supervisors with little or
no centrally provided Higher Degree Researcher support, so a team approach is highly recommended:
individual Faculties, Departments or Schools will usually appoint a staff member to oversee Higher Degree
Researcher training, so working with that person and other colleagues on the initiatives would increase
feasibility and sustainability. Another challenge - regardless of central provisioning - is encouraging
your Higher Degree Researchers to access available resources, training and support. The vignette below
illustrates how this could be done in the context of a regular supervision meeting.

Conclusion

The importance and value of different writing initiatives in helping Higher Degree Researchers progress
cannot be underestimated. Creating a welcoming writing ecology that offers HDRs various modes to
engage in is an investment in building Higher Degree Researcher communities within and across the wider
institution. Such communities can help sustain Higher Degree Researchers' motivation, facilitate their
                                                                       4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY | 55

progression in the doctoral undertaking, promote retention and help to enhance their experiences. They
can also involve Higher Degree Researchers, and by extension, their supervisors and the broader institution,
in promoting a wider community of thinking and learning people.

       Vignette
       The Supervisor "Professor Mitchell" and Higher Degree Researcher "Sam" have spent the
       last 45 minutes discussing data analysis etc. There are 15 minutes left of the consultation
       hour.
       Supervisor: That sounds like a good plan. So, how are you going with your writing? I notice
       you haven't sent me anything to read for the last few months.
       Sam: Oh, I've been reading a lot. ... Actually, I've been struggling to write anything on my
       thesis. There's so much to read and learn! When I read a paper, it just leads to other papers
       which sound important to read.
       Supervisor: Ah yes, it's a bit like the infinite social media scroll, isn't it! There's always more
       literature to read and review; you'll never reach the end of the recommended reading list!
       Sam: Oh no! Really?
       Supervisor: Yes, but it doesn't mean that you can't start writing. You actually know more
       than you think, and you do have something to say. It sounds like you might find a research
       writing group helpful, to motivate you with your writing.
       Sam: What's a research writing group?
       Supervisor: It's where a group of researchers - in your case, Higher Degree Researcher
       candidates - meet regularly to give feedback on each other's drafts: the group focuses on
       one member's writing each time. In fact, two of my other Higher Degree Researchers have
       been expressing an interest in starting a group, so I can get you in touch with them.
       Sam: Thanks, Prof Mitchell. I'm not sure I'm ready to join one of those groups quite yet as I
       haven't been working on a draft in a while. There are so many things going on in my life I
       can't find time for my writing! My kids need me to drive them around to activities, my
       parents often call on me to do jobs for them, and then there are so many emails to respond
       to from the university.
       Supervisor: That sounds hard, Sam. You've got a lot on your plate... I wonder whether you
       might like to join the weekly Show Up and Write sessions that a couple of my colleagues are
       hosting on Friday afternoons for Higher Degree Researchers and other academics in our
       department? Those sessions will give you permission to say no to other things and to
       switch off your email so that you can focus solely on writing for a few hours every week.
56 | 4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY

       You can join online or in person. I attended several Show Up and Write sessions last year
       and wrote a journal article during that time!
       Sam: Wow, that sounds like exactly what I need. I'll definitely sign up!
       Supervisor: And I'll email you some of my favourite blogs about research writing and doing a
       PhD. Oh, don't worry: they're very light compared to the other readings we discussed earlier
       in today's meeting! They're the sort of thing you can read while waiting for a train or your
       kids. I think you'll find the advice they give really useful.
       Sam: Okay, sure. Thanks so much, Professor Mitchell. All these are really great suggestions! I
       feel much more positive about my writing now.

     Activity - To build and evidence your practice, as part of the meso-system:

         1. What other avenues of support could you introduce at your institution to bring Higher
             Degree Researchers together, either face-to-face or virtually, to help build connections
             and progress their writing?

         2. Are there internet technologies you could optimise to extend the avenues of support
             available to Higher Degree Researchers?

         3. Brainstorm, by yourself or with colleagues, avenues of support you could offer to Higher
             Degree Researchers, either as a disciplinary or whole group. Here are a few to get
             started:

          · Monthly reading and discussion group
          · Monthly lunch club and presentation
          · Weekly 2 hour Show Up & Write session

     Additional Resources
                                                                       4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY | 57

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

     Websites, blogs and vlogs, as part of the exo-system
     The University of Manchester's Academic Phrasebank
     Purdue University's Online Writing Lab (OWL)
     Macquarie University's Subject and Research Guides
     The University of Auckland's Quick©ite tool
     The Hidden Curriculum in Doctoral Education
     Explorations of Style
     Patter
     Doctoral Writing
     Thesis Whisperer
     Research Degree Insiders
     Helen's Word YouTube channel
     Tara Brabazon on YouTube
     Cecile Badenhorst on YouTube
     Online PhD Groups
     Online PhD-StayOnTrack Groups

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.
58 | 4. ESTABLISHING A SUSTAINABLE HDR WRITING ECOLOGY

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. American
   Psychologist, 32, 513-531.

Guerin, C., Aitchison, C., & Carter, S. (2020) Digital and distributed: Learning and teaching doctoral
   writing through social media. Teaching in Higher Education, 25(2), 238-254. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   13562517.2018.1557138

Inouye, K., & McAlpine, L. (2019). Developing academic identity: A review of the literature on doctoral
   writing and feedback. International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 14, 1-31.

Kamler, B. (2008). Rethinking doctoral publication practices: Writing from and beyond the thesis. Studies
   in Higher Education, 33(3), 283-294.

Kumar, V. & Aitchison, C. (2017). Peer facilitated writing group: Programmatic approach to doctoral
   student writing. Teaching in Higher Education, 23(3), 360-373. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   13562517.2017.1391200

Lam, C. K. C., Hoang, C. H., Lau, R. W. K., Cahusac de Caux, B., Chen, Y., Tan, Q. Q., & Pretorius, L.
   (2019). Experiential learning in doctoral training programmes: Fostering personal epistemology through
   collaboration. Studies in Continuing Education, 41(1), 111-128.

Mantai, L. (2017). Feeling like a researcher: Experiences of early doctoral students in Australia. Studies in
   Higher Education, 42(4), 636-650.

Rosa, E. M., & Tudge, J. R. H. (2013). Urie Bronfenbrenner's theory of human development: Its evolution
   from ecology to bioecology. Journal of Family Theory & Review, 5, 243-258. https://doi.org/10.1111/
   jftr.12022

Thomson, P., & Kamler, B. (2012). Writing for peer reviewed journals: Strategies for getting published.
   Routledge.
   5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE | 59

5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING
HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE
THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE

   Anna Kokavec

     Why read this chapter?

     Sustainable higher degree research supervision requires a supportive and collaborative
     relationship between supervisors and higher degree researchers, which involves regular
     communication, clear expectations, and feedback. Higher degree researchers can face many
     challenges during their candidature which can impact their academic progress and well-being.
      When things do go wrong it is essential supervisors have the tools to identify problems early
     and provide appropriate guidance and support.
     The Graduate Research Engagement Assessment Tool (GREAT) has been specifically
     designed as an early intervention communication tool to assist supervisors and higher degree
     researchers identify, assess, and problem-solve potential risks. The GREAT includes:

          · self-assessment section to build higher degree researchers' self-awareness and problem-
             solve risk

          · questionnaire and scoring criteria to identify and quantify risk
          · opportunity to explore and request support
          · step-by-step guide to give supervision meetings structure
          · step-by-step guide to resolve challenges.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=94
60 | 5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE

Introduction

Sustainable research supervision is a multi-factorial construct that includes the creation of a supportive and
inclusive research culture, the nurturing of students' intellectual and personal growth, and the responsible
utilization of research resources. The overall aim of sustainable research supervision is to support resilient
and socially aware higher degree researchers who can thrive in today's ever-changing academic world
(Kaharudin et al., 2022).

Sustainable research supervisors put the well-being and advancement of their higher degree researchers
first by encouraging teamwork, fostering critical thinking, and promoting ethical research practices. In this
context, adopting a sustainable approach means prioritizing collaborative problem-solving, mentorship,
and two-way communication (Allan, 2019).

Facilitating sustainable supervision through early
intervention

Completing a higher research degree involves embarking on a 3-5-year journey that for many can be
very rewarding. One of the notable highs of completing a higher research degree is the opportunity
for significant intellectual growth. Higher degree researchers engage in deep exploration of a specific
subject, which leads to expanded knowledge and expertise in their chosen field of study. There is the
potential to make an original contribution and advance knowledge, which can be intellectually fulfilling
and professionally rewarding (van Rooji et al., 2021). However, as with any journey, it is not unusual to
encounter challenges along the way (Beasy et al., 2021). For example

 1. Goal-oriented challenges revolve around differing opinions or priorities regarding research goals,
      performance criteria, methodology selection, or project milestones.

 2. Administrative challenges relate to organizational or administrative aspects of research projects,
      such as defining roles and responsibilities, establishing reporting relationships, and clarifying
      decision-making authority.

 3. Interpersonal challenges arise from differences in work styles, communication preferences, or
      personality clashes among researchers, supervisors, and/or team members.

The evidence suggests that if (or when) problems occur, early intervention on the part of the supervisor is
critical to the success of a research project (O'Brien et al., 2008). It is essential that any challenges facing
higher degree researchers can be identified early and appropriate strategies put in place to mitigate risk
and support the higher degree researcher. By recognizing challenges before they become overwhelming,
supervisors can empower higher degree researchers to proactively seek the necessary support, and resources,
and make timely adjustments to their research plans and methodologies (Norton, 2011; Homer et al.,
2021).
   5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE | 61

Facilitating sustainable supervision through effective
communication

The relationship between higher degree researchers and supervisors plays a pivotal role in their academic
and personal growth. Supervisors assume a crucial position by offering guidance, mentorship, and
expertise, enabling students to navigate the intricate path of their research journey (Brownlow et al.,
2023). Leveraging their knowledge, supervisors provide invaluable insights that shape the research project's
trajectory, refine methodologies, and cultivate critical thinking skills (Satariyan et al., 2015).

Recent findings from a systematic review underscore the importance of fostering open, supportive, and
frequent communication between higher degree researchers and their supervisors, as it directly correlates
with student success and satisfaction. The consistency in shared work values, including communication
style, interaction frequency, and adherence to timelines, is perceived by both supervisors and researchers as
a measure of the strength of their relationship (Sverdlik et al., 2018). These key elements create a supportive
and constructive environment where ideas can be exchanged, any challenges discussed and addressed, and
knowledge shared (Berridge et al., 2010).

Incorporating effective communication practices into a sustainable supervisory approach can significantly
impact the engagement and progression of higher degree researchers. When faced with challenges, actively
involving higher degree researchers in constructive dialogues, and actively soliciting feedback fosters the
development problem-solving skills, critical thinking abilities, and emotional intelligence (London et al.,
2023).

Graduate Research Engagement Assessment Tool

The Graduate Research Engagement Assessment Tool (GREAT) is a multifaceted early intervention
instrument that promotes open and effective communication and instils a sense of empowerment among
higher degree researchers as they advance their studies. The complete GREAT tool can be divided into four
sections and includes:

 1. Self-assessment section to build higher degree researchers' self-awareness and problem-solve risk.
 2. Risk assessment questionnaire and scoring criteria to identify and quantify risk.
 3. Opportunity for HDRs to explore and request support.
 4. Step-by-step guide for facilitating group discussion and staying on track.

          Step-by-step guide for managing and resolving challenges.

For anyone looking to improve their communication skills, the GREAT is an invaluable communication
resource, which has the capacity to significantly assist both supervisors and higher degree researchers
throughout their collaborative research endeavours. Utilizing the GREAT affords supervisors and higher
62 | 5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE

degree researchers the chance to work together and proactively identify and manage challenges before they
turn into obstacles that could jeopardize the project. A copy of the complete JCU GREAT form is available
[Word document].

1. Self-assessment

The self-assessment part of the GREAT consists of six items. The aim is to develop self-awareness and
accept responsibility for any challenges before they turn into roadblocks. Completing the self-assessment
part of the GREAT can ensure supervisors and higher degree researchers are on the same page with respect
to progress and expectations. A copy of the JCU HSSDP - HDR Student Self-directed Project Assessment
form is available [Word document].

Items 1-4 are completed by all members of the higher degree research team and provide an opportunity for
higher degree researchers and supervisors to reflect on:

  · "How are things going?"
  · The information provided by the university pertaining to the expectations of a supervisor and higher

      degree researchers.
  · "What are my expectations?"

There is also an opportunity to brainstorm and problem-solve any challenges by thinking about possible
options and outcomes before deciding on the best option for moving forward.

2. Risk assessment

Before completing item 5 "Do I need additional support?" the higher degree researcher is directed to
completing a risk assessment. This provides an opportunity to build self-awareness and identify risk
associated with six factors (i.e., physical health, social support, research engagement, mental health,
personal wellbeing, and environment), previously shown to negatively impact higher degree researchers
(Sverdlik et al., 2018). A copy of the JCU HSPRF HDR Student Potential Risk Factors Assessment Tool
form is available [Word document].

The risk assessment contains 25 statements and statements are grouped according to the six factors. For
each statement, the higher degree researcher must choose one of three options (Yes, No, Unsure). Each
choice is weighted as 0, 1, 4, with responses deemed to suggest high risk = 4, moderate-low risk = 1, and
no risk = 0. After reading a statement, the higher degree researcher is required to circle the response that
best describes their circumstances. There are no right or wrong answers and the higher degree researcher
can choose whether to show the completed form to the supervisor or submit it to the Graduate Research
Office.
   5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE | 63

Scoring allows for six Factor scores and a Total risk score to be calculated. Total risk scores can range from
0 to 100, with a Total score above 12 deemed to suggest the higher degree researcher may be at risk.

After completing the risk assessment, the higher degree researcher is asked to reflect on responses with a
risk score of 1 or 4 and use the information provided in the risk assessment scoring criteria as a guide to
determine whether a meeting with the primary supervisor needs to be scheduled. If the Total risk score
recommends arranging a meeting with the supervisor the meeting should be arranged as soon as possible.

The higher degree researcher is responsible for contacting the supervisor and asking that a meeting be
scheduled at a convenient time for all parties involved. Meetings can vary in length, but as a rule, at least 1
hour should be set aside for the meeting to ensure there is plenty of time for discussion. It is important to
make sure the location where the meeting will take place is in a private space, and free of interruptions.

3. Exploring and requesting support

Item 5 "Do I need additional support?" is only completed by the higher degree researcher. In this section

  · There is space for the total risk score to be inserted.
  · There is also space to provide more information and justify responses to questions with a weighting

      of 1 or 4 for the six factors.
  · The risk assessment scoring criteria is used as a guide to prompt the higher degree researcher to book

      a meeting to discuss support with their primary advisor.

Item 6 "Accessing support" is completed by the higher degree researcher (only). This section

  · Provides an opportunity for the higher degree researcher to let the primary supervisor know support
      is needed.

  · Acts as an information source, highlighting the type of support that is provided by the organization.
  · Provides an opportunity for the higher degree researcher to find out more about specific types of

      support.
  · Provides an opportunity for the higher degree researcher to request external support.

4. Facilitating group discussion and staying on track

The GREAT is very useful because it helps to keep supervision meetings between the primary supervisor
and higher degree researcher on track. Using the GREAT adds structure to the interaction and forces
members of the research team to work through an agenda aimed at assessing the health of the project and
student-supervisor relationship in an open, objective, and collaborative manner.

At least 2 days prior to the scheduled meeting, it is essential to provide all participants with an agenda and a
64 | 5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE

copy of the GREAT self-assessment form. In the communication, attendees should be instructed to bring
the completed self-assessment form with them for group discussion. There is no mandatory requirement
to physically exchange responses during the meeting. After all, we need to be mindful that there may be
some things a higher degree researcher may either not want to or may not be ready to share with others
(for whatever reason), and this needs to be respected. However, if all parties agree, there is no reason
why completed self-assessment forms cannot be exchanged, especially if it helps facilitate open and honest
communication.

Meeting with a higher degree researcher to discuss progress is not just two people having a chat, all meetings
need to have an agenda, and this sent to attendees at least two days before the meeting. The agenda outlines
the goals to be achieved during the meeting and should be based on the following:

 1. How are things going?

          What is working, what is not working?
          Suggestions for improvement to create positive change
          Is additional support required?

 2. Moving forward

          What steps do I need to take to get from A to B?
          What are the measurable outcomes we want to see along the way?

 3. Setting a review date
 4. Evaluating progress

All discussions between a supervisor and higher degree researcher during a meeting should be meticulously
documented. Either the higher degree researcher or supervisor can be responsible for taking minutes of
the meeting. At the end of the meeting the primary supervisor is responsible for distributing copies of the
minutes to attendees and completing the GREAT Supervision and Progression Assessment form. A copy
of the JCU HSPA - HDR Supervision and Progression Assessment form is available [Word document].

The GREAT Supervision and Progression Assessment needs to be an accurate account of group views and
the primary supervisor should ensure that a copy of the completed form is sent to all attendees for comment
and any errors discussed and corrected before it is submitted to the Graduate Research Office for filing.

Resolving difficulties and moving forward

The GREAT is based on the conflict resolution model proposed by Davidson and Wood (2004) and has as
its foundation the six step "no-lose" approach proposed by Gordon (1970), which encourages everyone to
   5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE | 65

accept responsibility and promotes problem-solving, positive relationships and effective communication.
This means the GREAT can also be used in instances where communication between supervisor and a
higher degree researcher has completely broken down.

In instances where the student-supervisor relationship has become unworkable, the GREAT can act as an
objective communication tool for promoting constructive discussion through a mediator. The GREAT
when used in conjunction with a mediator allows for a structured communication space to be created
where everyone can put their case forward and be heard. There is an opportunity to listen to what others
have to say, work together to problem-solve and evaluate options to hopefully reach consensus on the best
solution, and move forward.

The agenda to be worked through at this meeting should be based on the following:

 1. Defining the source of the conflict by focusing on the underlying needs.
 2. Generating a range of possible solutions that could potentially meet the needs of all parties.
 3. Evaluating and assessing the potential of each solution.
 4. Collaboratively deciding on a mutually acceptable solution.
 5. Implementing the chosen solution.
 6. Evaluating the effectiveness of the solution at a later point in time.

The GREAT Supervision and Progression Assessment needs to be treated as a confidential document
that is an accurate account of group views and discussions. All discussions during a meeting should
be meticulously documented and the views of attendees respected. An independent person should be
recruited to take minutes during the meeting. Alternatively, the appointed mediator can be asked to take
notes.

At the end of the meeting, the mediator is responsible for distributing copies of the minutes to attendees,
completing the GREAT Supervision and Progression Assessment form, requesting signatures from
attendees, amending any errors, and submitting the signed form to the Graduate Research Office for
filing. A copy of the JCU HSPA - HDR Supervision and Progression Assessment form is available [Word
document].
66 | 5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE

Putting it into practice

     Case study

       Hassan is a higher degree researcher in Engineering from Oman and is 35 years old. He has
       been married for 5 years and his second child was born two months after he arrived in
       Australia to commence studies. After working as an engineer in Oman he completed his
       Masters in the US. Then he took time out to work as an academic in Oman. Now with
       government funding for three years, he is hoping to complete his doctorate to be eligible for
       tenure and progress along his academic career. He has co-authored two mid-level
       publications and feels confident about his capacity as a researcher. He selected his
       supervisors after many conversations. His supervisors include a male external industry
       partner, a senior female primary advisor and a female secondary advisor who is a 3rd year
       Early Career Researcher. The team has worked and is working with other higher degree
       researchers that have a strong presence as a research group. While he is the first Oman
       higher degree researcher to join the group - it is a very multi-cultural group. They often go
       for coffee and lunch as a group and meet for fortnightly cohort discussions about readings
       and methods and the latest research. He has struggled to engage with the group, feeling
       very stressed almost since arriving because he only has 3 years to complete and because he
       misses his family greatly. He was desolated when he had to request a 3-month extension
       when he was not ready for confirmation. He has a lot of feedback to address in order to
       finalise this milestone. He feels the supervisors are being too demanding, having never
       struggled with deadlines or received so much feedback on his written work before. The
       supervisory relationship is strained but all are trying hard to be receptive as they exchange
       ideas and Hassan works on his research design and literature review.

     Instructions

       Step 1: Download a copy of the JCU HSSDP - HDR Student Self-directed Project Assessment
       [Word document] and complete items 1-4 using the information provided in the case study.

            · How do you think things are going?

                      List the things that are working well and Hassan seems happy about in the
                        space provided on the form.

                      Is Hassan concerned about or does he want to change anything? Complete
                        your response in the space provided on the form.
5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE | 67

                   Overall does Hassan seem happy about his progress?
         · What are Hassan's expectations regarding his situation?

                   Review the information provided to higher degree researchers pertaining to
                     expectations.

                           Do Hassan's expectations align with university expectations?
                   Is there anything more Hassan could be doing?

                           Look at your responses to items 1 and 2 and suggest three ways of
                             improving Hassan's situation.

                           How would implementing these options benefit Hassan?
                           How would each option enhance Hassan's research experience?
                           How would each option impact the final project?
                           What do you think Hassan's best option is at this stage?
    Step 2: Download a copy of the JCU HSPRF - HDR Student Potential Risk Factors
    Assessment Tool [Word document] and use the information provided in the case study to
    answer each of the 25 questions. After you have finished, score the questionnaire, and
    answer the following:

         · What score did Hassan achieve?

                   Would Hassan benefit from accessing additional support?

                           If yes, what type of support would improve Hassan's research
                             experience?

                   Would Hassan benefit from meeting with his primary supervisor?
    Step 3: Summary and recommendations

         · How do you think Hassan is going?
         · Is his project at risk?
         · Would he benefit from receiving additional support?
         · As the primary supervisor, what recommendations would you give to Hassan?
         · Any other comments?
68 | 5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE

     Reference Materials

     · JCU GREAT [Word document]
     · JCU HSSDP - HDR Student Self-directed Project Assessment [Word document]
     · JCU HSPRF HDR Student Potential Risk Factors Assessment Tool [Word document]
     · JCU HSPA - HDR Supervision and Progression Assessment [Word document]

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Allan, G. E. (2019). A systematic review of the evidence base for active supervision in PK-12 settings.
   Behavioral Disorders, 45, 167-182.

Beasy, K., Emery, S., & Crawford, J. (2021). Drowning in the shallows: An Australian study of the PhD
   experience of wellbeing. Teaching in Higher Education, 26, 602-618.

Berridge, E. J., Mackintosh, N. J., & Freeth, D. S. (2010). Supporting patient safety: Examining
   communication within delivery suite teams through contrasting approaches to research observation.
   Midwifery, 26, 512-519.

Davidson, J., & Wood, C. (2004). A conflict resolution model. Theory Into Practice, 43, 6-13.
   https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip4301_2

Gordon, T. (1970). Parent Effectiveness Training: The tested new way to raise responsible children. Plume
   Books.

Homer, S. R., Solbrig, L., Djama, D., Bentley, A., Kearns, S., & May, J. (2021). The Researcher Toolkit:
   A preventative, peer-support approach to postgraduate research student mental health. Studies in
   Graduate and Postdoctoral Education, 12, 7-25.

Kaharudin, I. H., Ab-Rahman, M. S., Abd-Shukor, R., Zaharim, A., Mohd Nor, M. J., Mohd Ihsan, A.
   5. EARLY INTERVENTION: HELPING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS THRIVE THROUGHOUT CANDIDATURE | 69

   K. A., Md Zain, S., Hipni, A., Osman, K., & Idrus, R. (2022). How does supervision technique affect
   research? Towards sustainable performance: Publications and students from pure and social sciences.
   Sustainability. 14, 5696. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14095696

London, M., Sessa, V.I., & Shelley, L.A. (2023). Developing self-awareness: Learning processes for self and
   interpersonal growth. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 10,
   261-288.

Norton, J. (2011). "Getting to the End": Psychological factors influencing research higher degree
   completion. Journal of the Australia and New Zealand Student Services Association, 38, 1-9.

O'Brien, A., Cho, M. A. A., Lew, A-M., Creedy, D., Man, R. H. C., Chan, M. F., & Arthur, D. (2008).
   The need for mental health promotion and early intervention services for higher education students in
   Singapore. International Journal of Health Promotion and Education, 10, 42-48.

Satariyan, A., Getenet, S., & Gube, J., & Muhammad, Y. (2015). Exploring supervisory support in an
   Australian university: Perspectives of doctoral students in an education faculty, Journal of the Australia
   and New Zealand Student Services Association, 46, 1-12.

Sverdlik, A., Hall, N. C., McAlpine, L., & Hubbard, K. (2018). Journeys of a PhD student and
   unaccompanied minors. International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 13, 361-388.

van Rooji, E., Fokkens-Bruinsma, M., & Jansen, E. (2021). Factors that influence PhD candidates' success:
   The importance of PhD project characteristics. Studies in Continuing Education, 43, 48-67.
70 | DIVERSE RESEARCH ENVIRONMENTS

DIVERSE RESEARCH
ENVIRONMENTS
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                        NEW GUINEA | 71

6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER
DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A
DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA NEW
GUINEA

   Dora Jimela Kialo; Frieda Siaguru; Imelda Ambelye; Jillian Blacker; Lydia
   Yalambing; Mirzi Betasolo; Rachel Aisoli-Orake; Sogoing Denano; Susan
   Gasson; and Veronica Bue

     Why read this chapter?

     The key learnings from this chapter are:

          · the context of supervising higher degree researchers in Papua New Guinea
          · the key stakeholders informing success
          · a checklist for success.
     This chapter is informed by the lived experiences of researchers currently living and working in
     Papua New Guinea. As you explore this chapter you may find aspects of this discussion that
     resonate with you regardless of where you are located or the resources that are available to
     you. However, the fundamentals of supervisory practice are nuanced in this chapter to address
     the context for supervision of higher degree researchers in Papua New Guinea. Our exploration
     of this unique research education context contributes to broader discussions of inclusivity,
     equity and diversity in the higher education sector. Our chapter recognises the vulnerability of
     PNG and other less developed nations to global events such as the COVID-19 pandemic, climate
     change, and technological advances. These events have widened disparities between education
     systems and resources of the global north and south. We propose supervisory practices that
     enable diverse collaboration and network engagement, highlighting the strengths and
     opportunities that PNG and other developing countries can contribute to global research
     endeavours. Our chapter is inspired by Ha's (2018) notion of "pockets of possibility" and
     proposes more inclusive approaches to internationalisation (de Wit, 2019).
72 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=103

Introduction

Supervising higher degree researchers in Papua New Guinea (PNG) is informed by its sociocultural,
geographic and economic context. While the country has a wealth of natural resources it ranks 155th
out of 189 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index - lower than other Pacific
Island nations. It maintains diverse cultures across a population of nearly 10.5 million (including more
than 800 spoken languages). The population lives across 3.1 million square kilometres of rugged terrain
that hosts 5% of the world's total biodiversity and the world's third largest expanse of tropical rainforest.
Societal rules and norms continue to deny Papua New Guinean women basic rights, with domestic
violence affecting two-thirds of women in the country. Their access to health care and education, and
representation in government and public policy debates are also limited. This profile invites further
research and engagement from global researchers.

Sustainable development of higher education and research in PNG is constrained by limited funding
and resources, and relatively low participation rates in higher education. Ongoing economic and political
pressures create uncertainty and instability in many aspects of daily life, from public safety to access to the
internet. This context makes it hard for PNG's education system to begin to address global standards for
accreditation and quality assurance and support the creation of opportunities for research networks and
collaboration.

Most of the authors of this chapter are members of a Women in Higher Education SIG (significant
interest group) and all are female and reside in PNG and Australia. PNG authors have completed or are
completing higher degrees by research in Communication and Development Studies, Civil Engineering
and Agriculture at universities in Australia, the Philippines, and Papua New Guinea. Many have been
supervising higher degree researchers, as well as teaching and leading, for more than 10 years at the Papua
New Guinea University of Technology (PNGUoT).

Established in 1965, PNGUoT became an institute of technology in 1970 and then a University of
Technology in 1973. PNGUoT is now one of eight universities operating in PNG. The university
continues to strive to develop guidelines and policies to meet global teaching and research standards
with support from valued international partners in the Asia-Pacific region. As part of its commitment to
women's rights, it supports the Women in Higher Education SIG (established in collaboration with James
Cook University's Cairns Institute) and its activities.

This chapter provides an example of an inclusive collaborative research culture. The PNGUoT authors
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 73

have, with Susan and Jill from Australia, researched and written this chapter to identify ways to strengthen
research capacity and realise the potential of PNGUoT's unique research education environment. It would
be easy to propose addressing a lack of researcher expertise, weak infrastructure and limited resources.
Instead, we focus on the potential of researchers in PNG and the unique research and fieldwork
possibilities offered by the region as value propositions to encourage international collaboration and
investment through inclusive supervisory practices. The authors have drawn on their experiences of
supervision and in supporting higher degree researchers to identify ways for supervisors to ensure higher
degree researchers can progress uniquely framed topics of local interest and potential impact, taking
advantage of access to:

  · a depth and breadth of global and local methodological and theoretical expertise
  · information services and professional development resources
  · adequate infrastructure.

Scene setting - The path to success

Figure 6.1 shows the range of stakeholders who can assist supervisors in creating a path to success for their
higher degree researcher:
74 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

Figure 6.1 Key stakeholders on the HDR path by Rachel Aisoli-Orake, Susan Gasson and Jill Blacker used
under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

The Higher Degree Researcher is at the centre of the model, without them there is no research education
environment. The project topic is defined here as a stakeholder because it strongly influences, and is
influenced by, the skills and capacities of other stakeholders, and the resources and contexts where the
research is conducted. Ensuring the topic can be supported and is sustainable is a primary key to success
in the fragile PNG research education context. The figure emphasises that stakeholders do not operate
in isolation. Accounting for interdependencies between stakeholders is a vital practice for supervisors to
model to higher degree researchers.
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 75

The important factors for success

Topic

Supervisors, in working with their higher degree researcher, will take the lead initially to ensure that the
topic selected aligns with the supervisors' areas of expertise. In the unique PNG context there is also a
need to account for the availability of suitable literature and selection of suitable research design and data
analytics sensitive to the local context. Identification of local fieldwork sites or accessible datasets and tools
is also key. The PNG context is a rich site for research, but researchers need to be alert to socio-cultural,
geographic, resourcing and economic considerations that may affect topics that can be examined, and data
collection practices that will be feasible. These fresh fields ensure the potential for the social impact of
research is rich, despite the need to constrain the focus and scope of higher degree research undertaken.
Leveraging the strengths and expertise of local supervisors and engaged national and international research
networks may enhance the viability of a given topic or proposed research design, and lead to richer more
strategically beneficial research partnerships.

     Case study - Recruiting quality higher degree researchers

       The thesis topic is normally a consideration from pre-admission through to the completion
       of candidature. For example, the selection of higher degree researchers is undertaken by
       each department, after initial screening for entry requirements by the PNGUoT Admission
       committee. The respective postgraduate committee (faculty members) for each department
       meet to screen the applications. During this time the supervisors get to assess the higher
       degree researchers' proposed research topics, and their qualification and experiences in
       conducting research. Through the screening process, the supervisors get to have pre-
       knowledge of the higher degree researchers they would potentially be supervising. Having
       pre-knowledge of the higher degree researcher helps the supervisors in providing the
       necessary supervision and mentoring throughout the postgraduate research journey.
       Another aspect to consider is the logistics if 3 or 4 higher degree researchers have indicated
       their interest to study in a field where there is only one suitable supervisor. Such selection
       can be dictated by the thesis topic, resulting in many higher degree researchers being
       assigned to one supervisor. That is why at times the number of higher degree researchers
       allocated to one supervisor may go over the supervisory limit. This has impacts on both
       supervisory load, and the quality of the supervision that is able to be provided to each of the
       higher degree researchers. Supervisory practices in this context are explored further in the
       next section.
76 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

Supervisors and higher degree researchers

Supervisors must take time to get to know the background, experience and interests of their higher
degree researcher in order to identify a topic that aligns with available expertise, research resources and
networks. Additionally, there is a need to address research integrity and ethical conduct considerations.
PNG guidelines and policy are often in development and may be relatively untested in the local context.
It is for the supervisors to be the guides, aware of potential delays, or difficulties that could arise due to
societal rules and norms or environmental driven constraints. The confidence of higher degree researchers
in the topic and their supervisors will be enriched by open discussion of research design considerations
that result in the setting of realistic plans and approaches to the research process. The tyranny of distance,
when supporting a Higher Degree Researcher located away from campus, is much harsher in PNG. Online
interview data collection, sharing of large data sets or written drafts may not be feasible in a context of
limited internet and electricity supplies. Visits to multiple sites may not be realistic in certain seasons of
the year or in particularly harsh terrain. Finding ways to be available to problem solve and contribute to
discussion with your higher degree researcher on the merits of alternative approaches enriches the learning
and reduces anxiety and frustration when attempting to make steady progress. In time the higher degree
researchers, like their supervisors, will come to navigate around limitations and weaknesses and to access
experts and reliable approaches routinely. Finding ways to optimise use of limited internet services, and
avoid expensive and unreliable postal services, can be essential strategies for supervisors trying to provide
timely feedback.

     Case study - Building positive relationships

       An anecdote shared by a first-time supervisor, who was the principal supervisor of two
       Masters students highlights positive relationship building. "Being a first-time supervisor as
       well as a PhD candidate in the final stages of writing is no easy task. I focus on factors or
       themes I experience, and have dealt with, in order to successfully help the students I
       supervised".

       It is important that supervisors have a positive relationship with their higher degree
       researchers. The supervisors must provide consultative support and feedback and assist in
       networking with the related communities of practices in scientific research and the context
       of the study. Consultation tools including Google apps (Google Sheets, Google Docs, Google
       Slides, Gmail), WhatsApp, Messenger, LinkedIn, and text messaging are useful but can be
       limited by access to relevant technology and internet stability as well as considerations such
       as electricity blackouts. So, while there is a willingness to embrace technology to progress
       both research activities and supervisor/researcher relationships, there are factors that
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 77

       impact that are beyond the control of both the researchers and their supervisors. For those
       in remote areas, a letter does help, or a message is sent to the higher degree researcher
       through someone else.

Different perspectives on time and prioritisation of research in the context of broader social concerns can
be hard to monitor in PNG and can impact the effective use of time. In one example, the supervisor created
a structured schedule, distributing specific time slots for supervisory meetings, teaching undergraduate
courses, research consultations, and personal study. Being aware of the time commitments of higher degree
researchers is important. Consider the time they have available to conduct their studies routinely, and their
expected timeline for progressing to completion. Consider logistical constraints, and check that timelines
reflect the actual durations of key research activities. Discuss how long it takes the researcher to travel to
campus, ask them what forms of transport, and timetables are available. Take these and their work and
family commitments into account when scheduling meetings (See also Chapter 2).

A key consideration in PNG is that information services within the university may be very limited, so
routine access to online journals, or current textbooks may not be possible. Consider institutional and
research networks that may provide additional access or can - given time - facilitate the sharing of key
documents. Plan with your higher degree researcher to navigate away from places and spaces that may put
the conduct of rigorous research at risk.

Here are some examples of risks to three of the key stakeholders:

 1. The higher degree researchers - their development must be managed in a context of limited
      resources, while research standards remain unchanged regardless of context.

 2. The project topic - contingency plans for conducting research on the topic are essential. Loss of
      access to resources, data or expertise can be very disruptive, putting the conduct of the study at risk.

 3. The supervisors - their expertise in supporting the higher degree researchers and their research
      projects are vital, especially in a potentially volatile research context. Supervisors become the core,
      and sometimes sole, source of guidance and advice. Their roles include: building researcher capacity,
      sponsoring access to networks and resources, and overseeing the conduct of projects.

     Case study - Jane and Adam building expectations

       Jane had used Adam as a tutor in a number of her subjects and always found him easy to
78 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

       work with and able to conduct his classes professionally. As a Senior Lecturer she was also
       on the university ethics committee and academic board, supervised two higher degree
       researchers as primary advisor and was working on a grant application. Her grant topic
       allowed her to ask for funds for research support.
       Jane and Adam agreed that Adam would work with Jane on the grant application with a
       budget for a PhD scholarship for Adam. Jane had also invited a colleague from a developed
       country to join the work. A librarian by profession as well as a researcher, Ray was able to
       contribute to the grant writing and provide access to the latest journals based on agreed
       search strategies. By developing the application together, they ensured that the academic
       requirements of the grant matched their expertise. Adam also monitored some online
       modules to refresh his methodological skills and began reading journals to become familiar
       with the field.
       Together they set out the details of the grant to show a timeline for Adam's doctoral
       studies. Adam talked to his family about his plans to enrol in a PhD if the grant was
       successful. The scholarship would allow him to devote all his time to his project, but he
       hoped to continue to do a small amount of teaching to continue developing his practice. His
       family accepted that if the grant was successful Adam would need time to focus on his
       studies and they talked about finding a quiet space at home for him to write and think.

Institution

A university's infrastructure should cater for the needs of the higher degree researcher's program of study.
This can include but is not limited to, access to technology, access to laboratories and related resources,
access to libraries and scholarly articles and databases, funding and scholarships, and workload recognition
for supervisors. To explore these elements in practice, consider the following. Within the last decade, there
has been a dynamic shift in research practices with the use of Learning Management Systems (LMS) and
electronic devices. These electronic and technical devices have had an impact on various stages and aspects
of academic research (collecting, measuring and recording data and writing the report on the findings).
So higher degree researchers have to be trained to learn, and know how to use, the device and computer
programs. Additionally, the capacity of both researcher and supervisors to use these devices to conduct the
research successfully, and with ease must be considered.

Further, the institution's support of the availability of laboratory equipment in a technical institution
is very important to the success of research outputs. For example, if the water samples brought to the
laboratory cannot be appropriately processed and stored, the validity of the test results would be
compromised.
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 79

Access to resources goes beyond the availability of laboratory equipment. Facilities such as libraries and
academic writing and language support are fundamental to the success of a higher degree research
candidature. If these cannot be made available at the institutional level, then the higher degree researcher
and supervisors must explore research networks and institutional partner organisations to identify
alternative ways to access resources. This may involve getting a grant to travel elsewhere to conduct research,
or sending samples or data elsewhere, or inviting key experts to visit at key times to engage locally.

     Case study - Professional development resources

       The establishment of the Academic Resource Centre at PNGUoT could provide professional
       development and writing resources to maximize higher degree researcher progress. While it
       is acknowledged that this is a good step, the addition of a dedicated academic writing and
       learning support centre, with professional tutors specially tailored to assist higher degree
       researchers, is an ideal that requires funding. Papua New Guineans use English as a second,
       third or fourth language, so the need for good writing is a big challenge. This challenge
       remains the supervisors' responsibility when there are no resources or access to an
       academic writing centre.

Chapter 9 and Chapter 10 explore the roles of libraries and librarians, freely available online programs
and resources, and the role of supervisors. These chapters explore how supervisors can facilitate the use of
libraries and informed learning resources. Capacity to access, gather and process information is key to the
development of independent researchers.

Funding can also impact the success of a research project. Anecdotal experience of supervisors and higher
degree researchers is reflected in the following observation: `The university has a facility to draw funds
for my projects, however, there is a funding limit that constrains production of much better research
results'. Lack of scholarships and fund sources for high degree researchers can force them to engage in
full time work that can distract from their research progress. Work commitments can impact on higher
degree researcher's ability to conduct research, realise quality research outcomes, and gain experience as an
independent researcher. Higher degree researcher studies require large blocks of time for deeper thinking
and engagement with key literature. Scheduling 30-minute blocks between teaching classes is unlikely to
be a productive way of progressing studies. Access to quiet workspaces where interruptions are infrequent
can be highly beneficial. It can be hard to find such space in a busy work or home environment if facilities
are not available on campus.

Finally, institutional support for supervisors to manage workload is essential. Academics face ever-
increasing pressures to publish, and to maintain heavy teaching loads and administrative roles. Pressures are
also on higher degree researchers to publish before graduation to enhance their employability. Supervisors
80 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

can work on publications with higher degree researchers, to reduce the pressures for all concerned and
share the workload, and their expertise. Teamwork can reduce the amount of time that needs to be found
for research and writing. Equally university leadership has a key role to play in ensuring that workload
is distributed fairly, giving everyone opportunities across the domains of teaching, research, and service.
These pressures are no different for those in PNG, where teaching and service workload allocations are
high, and potentially more so for women academics.

Networks

Networking and collaboration with other researchers is a fundamental aspect of successful supervision. In
developing countries like PNG, networks may be used to access essential resources and expertise. Networks
can be used to give researchers in other institutions and other countries privileged access to unique local
data sets and knowledge that will allow their conduct of research in country. Collaborators can become
external supervisors or `critical friends' of the higher degree researcher. They may agree to review or
examine projects. They may be able to grant supervisors and higher degree researchers access to additional
library resources, research funding, data analytical tools or infrastructure. Network relationships developed
and maintained by supervisors can involve mentoring where those more experienced can guide and role
model supervisory practices. They may share different ways of critiquing work, or different theoretical and
methodological approaches to inform research conduct and design. In return local supervisors can grant
access to unique data sets and knowledges, explain the navigation of rich and diverse cultural contexts, and
manage expectations of research stakeholders.

Other examples of engagement activities through local and international networks may include enrichment
programs. University wide lectures from expert staff throughout the year, specifically targeting topics about
the research journey and supervision may be offered. Topics might include introduction to the research
culture, preparation for candidacy, reviewing literature, research methodology, data collection, analysis,
thesis write-up/ writing for publication or thesis examination. Some departments may be able to frame
events as course content for their higher degree researchers. If research methodology subjects are not offered
within courses, then supervisory mentorship may be required. For departments that do offer research
methodology subjects, there may be online resources available, or visiting experts providing complementary
resources to the support provided to higher degree researchers. Sourcing support beyond the supervisory
team needs to be considered and planned for well ahead of time.

Higher Degree Researcher networks or significant interest groups, initiated by supervisors or the
researchers, allow researchers to share, learn and support one another through candidature. Networks
may include researchers from across a range of related fields, connected by their higher degree by research
enrolment. Such groups can allow more advanced higher degree researchers to provide advice on the
navigation of candidature to new researchers, and help them in the identification of additional expertise
and infrastructure that may inform their progress.

Some other examples of key additional stakeholders include mentors, sponsors, or collaborators who may
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 81

be found in other areas of the university, beyond the university in industry or government, or perhaps
in universities in other countries around the world. The authors of this chapter who are members of
PNGUoT Women in Higher Education (WIHE) SIG acknowledge the value and power of their peer-to-
peer community of practice.

     Case study: Jane and Adam build research networks

       The grant was successful and a year later Adam is enrolled in his PhD, on a scholarship,
       progressing his research. A big hurdle for Adam is that he must present on his project to a
       panel and provide his literature review and project plan for their comments. The outcome of
       this presentation will be confirmation of his candidature and scholarship for the next 2 and a
       half years.

       Jane is keen to use this milestone to further develop Adam's academic writing and
       presentation skills. As a writer Adam is still struggling to adopt the thesis genre that
       involves using the literature to support his argument and intended research contribution.
       His critical thinking skills are growing, but he is finding constant reviews and revisions of his
       work troubling, unclear why his current drafts are not good enough. Similarly, he is
       approaching the presentation as a tutorial and not confident about responding to questions
       from the audience and panel at the conclusion of the presentation.

       To address these issues Jane is prompted to create a peer mentoring group. She creates a
       monthly meeting and invites Adam and her other two students to attend. Two other
       supervisors and their two higher degree researchers also come along to the meetings.

       At each meeting higher degree researchers present, lead discussions, or nominate to present
       or lead future sessions. There is also time devoted to a round table sharing of researchers'
       project progress. Presentations include practice presentations for conference papers and
       confirmations. Leaders present papers they find interesting and facilitate discussion of their
       contents. Supervisors are present to support discussion and model good practice in
       reviewing work and giving constructive feedback.

       For Adam and others, meetings provide a valuable way of learning from the experience of
       others, discovering the standard of work expected at different stages of candidature, and
       developing critical thinking and reviewing skills.
82 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

Checklist for success

The following checklists are provided for supervisors to discuss with their higher degree researcher,
accounting for key stakeholder considerations.

Higher Degree Researcher - For the higher degree researcher to complete and discuss with the
supervisors:
6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                NEW GUINEA | 83

                                                            Considered?
                                                            (Yes or No)

Consider your work and research experience to date,
and how it has prepared you for research studies?
Honestly consider your strengths and how to ensure a
good fit for your background, expertise and interests
with a possible project and supervisor. What are the
admission requirements and are you able to meet them?

Are your family and friends supportive of your studies,
and aware of how it will impact your time and devotion
to their needs? Have you discussed your commitments
with your supervisor and discussed a study timeline?
Have you engaged any scholarly networks or contacts
you have who may be able to provide advice on
managing your time?

What arrangements can you put in place to travel
regularly to campus to meet your supervisor? Do you
have access to study related resources? Have you
discussed your needs with your supervisory team? Is
there a place where you can go to focus on your studies
for at least 20 hours a week if you are studying part time
and double that if you are studying full time?

Are you aware of the support you can get from your
supervisors? Have you considered with them how you
will work together, and accounted for any concerns
about professional development or infrastructure
needs? Have you explored networks beyond the
supervisory team and institution that may be important
to you and your studies?

Are their financial considerations to be addressed before
you can study? Have you explored available funding
and scholarships with your supervisors? Have you
considered study exchanges or double degrees with
overseas universities?

Will you be studying full or part time? Externally or
internally? Have you considered and addressed the
implications of your study mode for meetings with
supervisors, accessing resources, family and work
commitments?

How will you manage work life balance during the term
of candidature, that could be up to a decade for part
time students. Carefully consider your goals and
motivations. Have you discussed with your supervisors
your goals?

Topic - For the supervisory team to complete and discuss with the higher degree researcher:
84 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

                                                                                              Considered?

                                                                                               (Yes or No)

                          Is the proposed project topic well aligned with the
                          available infrastructure and expertise? If not, who can
                          assist you to address needs locally or globally?

                          Does the higher degree researcher's academic and
                          research record reflect the capacity required to conduct
                          the research? If not, what are the options in terms of
                          variation to topic or additional pathway courses to better
                          prepare the researcher?

                          Do the supervisor's theoretical and methodological
                          approaches align well in supporting the student and
                          their project? If not consider where additional support
                          may come from, or how accounting for existing areas of
                          strength may help better align the topic with supervisory
                          capacity.

                          What are the possible outcomes of the research (e.g.,
                          journals, books, patents, or reports to government) and
                          what role can the supervisors play in supporting their
                          achievement? What expertise and expectations does the
                          Higher Degree Researcher bring and are those
                          accounted for in the outcomes planned? What other
                          experts may be useful stakeholders to invite onto the
                          supervision panel or contact for support?

                          What are the research integrity considerations to be
                          agreed on and understood (e.g., authorship, intellectual
                          property, ethics, and data management) and does the
                          supervisor's range of expertise and experience mean they
                          can support this work? What policy, guidelines, online
                          resource, or external expert can you call on to guide you
                          in ensuring the research is conducted appropriately?

                          Will supervisors' research be used to inform or be
                          informed by working with the higher degree researcher
                          on a topic led and owned by the higher degree
                          researcher? Are appropriate arrangements in place to
                          ensure all authors will be credited on work generated? Is
                          there a need to explore how to set such arrangements in
                          place, and if so, what appropriate resources can be
                          accessed?

Supervisor - Supervisors along with their higher degree researchers to discuss supervisory

approaches available to them (See also Chapter 1):
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 85

                                                                                             Considered?

                                                                                              (Yes or No)

                          Can supervisors establish an enduring relationship with
                          the higher degree researcher in this context? If working
                          across communities or countries - have you set up time
                          to share and discuss contextual considerations?

                          Can supervisors negotiate meeting arrangements and
                          ways of providing feedback that are suitable for all
                          concerned? Can realistic expectations be set with higher
                          degree researchers about timelines based on access to
                          internet and postal services, and time required to
                          prepare for meetings? Negotiate and explore options if
                          timeframes are not reasonable.

                          Can supervisors champion the higher degree
                          researcher's research by introducing them to a range of
                          networks, providing one to one support and guidance,
                          and being a research role model?

Institution - For supervisors and their higher degree researcher to discuss the resources available
to them:

                                                        Considered?
                                                        (Yes or No)

Can supervisors confirm that required infrastructure
can be made available to the higher degree researcher?
Have concerns or constraints been discussed? Are Plan
Bs in place to account for any concerns?

Can supervisors ensure the higher degree researcher is
aware of and can make good use of resources available?
Have concerns or constraints been discussed? Are Plan
Bs in place to account for any concerns?

Who are the key stakeholders within the university the
supervisors should liaise with or introduce the higher
degree researcher to in order to provide sufficient
administrative support and guidance? Who within the
broader community may be able to assist including
alumni, university networks and researcher
development organisations?

Networks - What additional resources are available? Have the following factors been considered?
86 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

                                                      Considered?
                                                      (Yes or No)

What library resources, professional development
offerings and infrastructure will be accessed beyond
the institution and how?

What supervisor and higher degree researcher
networks beyond the university can be used to inform
the higher degree researcher's progress?

Can higher degree researchers networks at the
institution, or with higher degree researchers and
alumni beyond the institution provide added support
for the higher degree researcher?

What internal and external scholarships, grants or
resource providers can supervisors and the higher
degree researcher identify to enhance access to
resources?

What sources of emotional and practical support are
available? How can supervisors and the higher degree
researcher access these more readily?

Evidence your practice

Can you identify a topic that is well aligned with your research interests and expertise? Can you identify a
potential applicant to discuss this topic with? Are their interests, skills, and experience well aligned to the
topic?

What are your current practices as a supervisor in building student skills? Based on your review of this
chapter, are there other new practices that would be more effective? Articulate these.

Consider your research networks. How can you apply these to develop a sustainable research education
environment for you and your higher degree researcher?

Conclusion

PNG supervisors and higher degree researchers face many challenges and have access to many opportunities
as they navigate a doctoral candidature together. As noted by Papoutsaki & Rooney (2006) they include:

  · building a research culture through continuity of staffing
  · designing curriculum in response to the needs of PNGs diverse communities
  · creating new knowledge building on locally based fieldwork
  · using senior academics to mentor new researchers in required research skills
       6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
                                                                                                                                       NEW GUINEA | 87

  · nurturing academic networks across the Asia Pacific region.

The learnings and lived experience shared by authors in this chapter provide unique, informing insights
aimed at enhancing collaboration and supervisory practices. Institution support and appropriate
guidelines are important in administering graduate research school programs. Where the institution is
less research intensive it may be an opportunity for the active research community to contribute to
development of resources, perhaps drawing on the expertise of their scholarly networks and trusted online
resources. The priority is to ensure that PNG and its wealth of promising researchers and research contexts
are brought into the frame of global research activity. PNG has much to offer in terms of unique resources
and varied social cultural perspectives. Being aware of their own research strengths, access to resources
and expectations and plans will help supervisors to make best use of higher degree researchers' strengths
and capacity. Continuing to build relationships with networks globally is a vital strategy employed by
even the highest-ranking universities. Building on strengths, being innovative and creative in approaching
challenges and being inclusive in research practice will always serve the PNG researcher and those in the
global research community well.

     Additional Resources

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

        Babcock, L., Recalde, M. P., & Vesterlund, L. (2018). Why women volunteer for tasks that
        don't lead to promotions. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2018/07/why-women-
        volunteer-for-tasks-that-dont-lead-to-promotions
        Baird, J., & Kula-Semos, M. A. (2018). Internationalisation and Indigenisation in Papua New
        Guinea's universities: Promoting authentic agency. Journal of Higher Education Policy and
        Management 40(6), 550-565. https://doi.org/doi/full/10.1080/1360080X.2018.1529116
        Cotterall, S. (2015). The rich get richer: International doctoral candidates and scholarly identity.
        Innovations in Education & Teaching International, 52(4), 360-370. https://doi.org/10.1080/
        14703297.2013.839124
88 | 6. CREATING SUCCESSFUL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHER PATHWAYS IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY - PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

        Noland, M. (2015). Comment on "Determinants of international research collaboration:
        Evidence from international co-inventions in Asia and major OECD countries". Asian Economic
        Policy Review, 10(1), 122-123. https://doi.org/10.1111/aepr.12089

        Papoutsaki, E., & Rooney, D. (2006). Colonial legacies and neo-colonial practices in Papua
        New Guinean higher education. Higher Education Research & Development, 25(4), 421-433.

        Payumo, J., Sutton, T., Brown, D., Nordquist, D., Evans, M., Moore, D., & Arasu, P. (2017).
        Input-output analysis of international research collaborations: A case study of five U.S.
        universities. Scientometrics, 111(3), 1657-1671. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2313-2

        Seeberg, V., & Qiang, H. (2012). Sustainable international cross-cultural collaboration:
        Transcending "brain drain" In K. Mundy & Q. Zha (Eds.), Education and global cultural
        dialogue. International and development education. PalgraveMacmillan.

        Tight, M. (2021). Globalization and internationalization as frameworks for higher education
        research. Research Papers in Education, 36(1), 52-74. https://doi.org/10.1080/
        02671522.2019.1633560

        Wagner, C., Whetsell, T., & Mukherjee, S. (2019). International research collaboration: Novelty,
        conventionality, and atypicality in knowledge recombination. Research Policy, 48(5),
        1260-1270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.01.002

     Wenger, E. (1996). How we learn. Communities of practice. The social fabric of a learning
     organization. The Healthcare Forum Journal, 39(4), 20-26.
                                     7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS | 89

7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS
RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS

   Ailie McDowall; Sana Nakata; Martin Nakata; and Felecia Watkin-Lui

     Why read this chapter?

     We find ourselves in a moment of opportunity for Indigenous researchers to help build the
     knowledge and research capacity to positively impact Indigenous communities and the
     academy. There is an increasing demand for Indigenous researchers to participate in research
     projects and on grants. At the same time, potential Indigenous higher degree researchers are
     approaching supervisors wanting to research a wide range of topics, but like all students arrive
     with varying capabilities to undertake thesis work. These higher degree researchers also
     encounter an academic workforce that is still developing its own supervision capabilities to
     meet this growth in demand.
     This chapter will:

          · demonstrate how JCU's Indigenous Education and Research Centre has been
             conceptualising the support of Indigenous higher degree researchers

          · describe issues in higher degree researcher and supervisor capabilities in the context of
             Indigenous research topics, and

          · suggest how supervisors might address these capabilities in their practice.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=98

Defining a research problem in Indigenous
90 | 7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS

research

Supervisors' experience with Indigenous research
projects

In an environment with increasing demand for Indigenous research and an impetus to support increasing
numbers of Indigenous higher degree researchers, it is as important for supervisors to first understand how
their research training and practice shapes their contribution to a project.

As supervisors, transparency with higher degree researchers and with other supervision panellists is
important. Talk with them about your intellectual commitments, including theoretical and
methodological practice. Explore together the extent to which these commitments usefully support or pull
against Indigenous research activity in your field.

Supervisors are encouraged to lean into their own expertise and share that expertise through research
training and education. Not all Indigenous research projects require Indigenous research methods, and
equipping Indigenous researchers with traditional methodological skills can have value. Supervisors also
need to be self-reflexive about how their own training and commitments may come into tension with
Indigenous knowledges and research practices.

Due to the limited Indigenous research training capacity nationally, supervisors should not assume that
others can supplement gaps in your expertise. The Indigenous academic workforce is growing, but still
small and it is not appropriate that non-Indigenous supervisors continue to delegate this aspect of their
supervision to others. We encourage supervisors to take a professional development approach to your own
skill set and invest in your ongoing learning: reading new literatures alongside higher degree researchers,
facilitating peer learning groups and critical friends, attending conferences, and asking questions.

Research problems at the interface between knowledge
systems

Not all research problems emerge from identifying gaps in existing scholarship. But all research problems
will add something new to existing scholarship.

In Indigenous research, many research problems will emerge from empirical problems that the higher
degree researcher has observed or experienced in their everyday life. The literature review task is thus driven
by the purpose of identifying whether the observations or experiences have been studied and made sense
of in the academy already. Gaps may well be identified. Sometimes, however, it can appear that there is
literature `on the problem' and an Indigenous higher degree researcher may need direction to articulate
how their inquiry will present something novel. Supervisors can support higher degree researchers by
working with them to identify their novel approach by thinking `widely' about the literature rather than
                                     7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS | 91

`narrowly', which risks guiding higher degree researchers into disciplinary debates and potentially away
from issues of significance to them.

Encouraging higher degree researchers to investigate widely may identify what types of commitments
underpin that body of knowledge: ontological, epistemological, conceptual or methodological. From here,
higher degree researchers should be able to identify how their proposed study is different from existing
knowledge on the subject. Indigenous research projects will often reveal how Indigenous and Western
knowledge systems are grounded in distinct commitments, and with many Indigenous research projects,
higher degree researchers will need to be supported to grapple with the interface between them.

Understanding the complexity of contemporary
Indigenous situations

Supervisors will arrive on panels understanding the complexity of contemporary Indigenous situations
in different ways - through lived experience, through research, and through relationships. Each type of
experience has its limits.

Similarly, Indigenous higher degree researchers may have understandings that they cannot yet articulate
through academic or disciplinary language. Supervisors may also not have the language to understand what
the higher degree researcher is trying to articulate.

Some try to address this issue by ensuring that each panel has an Indigenous supervisor, or that the
higher degree researcher engages an Indigenous reference group. These strategies can be useful if those
providing advice have experience with the research problem under investigation. There are also other ways
to ensure that the project aligns with Indigenous priorities (such as through the higher degree researcher's
networks or through partnerships with Indigenous organisations), and for supervisors to develop their
understandings. Groups such as JCU's Indigenous Research Support Network also provide venues to
discuss issues.

Doing a literature review in Indigenous research

Reading volumes of material

The thesis literature review provides an opportunity to study and map previous attempts to tackle the
research problem, deepening familiarity with both academic writing and conceptual knowledge. It also
provides higher degree researchers and supervisors an opportunity to ask questions of previous approaches:
did they work? What assumptions underpinned these approaches? Did they contribute tangible outcomes
to Indigenous goals?
92 | 7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS

Reviewing the literature requires higher degree researchers to search for, locate, identify and read a mass of
relevant literature, eventually sorting this literature into more and less relevant materials. Many Indigenous
students are underprepared for tertiary education when they commence undergraduate studies, requiring
considerable academic skill development during their initial degrees (Nakata & Nakata, 2023). Depending
on the individual's academic pathway, commencing Indigenous higher degree researchers will have varying
levels of independence when it comes to critical reading.

We suggest that supervisors do not make assumptions about Indigenous higher degree researchers'
capacities to identify and read masses of literature. Rather than sending higher degree researchers off
to independently read, make time to discuss approaches to locating and identifying relevant literature,
and model how you work your way through volumes of material. A useful approach is to plan a longer
supervision session to sit together and find and discuss relevant literature. Regular check-ins during this
stage allow you to clarify minor misunderstandings and provide feedback.

Understanding argumentation in scholarly literature

Having located relevant literature, higher degree researchers need to be able to read the structure of the
argument. This is again important in both understanding the field and learning to produce their own
writing. Proposition structure will support higher degree researchers in writing their own theses.

We have noticed that as Indigenous research interests proliferate across a range of disciplines, in many
fields there is an over-reliance on papers that critique or present a position on a topic, with varying levels
of evidence to support arguments. If higher degree researchers learn to read for propositions, structure
and evidence, they will be better able to understand the limits of previous research attempts, as well as
possibilities that exist within their field. Such an approach also centres the higher degree researchers' own
critical analysis skills and works toward building a scholarly identity.

This issue is again connected to Indigenous higher degree researchers' previous academic training.
Universities often provide workshops on identifying main arguments and Indigenous higher degree
researchers can be encouraged to attend these. Such workshops may be insufficient for postgraduate
research. In this case, supervisors or discipline-based postgraduate coordinators can work with individuals
or groups of higher degree researchers to demonstrate how you would identify the main argument in
a paper, providing opportunities for candidates to trial approaches and receive feedback. Higher degree
researchers will also benefit from guidance on developing an argument as they produce their own literature
reviews and analytical chapters.
                                     7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS | 93

Note-taking and writing short descriptions from
materials

Annotating materials is a fundamental skill in moving from reading literature to producing a critical review.
Learning to write short and concise notes is important to being able to identify major arguments.

Note-taking is taught in the school system, albeit with various emphases. University disciplines provide
students different opportunities to practise and cement these skills, depending on the engagements with
scholarly content. Here too, we would suggest supervisors do not make assumptions about their
Indigenous higher degree researchers' experience in note-taking. You can work with higher degree
researchers to practise identifying the paper's core proposition and writing short descriptions of the
arguments, including an assessment of the evidence to support the argument. These descriptions provide
building blocks for a more critical, rather than descriptive, literature review.

Encouraged to write short annotations of literature, a higher degree researcher wrote half-page descriptions
of each article they read. The first draft of the literature review was overly descriptive, containing
information that detracted from an understanding of how the field was constructed. By re-writing shorter
descriptions, the student could focus more on the major arguments.

Indigenous research design

Difference between theory, methods and methodology

As many Indigenous higher degree researchers take on novel topics within their fields or work from
philosophical assumptions unfamiliar to their supervisors, it is important that higher degree researchers
learn to differentiate between theory, method, and methodology.

Indigenous research projects undertaken within the University necessarily involve an interface between
Indigenous and Western knowledge systems. While supervisors are increasingly recognising the place for
Indigenous research methods within projects, a focus on research methods without a focus on theory
is likely to produce fundamental tensions in later stages of analysis. Ensuring higher degree researchers
can identify and critically engage with the underlying theoretical assumptions in their research design
(including problem formation) and the methods they consider utilising will help minimise later challenges.
It is also a reminder to supervisors that engaging in Indigenous-generated theory and philosophy should
be taken as seriously as consideration of Indigenous research methods. Importantly, strong Indigenous
theorisation of knowledge production can align well with `traditional' Western research methods.
94 | 7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS

Qualitative research

Many supervisors encourage Indigenous higher degree researchers to use qualitative approaches. The depth
and richness of qualitative data, as well as the opportunity for Indigenous participants to represent their
own experiences, are attractive to higher degree researchers and supervisors alike.

We suggest that supervisors contemplate the complexities of generating new data in qualitative research
projects. These include:

  · An extended ethics process given that Indigenous participants/topics often automatically make the
      project `high-risk'

  · Negotiating site access and following community protocols
  · Recruiting sufficient participants from what is often a small potential pool of potential people
  · Training higher degree researchers to interview Indigenous participants who may be uncomfortable

      expressing themselves in a formal research setting
  · Analysing research data, particularly if Indigenous participants' points of reference differ from those

      commonly used in your discipline.

You will need to work closely with the higher degree researcher to determine whether qualitative research
is appropriate for them. Considerations include whether the higher degree researcher is joining an existing
project, whether they have access to sites and participants, and their previous experience representing
Indigenous experiences within academic and disciplinary conventions.

Alternatively, analysing pre-existing data (such as policies, previous transcripts, archival research, or
publicly available data like newspaper media) can facilitate opportunities for scholarship whilst minimising
the risks to the project.

Project managing Indigenous research

Working to the timing of milestones

Regulating candidatures through milestones can lead to higher degree researchers focusing on achieving
goals related to milestones rather than maintaining a clear focus on the research and subsequent research
thesis.

We suggest that all candidatures commence with the end goal (the thesis) in sight, and that the progression
of chapters is prioritised. Many Indigenous higher degree researchers have additional community and
family responsibilities they must manage (Barney, 2013). Early and frequent conversations about self-
regulation strategies in the context of research work can provide conditions for success. You can support
the higher degree researcher to break the project into chunks, with clear goals and an agreed schedule of
                                     7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS | 95

deliverables. Re-visiting this schedule regularly and ensuring there are opportunities to revise as necessary
should ensure that higher degree researchers are on track for milestones, without making the milestones the
goal.

Indigenous higher degree researchers also experience unique time pressures that supervisors should take
into account. There is high demand upon Indigenous researchers from the earliest stages of their career
to become members of larger projects. Sometimes, they are sought after by research groups seeking to
demonstrate their inclusion of Indigenous researchers, represented as good opportunities for mentoring
and networking. This can certainly be the case. However, supervisors need to play a strong role in
supporting higher degree researchers to make choices that do not inhibit the student's own goals and
timelines. In our experience, often the benefit accrues to more established researchers than Indigenous
higher degree researchers.

Fieldwork

Many Indigenous higher degree researchers are highly respected members of their communities. Their
relationships within a community can both facilitate fieldwork and raise complexities which can be difficult
to negotiate within a research degree's timeframe.

Supervisors should prompt higher degree researchers to reflect on their own position within the research
and its impact on fieldwork. Where the higher degree researcher has pre-existing relationships, you will
need to discuss how to re-frame personal, family, community and professional relationships into a research
context, and assist them to develop self-awareness about how they present themselves to potential
participants. Strategies such as wearing university uniforms and communicating through university
channels can help to emphasise the higher degree researcher's position as researcher.

Supervisors should also be hands-on in developing interview questions and practising interviewing.
Closeness with the topic and participants can lead to inexperienced researchers making assumptions about
participants' positions, rather than asking follow-up questions. These issues can be supported through
training. Ensure potential participants and interview questions are closely aligned to the research question,
rather than following tangential interests (from the student or supervisor), given the complexities of
Indigenous research contexts.

When researching in community settings, we recommend supervisors being hands-on in analysis. Study
transcripts independently from the higher degree researcher, probing why they think participants gave a
particular response. The higher degree researcher should then allow for time to workshop the analysis
with community participants. You will need to discuss what will happen if participants are unhappy with
the analysis, or want their views represented differently. This is not to suggest that participants' analysis
should dominate the final thesis. Rather, participants should have an opportunity to express their own
understandings, and higher degree researchers should check that these understandings have not been lost
in the disciplinary analysis. It also builds the understanding that Indigenous community people need to see
96 | 7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS

themselves represented within research to enable impact. This stage can help develop relationships that can
be useful for postdoctoral research.

Ethics

Relationships in the research site also affect questions of ethics. If supervisors are unfamiliar with
Indigenous research protocols, guidelines from organisations such as AIATSIS and the NHMRC are
useful starting points. Where Indigenous higher degree researchers are well known within the community,
it is important to negotiate any perceived requirement to participate. You will need to support higher
degree researchers to conduct interviews where participants can speak voluntarily, freely and confidentially.
They may also need to manage participants' expectations that the research will result in immediate change.

Withdrawal of data

While rare, there is a possibility that participants may withdraw data from a research project. Ethically,
this would likely result in that data no longer being part of the project. This could have implications
for the project's viability and serious implications for an Indigenous higher degree researcher having
insufficient data to analyse. The supervisor's responsibility is to be considerate of these potential tensions
and balance the respect for Indigenous protocols and their educative duty to the higher degree researcher.
The possibility of data withdrawal should be considered in the research design process, ensuring that the
project is robust enough to withstand such a request.

Writing, examination, and publication approaches
for Indigenous research

Interpreting Indigenous research data

We recognise many supervisors have limited experience interpreting Indigenous research data. Indigenous
participants and Indigenous higher degree researchers may draw on reference points unfamiliar to you
as supervisors. This is another delicate balance that supervisors must hold: the reflexivity to recognise
the limits to your own approach, and supporting the higher degree researcher to analyse this data with
theoretical and conceptual frameworks.

You can encourage the higher degree researcher to explain how Indigenous reference points may provide a
new way of thinking about the topic. Rather than deferring to an Indigenous position as the `truth', this
requires an engagement with and extension of the disciplinary conventions in your field. Theories such as
the cultural interface and Indigenous standpoint theory (see Nakata, 2007b) can be useful tools to assist
higher degree researchers in interpreting contemporary Indigenous situations.
                                     7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS | 97

Selecting and responding to examiners of Indigenous
research projects

Indigenous research remains a small field, with a small pool of potential examiners. The pool of Indigenous
examiners is smaller still, and both personal and professional conflicts of interest exist.

A thesis does not need to be examined by an Indigenous examiner, rather by an expert in the field. There
will be a strong correlation between Indigenous research expertise and Indigenous examiners, but where
an Indigenous expert in the field is unavailable, the next best choice is another disciplinary expert, rather
than an Indigenous examiner with less expertise in the thesis subject matter. Again, this approach centres
the supervisor's responsibility to the candidate.

You will need to guide the higher degree researcher in responding to examiners, particularly where reports
are critical of the work. Some examiners hold strong convictions about what constitutes appropriate
methodological and theoretical approaches for Indigenous projects, which may or may not reflect genuine
issues in the thesis. Where critique corresponds to the argument presented in the thesis, it should be
addressed. Where critique is founded in alternative theoretical or ideological perspectives, the higher degree
researcher can identify this in their response to examiners.

Supporting publications

Supervisors play a key role in encouraging and supporting Indigenous higher degree researchers to establish
their track records, particularly as lead and sole authors. This can include developing a publication plan and
demonstrating how manuscripts can be developed from thesis work (or vice-versa).

       As a supervisor, you mentor an Indigenous higher degree researcher into new academic
       networks. They are invited onto an existing research team's proposed publication, whose
       lead researcher you have known for many years, and who is keen for the novice researcher
       to contribute an analysis of Indigenous knowledges relevant to the central thesis. This is an
       exciting opportunity for establishing a publishing record for the higher degree researcher. As
       the paper takes shape, the higher degree researcher makes their contribution but then
       raises concerns that the analysis is not consistent with their contribution around Indigenous
       knowledges. The higher degree researcher suggests a different approach, but the research
       team rejects this idea and indicates they are overstepping their agreed contribution. The
       higher degree researcher is distressed: they can either keep their name on the paper, despite
       their reservations about its overall argument; or they can withdraw, eliminating an
98 | 7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS

       opportunity for their first publication and risking new professional relationships. They share
       with you what has happened, but do not explicitly ask you for advice.
       In this situation, a supervisor needs to prioritise and protect the interests of the higher
       degree researcher, their intellectual integrity, together with the goals of timely completion
       and establishing a research track record. A number of options follow: you can offer your
       support to the higher degree researcher no matter what decision they make. Whether they
       progress the publication or not, you can help identify an alternative publication opportunity
       from their own emerging research that they might lead or sole author. You can de-
       emphasise the need to publish under these circumstances, and assure them of future
       opportunities. You can smooth tense relationships with your colleagues, or you might be
       willing to advocate for them more strongly given your long-standing relationship with the
       project lead.

Conclusion

Supervisors have a vital role to play in educating the next generation of Indigenous researchers. As you
develop your own experience, awareness of the complexities of Indigenous research, and to protect the
interests of the Indigenous higher degree researcher by ensuring a high-quality research experience.

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Supporting Indigenous HDRs
Barney, K. (2013). `Taking your mob with you': Giving voice to the experiences of Indigenous Australian
                                     7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS | 99

   postgraduate students. Higher Education Research & Development, 32(4), 515-528. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/07294360.2012.696186

Hutchings, K., Bainbridge, R., Bodle, K., & Miller, A. (2019). Determinants of attraction, retention
   and completion for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander higher degree research students: A systematic
   review to inform future research directions. Research in Higher Education, 60, 245-272.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-018-9511-5

Indigenous Research Support Network. (n.d.). Support our researchers. James Cook University.
   https://www.jcu.edu.au/ierc/indigenous-research-support-network

McDowall, A. (2022). Preparing postgraduate research students to research Indigenous topics. Innovations
   in Education and Teaching International. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   14703297.2022.2157857

Moreton-Robinson, A., Anderson, P., Levon, B., Nguyen, L. & Pham, T. (2020). Report on Indigenous
   success in higher degree by research: Prepared for Australian Government Department of Education and
   Training. Indigenous Research and Engagement Unit, Queensland University of Technology.
   https://www.qut.edu.au/?a=921040

Nakata, M. & Nakata, V. (2023). Supporting Indigenous students to succeed at university: A resource for the
   higher education sector. Routledge.

Ethics

Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies. (2020). AIATSIS code of ethics for
   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research. https://aiatsis.gov.au/research/ethical-research/code-
   ethics

Nakata, N. M., & Nakata, V. S. (2011). Report of Torres Strait fisheries research protocols: A guide for
   researchers. UTSePress. https://utsepress.lib.uts.edu.au/site/books/m/10.5130/978-0-9924518-4-4/

National Health and Medical Research Council. (n.d.). NHMRC ethical guidelines for research with
   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/research-policy/ethics/ethical-
   guidelines-research-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-peoples

Methodology

Kukutai, T. & Taylor, J. (2016). Indigenous data sovereignty: Toward an agenda. Centre for Aboriginal
   Economic Policy Research, Australian National University. http://doi.org/10.22459/
   CAEPR38.11.2016

Nakata, M. (2007a). Disciplining the savages, savaging the disciplines. Aboriginal Studies Press.
100 | 7. SUPERVISION OF INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS

Nakata, M. (2007b). The cultural interface. Australian Journal of Indigenous Education, 36(s1), 7-14.
   https://doi.org/10.1017/S1326011100004646

Tuhiwai Smith, L. (2011). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and Indigenous peoples. Zed Books.
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                        COUNTRIES | 101

8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER
DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM
NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING COUNTRIES

   Santosh Jatrana and Susan Gasson

     Why read this chapter?

     The chapter explores the challenges faced by international higher degree researchers from non-
     English speaking countries. We provide a tool outlining how to support higher degree
     researchers from non-English speaking countries to progress to completion.
     This chapter will provide:

          · An overview of international higher degree researcher enrolment trends in Australia.
          · Supervisor responses to common challenges faced by higher degree researchers from

             non-English speaking countries.
          · A six-phase tool highlighting supervisory approaches that support the progress of higher

             degree researchers.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=100

Overview of trends

The number and diversity of international higher degree researchers has steadily increased in Australia
in the past two decades, with education being Australia's third biggest export category. International
education contributed more than $40 billion to the Australian economy in 2019 (Australian Bureau of
102 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

Statistics, 2022). In 2023, there are more international students from non-English speaking countries (e.g.,
China and India) than at any time in the past (Wellard, 2023).

Our chapter builds on our expertise in supporting higher degree researchers. Santosh has a 100%
completion rate for her international higher degree researchers. Susan's input, as a researcher developer,
has motivated Santosh to share her reflections on how to select and support higher degree researchers
to completion. Together we have built a framework to help supervisors navigate challenges (e.g., cultural
clashes, social isolation due to homesickness, stress in adjusting to new social norms, unfamiliarity with
the education system) faced by international higher degree researchers. We describe approaches supervisors
can take to enable success; the services and supports that are critical; and key decision points and how
to navigate them. The tool helps supervisors build trusting and respectful relationships with their higher
degree researchers, by addressing their research and career expectations through provision of tailored
research education opportunities.

The international higher degree researchers considered in this chapter are higher degree researchers from
non-English speaking countries who enrol in English-speaking countries. Santosh chose this focus because
of her experience of challenges faced by higher degree researchers from a non-English speaking country
attending studies in an English-speaking country. Santosh draws on her personal experiences as a higher
degree researcher from India studying in Australia, and as an Australian university supervisor supporting
higher degree researchers from non-English speaking countries. Susan has worked, as a research manager
and developer in Australia, for more than 30 years with international higher degree researchers and their
supervisors.

Supervisor responses to challenges faced

International higher degree researchers face language, cultural, and educational challenges. The induction
of higher degree researchers by supervisors contributes to their successful transition to research education
in a new environment. Supervisors ensure higher degree researchers share their expectations and that they
respond to these in kind. If higher degree researchers' expectations about their role and that of their
supervisors are not addressed, this can result in confusion and stress. In some countries the supervisor
directs the research, while in others higher degree researchers are encouraged to take ownership of their
own research. Supervisors need to clarify their expectations early and support higher degree researchers in
adjusting to their new research context. Clarifying expectations, such as with Paltridge and Starfield's Role
Perception Scale (2020), can be a good way to establish trust and respect. Trust and respect help to build
a supervisor/higher degree researcher relationship that will endure the demanding years of a higher degree
by research award. Further advice on responding to challenges will be provided in the next section.

Supervisors, as part of a broader institutional network, provide intellectual guidance, technical and
laboratory support, administrative or managerial advice, and personal empathy. Their sensitivity to family
and social concerns contributes to the mental health of higher degree researchers as they face the demands
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                        COUNTRIES | 103

of higher degree research. With heavy teaching and service workloads, it is important that supervisors
encourage higher degree researchers to access institutionally provided services (e.g., English language
classes, daycare centres). Accessing these services ensures that higher degree researchers receive expert,
sufficient, and timely attention.
Figure 8.1 provides a snapshot of the networks available to higher degree researchers (see also Chapter 3
and Chapter 4). The supervisor's role is to be aware of these networks and to provide safe spaces where
higher degree researchers can share concerns. Guiding and encouraging higher degree researchers to engage
with various networks enriches their research experience. Broader networks ensure they have the support
required to meet the challenges of research studies.

Figure 8.1 Higher Degree Researcher networks by Santosh Jatrana and Susan Gasson, used under a CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

Below are some key activities offered to international higher degree researchers by key networks.
Supervisors can ensure international higher degree researchers access:

 1. Orientation: attend available orientation programs to help them become comfortable in their new
      environment. (See also Phase 1 of the higher degree researcher Supervisor framework).

 2. Resources: know how to access required resources, such as research materials, laboratory
      equipment, computer hardware and software, office equipment, etc.

 3. Time and money: are aware of the maximum time for their award and the budgetary and
      compliance considerations associated with completing the award. Higher degree researchers due to
      visa conditions may be constrained in their ability to fund their studies. Their ability to study may be
104 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

      conditional upon scholarship funding. The potential to finalise studies at home may be impossible
      because of infrastructure constraints. Family and community investments in higher degree
      researchers may be contingent on their success and timely return home. Supervisors need to be
      sensitive to these pressures that can make higher degree researchers more vulnerable to negative
      feedback, and less able to overcome setbacks in progressing their research.
 4. Cultural differences: feel that their cultural values have been considered and respected. Supervisors
      have a role in ensuring higher degree researchers understand the cultural values of their new
      environment and work to create an inclusive environment where cultural diversity is respected and
      celebrated. Through open discussions of any potential culture clashes critical advice and guidance
      can be offered and accepted. Supervisors, disciplines, and institutions can manage potential culture
      clashes by providing suitable orientation and support programs for higher degree researchers. These
      programs should include information about the local culture, education system, and language, as
      well as resources for adjusting to the new environment.
 5. Feedback and meetings: receive regular updates on progress to meeting requirements such as
      progress milestones. Regular meetings will be greatly valued and valuable.

Higher degree research supervision tool

The six phases of HDR supervision illustrated in Figure 8.2 summarises the support involved in supporting
international higher degree researchers. Supervisory practices are shared that relate to each phase. The
approach is designed to ensure a holistic approach. The phases accommodate the fact that each
combination of higher degree researcher, supervisor, and project is unique, and that needs evolve during
higher degree research studies.
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                        COUNTRIES | 105

Figure 8.2 Six phases of Higher Degree Research supervision by Santosh Jatrana and Susan Gasson,
used under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

Phase 1 - Recruitment

       Santosh receives many emails from international students interested in studying a PhD in
       Australia, but, the ones she follows up have looked at her profile and can demonstrate
       interest in her research work. They can show that their research training and experience
       align with her areas of interest and expertise. She always looks up their graduating
       universities to assess their research capacity, and considers if the writing in the emails
       reflects a sufficient command of English. It is also reassuring if their referees are known to
       her or are part of her research network.

Three aspects of the higher degree researcher recruitment process are illustrated in Figure 8.3.
106 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

Figure 8.3 Three aspects of the Higher Degree Researcher recruitment process by Santosh Jatrana and
Susan Gasson, used under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

a) Selecting the person - During the recruitment phase it is important to start to get to know the person.
Early evaluation of researcher expertise and fit to your interests will determine the need to schedule online
or in person meetings to progress discussion. During meetings consider if you communicate well together,
and if you can contribute to their research education. Read work prepared by applicants to consider how
they write and their ways of thinking. Some supervisors set written tasks or tests to prompt the preparation
of work for review. Encourage the applicant to ask questions on a range of topics including discussion of
available scholarships, cost of living, and lifestyle considerations. Take account of the whole person, and
their life circumstances in determining whether you will become their supervisor.
b) Developing the researcher - Consider applicants' motivations for research studies. Their motivations
will influence their drive for successful completion. Discuss their academic achievements, work experience,
career plans, and any other criteria that can help you assess their fit for the project and award. Consider
whether you can provide the right context for their research education. Will the project they propose allow
them to realise their career plans? Have they the expertise and capacity to conduct the project they propose?
c) The research project - At this pre-candidature phase supervisors need to test if they can work with
the applicant to define a project that meets award requirements and can be realised using the resources
available. Industry-related projects must balance the fulfilment of industry-driven goals with award
requirements. Supervisors may need to ensure industry stakeholders take account of research requirements.
Theoretical projects, on the other hand, may have more freedom of scope, breadth, and depth. As a
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                        COUNTRIES | 107

supervisor, your role is to assist the applicant in producing an original and significant knowledge
contribution that meets award requirements.

Phase 2 - Pre and post-arrival strategies

       Santosh's most recent student came from a South-Asian country. Her admission was
       affected by COVID-19 related delays. Santosh helped her complete application forms and
       made processes seem a little less daunting. She was granted a full scholarship, but her
       arrival was delayed and this impacted when she could attend induction. Santosh acted as a
       mentor and support as she applied for and obtained her student visa. On her first day on
       campus, Santosh met with her and introduced her to the staff in the office, oriented her to
       the facilities, and a range of centre services including health and accommodation facilities.
       Santosh introduced her to the graduate research office and encouraged contact with them
       for any award related questions. Then the student had a network to turn to for help.
       Santosh was very flexible about meeting times and sought to account for anything that
       would help her settle. Together they explored the provision of a prayer room, where to find
       ingredients to make culturally familiar meals, and the identification of part-time work
       opportunities.
       As a supervisor make sure your higher degree researchers are aware of the different
       support services available and explain how to access these throughout their study period.
       Empower them to identify and use resources to build their self-confidence, adapt to the
       new social and research environment, and access tools to successfully manage their studies.
       Higher degree researchers should be ready to seek university and government guidance on
       a range of points, including those referenced below.

Pre-arrival orientation: Should include information on:

  · visa requirements
  · living and studying in the host country
  · accommodation and support services
  · tuition fee payment/ tuition waiver scholarship
  · budgeting for living expenses
  · welcome pack or guide from the university, information about the orientation program
  · medical insurance
  · community and social clubs and committees
  · childcare and education systems for international students with children in the country
108 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

  · transport options.

Post-arrival orientation: Institutional and government services may
include advice on:

  · access to financial resources/scholarships/opening the bank account
  · health and medical services including university counselling services
  · career advisory services
  · academic and social support services
  · applying for the student identity card
  · building a peer group
  · accessing research material/library resources/desk and computer
  · accessing learning advisors/tutors
  · acquisition of academic skills such as research methodologies, data collection, and storage, analysis,

      and writing.

Community networks and mentorship:

Foster a sense of community by working with your higher degree researchers to establish cohort meetings
or peer networks. Connect international students with more experienced peers, alumni, and professionals
in the field who can provide them with guidance and advice. Your institution or discipline may provide
academic mentors for international students to ensure they have support and guidance throughout their
studies.

Training and development:

Be alert to, and address, your higher degree researchers' developmental needs. Help them to develop a
timeline that incorporates a professional development plan, publication plan, teaching appointments,
conference presentations, an internship, etc. Show them how to explore and evaluate available professional
development courses to prioritise those most relevant to their research and career expectations. Guide their
appreciation of the tools and skills, support, and resources needed to succeed.

Cultural awareness:

Ensure that international students are acculturated to cultural differences. Some of these will support their
socialisation and others their conduct of research within their host country. Socialization may include
arranging informal meetings for new international students with other students and researchers, or
assignment of a late-stage candidate as a mentor. Conduct of research advice may be covered in institutional
inductions or online programs. If these are not available then supervisors may alert higher degree
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                        COUNTRIES | 109

researchers to relevant codes, and discuss with international candidates particularly how these may vary to
other countries' research contexts.

Building trust and monitoring:

Ensure your meetings with higher degree researchers offer them a safe space where they can share challenges
and celebrate successes. Create an open and supportive environment by:

  · communicating expectations clearly and regularly
  · providing clear, consistent, and regular feedback on their progress and performance
  · addressing any cultural differences that may arise
  · helping higher degree researchers identify resources or support that may be of help
  · monitoring progress on a regular basis to ensure higher degree researchers stay on track
  · encouraging higher degree researchers to take ownership of their work and become accountable for

      their commitments.

Open and frequent communication:

Communication is the key to ensuring that higher degree researchers know that they are seen and
supported. Supervisors should not only offer regular feedback, guidance, and suggestions but also take time
to listen to higher degree researchers' needs and concerns. Allow international higher degree researchers to
adjust their research plans and be flexible in planning for their success. Flexibility can be required to address
time and financial pressures and meet family and scholarship provider commitments.

Recognition/celebration/reward:

Supervisors can offer incentives and rewards for meeting specific goals. By taking them for coffee or lunch
to celebrate the completion of a milestone, they will be motivated to achieve their goals in a timely manner
and within the allotted timeframe. Recognise achievements and encourage the pursuit of research goals.
Reward effort, incentivize risk-taking, and acknowledge growing persistence and resilience.

Phase 3 - Pre-confirmation strategies (0-1 year)

0-3 months

       Santosh has had international higher degree researchers who struggle to meet
110 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

       requirements for confirmation. To pre-empt this issue, she now encourages them to read
       others' work, and to keep writing and practicing. She asks them to schedule time every day
       to first read a paper, and then write about it. Initially, that may be a summary of the paper
       they have read. They are encouraged to look for and describe the gap in knowledge
       identified in the paper, and to begin to be alert to gaps in the literature.
       She asks them to print out and become familiar with the requirements for the confirmation
       milestone. They can then set out when those steps must be met within their timeline and
       then work to that plan. Santosh explains that their writing develops through a series of
       drafts that she will review. Over time they can look back at previous drafts and see the
       progression of their writing through the preparation for confirmation period.
       As the deadline for presentation approaches, Santosh encourages presentations to mentors,
       peers, and others, conducting up to four practice presentations before the confirmation
       event. That practice helps researchers learn to complete their presentations on time and to
       refine their slides based on audience feedback.

  · Be patient and maintain regular contact (at least weekly) or assign a buddy (a fellow HDR who is
      further down the track) who they can talk to as they adjust to their new home and understand the
      expectations of the supervisors and the project.

  · Discuss the project. If the project involves focused applied research, help them see the end goal and
      to write down some key milestones towards finishing the project. If the project is more theoretical,
      encourage them to read the literature around the key topic areas. Guide consideration of: Where is
      the state of the art? What is the knowledge gap?

  · Understand higher degree researchers' key interests and strengths. Share the excitement of research
      education and the opportunity to build capacity and gain knowledge and expertise. Help them shape
      the project to build on their strengths and areas of interest. Share with them the scope and focus of
      the project appropriate for the knowledge contribution that will be expected by examiners. Discuss
      and prepare a timeline, account for the preparation of an ethics application, a data management
      plan, and a publication plan accounting for authorship arrangements as appropriate.

Up to 6 months

  · Continue to guide higher degree researchers to theory and methods literature that will refine their
      research question or hypothesis. Guide them towards a problem worthy of research, a suitable
      method and methodology, and work with them to ensure that the resources and infrastructure are
      available or can be found.

  · Encourage higher degree researchers to strongly engage with critical thinking activities. Set up a
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                         COUNTRIES | 111

      reading group where higher degree researchers can discuss interesting papers. Reading groups
      provide a safe space for modelling and practising critical evaluation and questioning. Normalise
      higher degree researchers' giving presentations and contributing to peer review, so they come to see it
      as part of the researcher's life.
  · The project may start taking a new direction. As the supervisor, guide your higher degree researchers
      - you may need to partially define the problem for some. Ensure they see a path forward for at least
      the next 6 months.
  · Discuss the proposed structure of the thesis. If that includes publications or a future patent, explore
      what that means for the work to come. Refer them to the library or research office for further advice
      as needed.
  · Review and discuss the timeline with higher degree researchers. Ensure you have accounted for and
      integrated the preparation of formal milestone requirements into project plan discussions. Ask
      yourself very honestly if the researcher can do a research award. Should they go towards
      confirmation? Is the project shaping up to be the best one for them? Do they need any additional
      supervisory assistance? Refer concerns to service providers for discussion as needed. (See also
      Chapter 2 and Chapter 5)

Towards confirmation (12 months)

  · Enhance higher degree researchers' confidence and ability to communicate their research findings.
      Schedule more regular meetings and devote time to shaping their ideas. Set high standards for
      presentation of the results in reports and meetings, e.g., PowerPoint. Encourage peer review that
      discourages sloppy presentations. Explore presentation opportunities (e.g., conferences,
      competitions).

  · Empower your higher degree researchers to lead their research work, and take ownership of their
      projects by the time they reach confirmation. If a researcher is not capable of this, be clear it is an
      expectation, and that it is their responsibility to work toward ownership. Well-defined research
      hypotheses/ questions with a well-articulated plan to address the questions (s) will give them greater
      confidence. Be clear that the project is progressing, even though outcomes may not yet be clear, and
      plans may need further refinement or revisiting - the aim is the creation of new knowledge.

  · Revisit and revise the timeline. Review and revise as needed preparation of formal milestone
      requirements in project plan discussions. Consider adding the Three Minute Thesis competition or
      an internship to the plan. Schedule and complete confirmation. Discuss how activities align with
      research aspirations, career goals, and the timeline for completion.
112 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

Phase 4 - Post-confirmation strategies up to 24 months

       After confirmation, one of Santosh's higher degree researchers struggled to progress. In
       discussion with the researcher, university, college, and others, Santosh took great trouble to
       arrange for the student to relocate to another campus. She had become too relaxed after
       confirmation and was not able to find the momentum required to progress well. Once she
       relocated, she rediscovered her passion for the project when surrounded by others at a
       similar stage of candidature, and in a homestay that let her connect with others with similar
       cultural values and practices. Santosh reminded the HDR that they were on the journey to
       completion together and that she could return to her original campus later if that would be
       helpful.

The vignette highlights the supervisor's role in taking a personal interest in each candidate and making the
time to consider their concerns. Being open to revising arrangements to ensure they feel supported and
heard is more pressing for international students who have a greater investment in, and more adjustments
to make in realizing candidature success.

  · Take time to celebrate confirmation. Encourage a break from work to refresh and prepare for the
      next stage of candidature. Emphasise that this is a marathon, not a sprint: research work requires a
      higher level of stamina than assessments in other award courses require.

  · Refer them to a career counsellor to discuss their professional development plans and explore
      activities that can inform their future career. Ask: "What are your career plans after graduation?"
      Explore with them how to gain additional skills or build their resume outside their direct project to
      support their plans. Consider identifying a mentor from the sector where they wish to work or
      introduce them to networks where they may encounter future employers. For example, if the
      researcher is entrepreneurial, they can attend courses or workshops, or you can link them to your
      network of industry contacts - maybe support them to do an internship. On the other hand, for
      higher degree researchers seeking academic futures, guide them towards more high-impact
      publications, visits to international labs, presentations at conferences, etc. to expand their networks/
      collaborations for the future. Consider with them their readiness, at least in the short term, for the
      globally mobile and precarious life of the early career researcher.

  · Review their written skills. Discuss the preparation of a conference paper or publication to give them
      shorter-term goals to work toward that still progress their research work. Refer them to workshops
      or resources to build their writing skills for different genres.

  · Start to expect professional presentations on their work to date. Use existing professional
      development courses if there are concerns about the quality of their presentation skills. Ensure they
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                         COUNTRIES | 113

      see presentations of the standard required and discuss with them how their presentations could
      better reflect that standard. Seeing others benefit from attending conferences and international
      meetings, based on practice presentations within your group, may encourage improved effort.
  · Structure your meetings to encourage higher degree researchers to `lead' the project, and be
      accountable for the time remaining. If they are experiencing challenges, ask prompting questions like
      "So why do you think that happened?" or "What could you do differently next time to address
      that?" While encouraging them to initiate the next steps, ensure they feel you are listening and
      supporting them. Frame your role more as a critical friend than an expert. Address any likely delays
      or progress concerns. (See also Chapter 2)

24-36 months

  · This is one of the toughest times for most higher degree researchers. They are under pressure to
      complete, need to make plans for transition to work and/or return to their home country, consider
      alternative funding as scholarship monies end, and pull together the chapters of the thesis to fully
      articulate their contribution to knowledge.

  · If things have not gone to plan, supervisors can help higher degree researchers consider applying for
      extensions. International student services can explain implications and processes for extensions:
      support visa and funding applications, and provide additional support.

  · Supervisors need to find extra time to engage in data interpretation and paper write-up as higher
      degree researchers push to create their first complete thesis draft.

  · Revisit the meeting schedule, timeline, and supervisor processes for review of written work. Set
      realistic goals and meet them as requested. Ensure higher degree researchers provide at least monthly
      reports on progress against the agreed timeline, and attach the latest drafts of written work for
      review.

Phases 5 - The remaining time i.e, Finalising results and
writing up

       Santosh's higher degree researcher decided to study toward a thesis by publication, though
       he noted her preference for a monograph. She warned him that she would not accept
       publications in low quality journals. After two and a half years he had not had any papers
       accepted for publication. He had moved to Australia with family, and simultaneously a
       family member required medical support. He chose to buy a car to be more able to help with
       medical appointments. This put him under additional pressure financially. Helping with
       medical appointments also took time away from study. He became anxious that his
114 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

       scholarship was going to end in 6 months (at 3 years), and that he was nowhere near
       completion of a thesis by publication. Family matters were very distracting and he was
       under severe financial pressure. Santosh calmed him by taking stock with him. He had
       completed all the analysis for the thesis chapters. They prepared a rationale for an extension
       request, setting out the additional time required. They then prepared a tight timeline,
       detailing the work for him to write and Santosh to review. Santosh made it clear that the
       timeline was non-negotiable. She also referred him to support services to get advice on how
       to manage the stress and begin to address some of his financial and family difficulties. The
       researcher delivered a thesis by monograph, applied for residency, and is now settled and
       working full-time in Australia.

This is a very stressful phase for most researchers. Be ready to give them more time and to build their
confidence.

 1. Some students may need you to co-write with them to motivate them. i.e., sit in the same room (or
      join them on videoconference) and literally shape the page.

 2. Some will give you finished whole chapters. Santosh discourages that initially until they are writing
      confidently and well. Some sections may need more feedback and more iterative drafting and review.

 3. Read the whole thesis to consider the knowledge contribution. It is essential to simultaneously
      ensure that the writing is clear and that the big-picture thinking reflects the original or novel nature
      of the work. Involving other critical friends in reading the work can assist. Consider the need to find
      funding and time to employ an editor. Discuss the table of contents and headings to check for
      consistency and flow of the argument. Reviewing the first sentence of each paragraph within a
      chapter can ensure the argument flows through the work. Mind mapping on a whiteboard or large
      piece of paper may help to clarify the key findings.

 4. Universities may require a final milestone event (a "pre-completion seminar") where the work is
      presented to an audience and reviewed by a panel of experts. The panel is asked to advise if the
      timeline is suitable, when an examinable thesis may be ready for consideration, and for final
      feedback. Document responses to feedback as practice for responding to examiner comments.

 5. Regular meetings and a checklist setting out a timeline for submission of drafts for feedback will help
      you keep track of progress. Ensure supervisors have established an efficient way to work together to
      provide timely feedback. Agree on how you can best progress smoothly toward a final draft.

Phase 6 - The final products

 1. The examination process may involve an oral defence or provision of the thesis for review.
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                         COUNTRIES | 115

      Supervisors are often responsible for the nomination of suitable examiners (check your institutional
      or national guidelines). Supervisors need to be aware of the thesis examination process and support
      the student to submit the thesis in a suitable format to meet examiner and institutional
      requirements.
 2. Make time to celebrate. Having a physical thesis to hand can be important. A higher degree
      researcher ceremonially giving a copy to the supervisor, acknowledging the shared challenge
      overcome, can be joyous.
 3. By the end of the candidature, the higher degree researcher should have become the master of their
      chosen field, and know more about it than you.
 4. You can support them by providing references for job applications and discussing future work they
      may wish to plan in terms of postdoctoral positions or funding opportunities, grants, publications,
      teaching, and research projects.

This chapter has described a broad process that you can go through in supervising international students,
given the various challenges that they may face, particularly if they come from non-English speaking
countries. The chapter explained the Higher Degree Research Supervision Tool model, with its six steps
from recruitment to graduation, and the support that a supervisor can provide to help an HDR student
become an independent researcher by the end of their research journey.

Evidence of practice

Are there points made above that you might incorporate into your supervisory practice? Consider one of
your current international higher degree researchers who has a particular challenge you wish to address.
Articulate that challenge, and then explore your practices, patterns of celebration and reward, and the
higher degree researcher's networks accessed or accessible. Are there other practices you could use to better
address the challenges? Try applying up to three of those practices and then write up what happened and
any next steps required to resolve the challenge faced.

     Additional Resources
116 | 8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
COUNTRIES

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

        Cotterall, S. (2015). The rich get richer: International doctoral candidates and scholarly identity.
        Innovations in Education & Teaching International, 52(4), 360-370. https://doi.org/10.1080/
        14703297.2013.839124
     Department of Education. (2022). International student numbers by country, by state and
     territory. https://www.education.gov.au/international-education-data-and-research/
     international-student-numbers-country-state-and-territory
        Tight, M. (2021). Globalization and internationalization as frameworks for higher education
        research. Research Papers in Education, 36(1), 52-74. https://doi.org/10.1080/
        02671522.2019.1633560
        Wit, H. d., & Altbach, P. G. (2021). Internationalization in higher education: global trends and
        recommendations for its future. Policy Reviews in Higher Education, 5(1), 28-46.
        https://doi.org/10.1080/23322969.2020.1820898

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2022). International trade: Supplementary information, financial year.
   https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/international-trade/international-trade-supplementary-
   information-financial-year/latest-release

Paltridge, B., & Starfield, S. (2020). Thesis and dissertation writing in a second language: A handbook for
   students and their supervisors (2nd ed.). Routledge.
                     8. SUPERVISING INTERNATIONAL HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS FROM NON-ENGLISH SPEAKING
                                                                                                                                         COUNTRIES | 117

Wellard, J. (2023). Keynote Address Australia-China Education and Tourism Symposium 2023 Sydney,
   Australia. https://universitiesaustralia.edu.au/media-item/keynote-address-australia-china-education-
   and-tourism-symposium-2023/
118 | FUTURE FOCUS

FUTURE FOCUS
                                                                         9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 119

9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE
RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

   Claire Ovaska; Stephen Anderson; and Annette Messell

     Why read this chapter?

     In many universities, supervisors and higher degree researchers (HDRs) benefit from services
     and resources offered by their academic library. Academic librarians are experts on digital,
     information, and research literacies, and can help your higher degree researchers gain
     competency in all these areas. The following sections will introduce you to the research lifecycle
     and point to librarian support during the research journey. Supervisors will also gain tools and
     ideas for higher degree researcher supervision.
     In this chapter we will overview:

         1. The research lifecycle journey including its intersection with academic librarian support
             and artificial intelligence (AI)

         2. Development of a research plan to keep an higher degree researcher candidature on
             target

         3. Selection of bibliographic software to manage citations and to facilitate higher degree
             researcher-Supervisor collaboration

         4. The value of data management and sharing for higher degree researcher recognition and
             reuse

         5. Development of a publishing strategy for higher degree researcher recognition and career
             development

         6. Development of an online presence for wider higher degree researcher engagement and
             impact

         7. Methods for measuring higher degree researcher research impact.
120 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=108

A key role of supervisors is to ensure higher degree researchers become familiar with, and apply good
information literacy practices to inform their research. In developing capacity supervisors will model
their own practices as researchers, and refer higher degree researchers to the resources and experts in
accessible library, e-research and research services. This chapter uses a research lifecycle to illustrate and
frame discussion of the range of skills required, sources of support, and strategies for building literacies.

1. A quick overview of library support for the
research life cycle

Figure 9.1 illustrates the cyclical nature of the research lifecycle and where it intersects with academic
librarian support. In some higher education institutions, elements of the research lifecycle may also be
supported by their research office or other institutional units. The rest of this chapter provides an overview
of the major phases of this diagram. The underlying theme is planning for higher degree researcher success.
                                                                         9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 121

Figure 9.1. Library support for the research life cycle by Claire Ovaska, used under CC BY-SA 4.0 is a
derivative of "Research Life-Cycle" by Morgan Simpson, RMIT University

2. Artificial intelligence (AI) considerations across
the research lifecycle

AI is increasingly shaping how higher degree researchers approach their candidature, offering efficiencies
across the research lifecycle. Developing the ability to engage critically and ethically with AI is essential -
and supervisors play a key role in guiding researchers through this evolving landscape.

     Benefits
122 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

     Thoughtful use of AI can support:
          · Literature reviews: Finding, scanning and summarising large amounts of academic
             literature.
          · Data analysis: Identifying patterns, trends, and anomalies in complex datasets.
          · Writing and editing: Enhancing academic writing, grammar and structure.
          · Time management: Assisting with project and time management and automation of
             repetitive tasks.
          · Idea generation: Suggesting research approaches or hypotheses based on existing data.
          · Visualization tools: Developing clear, compelling data visualizations for sharing complex
             concepts.
          · Language translation: Accessing and interpreting information sources in other languages.
          · Accessibility: Supporting students experiencing disability
          · Collaboration: Facilitating communication and project management between
             collaborators.
          · Ethical awareness: Encouraging critical thinking about data ethics, bias, and responsible
             research.

Understanding AI

Understandably, many people lack a strong understanding of AI technologies and the issues they raise.
However, while AI technology and its uses are rapidly evolving, the principles of ethical and responsible use
remain consistent. Supervisors can support higher degree researchers by introducing the basics of AI and
grounding its use in core values.

     HDR Activity 1

     Watch these short videos [approximately 1:22 each] to gain an understanding of key AI issues.
                                    9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 123

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
        them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=108#oembed-1

Read 10 AI dangers and risks and how to manage them
Read the Living guidelines on responsible AI use in research and adapt EU-specific details to
your context
Reflect on your learnings in relation to your research project.

AI tools

AI functionality is increasingly being embedded across digital research platforms, including tools such
as databases and bibliographic software. Many AI platforms offer free access tiers, while others require
payment. Check with your institution for available proprietary AI products and their usage restrictions.
Below are examples of AI tools for researching literature, writing, editing, and guidance for attribution.
Explore further for AI tools that could support other stages of the research lifecycle, such as data
management and analysis and benchmarking to measure research impact.

Table 9.1. Popular AI tools for researchers (information current at time of writing)

Cost Writing and editing tools Research tools           Attribution tools

Free · Google Notebook · Perplexity · AI attribution toolkit LM · Research Rabbit · GAIDeT declaration generator

Free and paid  · ChatGPT            · Connected Papers
               · Claude             · Elicit
               · Grammarly
               · Microsoft CoPilot

Examples of practice

Support higher degree researchers in exploring AI's potential and responsible use by sharing your own
practices and welcoming their reflections and suggestions.
124 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

3. Plan and design your research

A higher degree researcher research project is a significant undertaking and it is helpful if supervisors
emphasise the importance of having a detailed research plan. A plan will enable your higher degree
researcher to monitor their own progress and steer their project towards timely completion. We have seen
many instances of unnecessary stress for higher degree researchers and supervisors -- and requests for
extensions -- because of inadequate planning.

     Benefits

     A comprehensive research plan:
          · clarifies the research question
          · establishes the overall research design: components may require different designs,
             analyses, and timeframes
          · identifies potential challenges: such as ethics approval, data collection, and research site
             access
          · maximises resources: including time, funding, and personnel
          · provides milestones: facilitating timely completion, identifying areas for improvement,
             and detailing work to be done.

Research parameters

Higher degree researcher research plans should follow discipline parameters and these can vary widely. A
creative arts higher degree researcher might create a literature review, a major creative work, and an exegesis,
while a medicine higher degree researcher might produce a systematic review and conduct a clinical trial.
Having research parameters will minimise duplication of effort across the project.

Research outputs

What is the publication plan for articles, chapters, and books arising from the research project? What are
the requirements of the targeted journals? If your higher degree researcher is part of a team, then who is
responsible for what output?
                                                                         9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 125

Notes, collaboration, and data storage

How will your higher degree researcher take, store, and share their research notes? What text, images,
videos, documents, audio files or other data needs to be recorded? Your higher degree researcher's
understanding of what needs to be kept will help identify storage options.

  · Storing your research: refer to Managing your data section of this chapter
  · Collaboration tools: could include Open Science Framework, Google Docs, LabArchives, Evernote,

      and Trello

Developing a research question and searching strategy

It can be helpful if supervisors and higher degree researchers make a joint appointment with their librarian
to discuss search strategies. Librarians are searching professionals with academic database expertise,
supervisors are seasoned researchers in the field, while higher degree researchers are probably not clear on
what resources they need. We have found that when everyone meets together, the higher degree researcher
leaves with a clearer sense of the task at hand. Appointment discussion points could include:

  · What and how many databases need to be searched?
  · Do relevant databases use subject headings or keywords?
  · Are there discipline registries to be searched?
  · Is there relevant grey literature?
  · What primary, secondary, or tertiary sources need to be found?
  · What publication types or sources are acceptable?
  · What is required by targeted journals?

Examples of practice

Help your higher degree researchers understand the importance of planning their research journey with
stories (good and bad) from your own career, or from your institution or discipline.

4. Manage your citations

Effective management of citations ensures higher degree researchers can provide clear evidence for their
arguments and hypotheses, and avoid plagiarism. Referencing done by hand is time consuming and prone
to transcription errors. Using citation or bibliographic management software means that with a few
clicks your higher degree researcher can insert citations throughout a document in a preferred referencing
126 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

style and save citations for future use. The most popular examples are EndNote, Zotero, Mendeley, and
RefWorks. Each has its strengths and weaknesses, but they all make referencing easier.

     Benefits

     Using bibliographic software:
          · builds a persistent library of research materials
          · enables importing of citations from academic databases
          · tags, labels, and groups references for your research
          · saves, manages, and annotates PDFs
          · reduces the potential for plagiarism
          · manages referencing style compliance.
          · Watch this video [1:31] to find out more about the benefits of using citation management
             tools.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=108#oembed-2

Choosing a citation manager

An important part of the research plan is to identify which citation software will be used. All parties need
to be familiar with the software to use it effectively and efficiently. Also consider possible collaborations and
the software used by colleagues. We have seen instances where the higher degree researcher and supervisors
are familiar with different citation systems (or not familiar with any at all), causing work to be lost or
rendered inaccessible.
Fee-based citation software may be available through your university library, while others are freely available
online. Once you have decided which program to use, we recommend supervisors and higher degree
researchers attend training on how to use it (unless you are an expert user). If your library or institution
does not offer training, go to the software's website for download instructions and training.
                                                                         9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 127

Top tips for citation manager success

  · Expect that learning new software will take time
  · Take advantage of online tutorials, instructions and troubleshooting information
  · Integrate citation manager use into your research habits
  · Check the software is producing the required referencing style correctly
  · Check imported citations for missing information or mistakes.

Examples of practice

Help your higher degree researchers understand the importance of managing their references with stories
(good and bad) from your own career, or from your institution or discipline.
For more citation management resources refer to the reading list.

5. Manage your research data

Managing research data effectively and sharing it with others can unlock many benefits for researchers, and
is an expectation for higher degree researchers today. It is helpful if supervisors encourage higher degree
researchers to develop a research data management plan (DMP) early on to safeguard their data, and to
determine responsibilities and actions required. Connect with your academic library, research office, or
data management experts for more information.

     Benefits

     Published data:
          · is another way to get noticed
          · may be cited by other researchers
          · can lead to collaboration
          · facilitates transparency, trust, and respect
          · may be required for project, journal, or funder compliance
          · can be reused in future projects
          · supports fair and inclusive access to research.
128 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

Research data management planning

Figure 9.2. Research Data Management - Discover, Reuse & Cite by Gaelen Pinnock is used under CC BY-
SA 4.0Developing a data management plan (DMP) is the first step. A DMP establishes a link between the
project and the data, and can inform research activities. Your higher degree researchers will need to consider
and document:

  · Responsibilities relating to data management
  · Ownership and intellectual property considerations
  · Data collection and analysis methods
  · The kinds of data that will be generated and its organisation
  · Data documentation (metadata)
  · Data storage, backup, and collaboration needs
  · Changes to the research project
  · Measures to protect sensitive data
  · Post-project data access, retention, and disposal
  · Requirements for implementing the DMP
If your institution doesn't support DMPs, supervisors can direct higher degree researchers to open-source
tools such as DMPTool which provide templates and guidance for developing robust plans.

Data sharing and publishing

When it comes time for higher degree researchers to share their data, generalist repositories such as the
Open Science Framework and Zenodo are freely available, and well-known. However, your higher degree
researcher may need to deposit their data with your university, national or discipline-specific repository, or
as recommended by a specific journal or funder. Supervisors can also suggest FAIRsharing and Re3Data
registries to identify a suitable data repository.
                      9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 129

Examples of practice

Help your higher degree researchers understand research data management and data sharing with stories
(good and bad) from your own career, or from your institution or discipline.

For more data management resources refer to the reading list.

6. Strategically publish and share your research

Publishing and sharing research results and new knowledge is a responsibility of all researchers. A
combination of scholarly and informal publishing could lead to improved research engagement and
impact by deliberately targeting key academics, government, and industry groups as well as the wider
community. Another consideration is the enormous change that academic publishing has experienced in
recent years. We have seen the rise of new technologies, publishing via Open Access, predatory publishing,
research funding pressures, and more. Today's already time-poor researchers cope with so many demands
on their time that it is important to have a plan or strategy to follow. Supervisors and higher degree
researchers are encouraged to connect with their academic librarian for assistance related to the content of
this section.

Benefits

     Publishing and sharing strategically can:
          · increase engagement, reuse and citations for research outputs
          · highlight research output distinctiveness making it stand out
          · strengthen future grant, job, and promotion applications.

Strategy and being distinctive

Ideally, higher degree researcher research publishing choices should work to increase audience engagement
and impact and contribute to career growth. This requires the development of a publishing strategy that is
personally catered to them. Questions to pose to your higher degree researchers could include:

  · Who should you collaborate with (locally, nationally, and internationally) to build your career? How
      can you make that happen?
130 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

  · Which government, industry, or community groups should you aim to publish with?
  · What is the audience for this research and how can it make a difference?
  · How much should you publish? How do you need to organise yourself to make this happen?
  · What is unique about your research? How could you capitalise on your distinctiveness?
  · How can you vary where you publish to attract new audiences and increase impact?

Understandably, a researcher's publishing strategies will evolve over time to allow for changing
opportunities and circumstances. Supervisors could suggest higher degree researchers revise their strategy
at least once a year. Alternatively, revision will be useful in the lead up to performance appraisals, job
applications, promotion rounds, or grant applications.

Deciding where to publish and which conferences to
attend

Deciding where to publish requires consideration. Where established researchers publish may vary
significantly from where a novice researcher can publish. Higher degree researchers should ask themselves
some questions and develop a shortlist of journals, book publishers, and conferences:

  · Should I publish Open Access articles to maximise citations and engagement? Does my funder
      require me to?

  · What are the key scholarly journals, publishers, or conferences in my reference lists?
  · What journals, publishers, or conferences do my supervisors recommend? Which ones are favoured

      by my discipline?
  · How can I reach my desired audience?
  · Who should I meet and network with at conferences?
  · What is the scope of my shortlisted scholarly journals, book publishers, or conferences?

Due diligence: Predatory journals, book publishers and
conferences

Higher degree researchers should be aware of the increasing number of predatory publishers to be avoided.
Predatory publishers have taken advantage of the Open Access, author-pays, academic publishing model to
make enormous profits. These predatory and deceptive publishers are known to:

  · make dubious claims about the quality or credentials of a journal, conference, or publisher
  · provide limited editorial support
  · fail to meet established peer review standards
  · charge an article processing fee disproportionate to the work they undertake
  · falsely claim that the publication is included in reputable indexes (e.g., Scopus or Web of Science)
                                                                         9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 131

  · adopt a journal or conference name that is easily mistaken for that of a respected entity
  · publish journals that include material from multiple, unrelated disciplines
  · solicit research outputs or conference attendance by emailing authors
  · have shallow websites with few policies and guidelines.

Higher degree researchers also need to become familiar with current predatory publishing practices. Good
journals can be hijacked by profiteers, while some predatory journals have become more acceptable over
time. Shifts in journal quality could arise from a change in journal ownership, editorial board changes, or
from a decision to do better.

     Quality checks

       When deciding where to publish a manuscript or which conference to attend, there is no
       single indicator of quality that Supervisors and higher degree researchers can check. It is
       essential that researchers use multiple indicators and conduct multiple checks.
       Watch this video [1:44] !Think  Check > Submit about journal checks. These principles
       also apply for choosing conferences and book publishers.

                             One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                             view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=108#oembed-3

       Use these checklists to determine the quality of a journal, conference, or book publisher:
       !Think  Check > Submit (journal articles)
       !Think  Check > Attend (conferences)
       !Think  Check > Submit (books and chapters)

Informal platforms and informal publishing

Social media platforms and informal publishing can be useful for building professional networks,
facilitating wider academic and community engagement, and publicising research. Personal preferences
and your experience of disciplinary practices will help your higher degree researchers determine which
social media platforms to use. LinkedIn, Twitter, blogs, Facebook, Threads, Weibo, YouTube, and TikTok
132 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

are popular options. Regular engagement is essential for success. Informal publishing on research news sites
such as ScienceDaily or The Conversation is another way to promote research.
How we work at The Conversation explains how The Conversation publishes globally, and the process for
making articles available for republishing by major news outlets (e.g., ABC News, CNN, BBC, The Jakarta
Post, and The Guardian). Timing is everything for your higher degree researcher to make a successful
pitch, such as in the lead up to relevant a current affairs event, or prior to your higher degree researcher
announcing a research breakthrough.

     HDR Activity 2

     Reflect on your career goals (or who do you want to emulate) and how your research outputs
     could help you achieve this goal. Note your ideas and revisit and revise them from time-to-time.

Examples of practice

Help your higher degree researchers understand the importance of developing a publishing strategy and
share stories (good and bad) from your own career, or from your institution or discipline.
For more publishing resources refer to the reading list at the end of this chapter.

7. Building a professional online identity

Building a professional online identity facilitates being noticed beyond your immediate sphere. Online
profiles have become tools to improve and demonstrate engagement and impact. Encouraging your higher
degree researchers to build and maintain key online profiles is a valuable part of their career strategy. This
section provides information and tools to help your higher degree researchers establish professional online
identities. You can also connect them with your academic library or research office for assistance.

     Benefits
                                                                        9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 133

     A solid and professional online identity can:
          · support job, promotion, or grant applications
          · promote achievements and research outputs
          · facilitate citation and other metrics
          · facilitate professional and community engagement
          · connect with collaborators
          · avoid misattribution of research outputs
          · disseminate research to broader audiences.

Apply these ideas in practice

Most higher degree researchers will arrive with an existing online footprint that they are probably taking
for granted. On commencement of their studies, they need to reflect on this aspect of their lives by:

  · considering what online profiles are best suited to supporting their research and career journey
  · considering what online profiles they are prepared to keep current
  · taking advantage of all editable fields to evidence the breadth of their activities and interests
  · considering privacy issues for professional and personal online identities.

     HDR Activity 3

     Search for yourself online:
          · note positive material for sharing or reuse
          · clean up undesirable content
          · update social media profiles or close unwanted accounts
          · It is recommended that higher degree researchers repeat this activity at least once a year.

ORCID

ORCID profiles are free and belong to their creators. The most important role for an ORCID profile
134 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

is disambiguating individual researcher's names and outputs from others with similar names. This is
critical in an era where algorithms match authors with research outputs. As a result, many employers,
publishers, and funding bodies now ask researchers for their ORCID numbers. This disambiguation
purpose means your higher degree researchers should only have one profile over the life of their careers
(removing additional or duplicate profiles).
Your higher degree researchers can find out more with the following video describing ORCID [4:16]

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=108#oembed-4

     HDR Activity 4

     Search ORCID for your name spelled out in full, then try your initials and surname. Were you
     surprised at how many researchers have your exact or similar names to you?

     HDR Activity 5

     Create and/or update your ORCID profile. If necessary, reset your login details to regain access.

Google Scholar

Google is the world's most used search engine, so it makes sense for higher degree researchers to set up a
free Google Scholar profile. They can enhance their profiles by adding a photograph, research keywords,
and a link to an ORCID profile. Once set up, they require little maintenance and will provide your higher
degree researchers with comprehensive citation data.
                                   9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 135

Other online profiles

Your higher degree researchers may be interested in other online profiles to build their network and
share research outputs. Platforms such as ResearchGate and Academia are primarily used for scholarly
networking. LinkedIn showcases professional activities and facilitates networking. Other popular options
include X/Twitter, blogs, Facebook, Weibo, Instagram, Snapchat, Threads, YouTube, and TikTok.

Examples of practice

Help your higher degree researchers understand the importance of developing a professional online
identity and share stories (good and bad) from your own career, or from your institution or discipline.
For more professional online identity resources refer to the reading list.

8. Measuring research impact

The need to measure research performance is intrinsic
for contemporary higher education institutions, and
this has traditionally been achieved through research
metrics. This is problematic as no one metric can sum
up the contribution of a researcher or research output,
or account for differences between disciplines and
career stages. Some higher degree researchers may be
able to use bibliometrics to gauge their productivity,
citations, and collaborations. However, alternative metrics and qualitative evidence are probably better
suited to evidencing impact for emerging researchers. Here we provide information and tools to help your
higher degree researchers craft their impact narratives. You may also want to connect with your academic
library or research office resources and experts.

Benefits
Building an impact narrative can:
136 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

          · support publishing decisions
          · support job, promotion, and grant applications
          · identify potential collaborators and workplaces.

Bibliometrics

Bibliometrics refers to quantitative analysis of journals and article citation data and is rooted in formal
academic publishing. Bibliometrics inform (and often confuse) researchers, higher degree researchers,
and stakeholders. Broadly, journal level metrics are used as indicators for the prestige or quality of a
journal, and not individual researchers or outputs. They may provide useful data for deciding where to
publish. Scimago is Elsevier's free journal-ranking product. Article level metrics can be used to assess the
productivity, apparent quality, and collaborations of researchers and research groups, but they are less
useful for assessing fledgling higher degree researcher researchers. Researchers can access free citation data
by setting up a Google Scholar profile.

     Find out more

     Are your higher degree researchers confused about metric terms such as Field-Weighted Citation Impact
     (FWCI) and h-index? Direct students to the Metrics Toolkit for clarification.

     HDR Activity 6

     Help your higher degree researchers understand the responsible use of metrics for research
     assessment. Have them:

          · read Harnessing The Metric Tide for key principles, page 24
          · watch the Leiden Manifesto [4:28] for using research metrics for research evaluation
          · read the Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA) recommendations for research
                               9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 137

   evaluation stakeholders
· reflect on their learnings.

Alternative metrics

Alternative metrics are used to gauge research impact beyond traditional academic publishing, and could
be useful for higher degree researchers who are gaining publicity and/or are active social media users.
Alternative metrics track research outputs via a DOI or other persistent identifiers in a variety of social
and news media sites, policy documents, blogs, Wikipedia, and more. higher degree researchers could
manually record their views, downloads, mentions, followers, sales, etc. Alternatively, Altmetric collates
many alternative metrics in a neat package. It is a paid platform but it does offer some free functionality for
individuals and institutions.

Your higher degree researchers can find out more about Altmetrics video [2:59]

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=108#oembed-5

Other sources of evidence

Higher degree researchers can look beyond metrics to other sources of evidence to support job, promotion,
and grant applications. Evidence alternatives could include letters of appreciation, awards, positive reviews,
and more. Encourage your higher degree researchers to develop a system so that their qualitative evidence
is stored and accessible for future use.

Examples of practice

Help your higher degree researchers understand the value of measuring research impact and share stories
(good and bad) from your own career, or from your institution or discipline.
For more research benchmarking resources refer to the reading list.
138 | 9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE

Conclusion

In this chapter we have covered major phases of the research lifecycle that your higher degree researchers
will navigate during their studies. The long list of `things' they need to consider and achieve may seem
daunting, but our central message is the value of planning. Project planning, citation management, data
management, publication strategies, research promotion, and career planning are all crucial. Though never
easy, solid planning contributes to lasting success. Remember, you and your higher degree researchers are
not alone. If you reach out to your library or research office, you'll find partners dedicated to higher degree
researcher success.

     Additional Resources

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

        Auckland University of Technology. (2023). Which reference manager? Comparison of
        EndNote, Mendeley and Zotero. https://aut.ac.nz.libguides.com/managingreferences
        Committee on Data. (2022). Research data management terminology. https://codata.org/
        initiatives/data-science-and-stewardship/rdm-terminology-wg/rdm-terminology/
        Digital Curation Centre. (n.d.). Example DMPs and guidance. https://www.dcc.ac.uk/resources/
        data-management-plans/guidance-examples
        Directory of Open Access Journals. (n.d.). Find open access journals and articles.
        https://doaj.org/
        Feldman, Z., & Sandoval, M. (2018). Metric power and the academic self: Neoliberalism,
        knowledge and resistance in the British university. TripleC, 16(1), 214-233. https://doi.org/
        10.31269/triplec.v16i1.899
        James Cook University Library. (2023). Publishing academic research.
        https://libguides.jcu.edu.au/publishing
        James Cook University Library. (2023). Researcher profiles, identifiers and engagement.
        https://libguides.jcu.edu.au/identifiers-engagement
                                                              9. BUILDING LITERACIES FOR THE RESEARCH LIFECYCLE | 139

James Cook University Library. (2023). Using research indicators. https://libguides.jcu.edu.au/
research-indicators
Sherpa Services. (n.d.). Search across Sherpa services. https://beta.sherpa.ac.uk/
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. (2021). Open science.
https://en.unesco.org/science-sustainable-future/open-science/recommendation
140 | 10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS

10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH
SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING
INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER
DEGREE RESEARCHERS

   Lyndelle Gunton; Sal Kleine; and Stephanie Bradbury

     Why read this chapter?

     Every day we all apply skills to find, evaluate, organise, and use information. This may be as
     simple as searching for a specific product in an online store, where the consequence of
     employing an ad hoc approach is low risk. However, in the context of conducting research in
     higher education, understanding how to "seek, evaluate, use and create information effectively"
     (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2023), or information literacy,
     is key to producing credible and reliable research outputs.
     Information literacy empowers higher degree researchers to achieve their research goals.
     Developing the information literacy of higher degree researchers ensures they can achieve
     program milestones, become valued contributors in the wider research environment, and can
     improve their employability.
     This chapter will be of benefit to research supervisors and decision-makers in institutions
     seeking to:

          · actively develop higher degree researchers' information literacy
          · strengthen the role of supervisors as an influencer of knowledge and skills development

             that inform information literacy
          · consider how to position information literacy within the broader development of the

             higher degree researcher.
     Key takeaways

          · Developing sophisticated, generic, and discipline specific information literacy is an
             essential part of learning to be a researcher. Opportunities for training should be
              10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
                                                                                                                                    RESEARCHERS | 141

             incorporated into early stages of any higher degree research program.
          · Library staff can provide valuable expertise and support in the development of

             information literacy, and form part of your higher degree researcher's support network
             and your own research community.
          · Quality, open educational resources are available to use in supporting your higher degree
             researcher's skill development in finding, retrieving, managing, and using information
             effectively.
          · Proactively seeking opportunities to discuss these topics with higher degree researchers
             may support your own upskilling and maintenance of relevant skills in these areas.
          · As a supervisor, you play an influential role in the development of information literacy for
             your higher degree researcher.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=112

A framework for developing information literacy
skills for research

A commitment to developing effective skills for finding and using information is not always seen as a
priority in the context of a broader research skills program. We know that the early stages of a research
degree can be exciting but also stressful. Often, the priorities of both the higher degree researcher and
supervisor are elsewhere, particularly if the researcher is also negotiating additional challenges such as
finding accommodation, adjusting to living in a different country, navigating a second language, or any
combination of other factors.

However, there is a need to focus on developing advanced information literacy early in the research
program. This derives from understanding that the relevant skills and knowledge associated with effective
searching, accessing, retrieving, organising, and using information are essential for success. Appropriate
skills development will instil good habits, reduce stress, and potentially prevent issues from emerging later
in the research program.

Some higher degree researchers commence their studies with an advanced understanding of these
important skills. They benefit from being adept at using systems and tools to make effective use of the
information environment. However, many are neither equipped nor aware of the gaps in their knowledge
142 | 10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS

and skills, or the impact that may have on their progress. While higher degree researchers may become aware
of their need to upskill from a librarian or other sources, encouragement from supervisors can ensure that
information literacy training is prioritised.

Research shows that supervisors can have a significant influence on the way, and the extent to which,
higher degree researchers develop effective information literacy (United Kingdom Research Information
Network, 2011). Evidence also suggests that higher degree researchers will often seek guidance or help
from their supervisors before exploring other avenues, such as librarians (Harrington, 2009). Therefore,
supervisors need to focus higher degree researchers' attention on the importance of information literacy
and, sometimes, assist in identifying gaps and potential opportunities for training.

The questions that need to be asked are:

 1. How can this be done in a way that ensures consistent development of advanced information literacy
      across all higher degree researchers, regardless of educational, cultural, professional, or scholarly
      backgrounds?

 2. How can higher degree researchers access foundational support to develop nuanced information
      literacy and knowledge transferable to discipline specific fields of study and research contexts?

A 2022 review of Australian doctoral employability indicated that supervisors are the primary educators
of higher degree researchers (Chen et al., 2023). While the review highlighted the uncertainty around
researcher training requirements and supervisory roles, the findings supported the need for, at least,
doctoral supervisors to work in partnership with other professionals to develop their higher degree
researchers' career learning requirements (Chen et al., 2023).

Supervisors may not have the expertise or time to share and train their higher degree researchers in finding
and managing information. This is where the value of partnering and communicating with library (or
other research support) staff is critical. Where this service and support is absent, the availability of quality,
freely accessible training resources for information literacy is essential. With these supports, supervisors can
successfully guide their higher degree researchers to:

  · develop foundational skills to use information for research independently and effectively
  · prepare for their first higher degree research milestone
  · understand and operate in the scholarly publishing environment
  · ensure they have the skills and capabilities to conduct research now and into the future, regardless of

      the academic, professional or industry context in which they find themselves
  · develop a robust support network by connecting with library staff, other research support experts,

      and peers where available.

The encouragement of supervisors is acknowledged as valuable in motivating higher degree researchers
to develop their information literacy. However, more formal methods of training are seen as critical in
              10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
                                                                                                                                    RESEARCHERS | 143

ensuring the effectiveness of these skills (Zhao, 2019). Participation in programs developed and delivered
with, or by, librarians is recommended where available. If not, the use of recognised quality training
programs is preferred, such as Advanced Information Research Skills (AIRS).

The Advanced Information Research Skills (AIRS)
framework

AIRS is one example of how information literacy training can be effectively delivered for higher degree
researchers. It is a model that highlights the value of support for higher degree researchers by the library
and other areas of a higher education institution. AIRS learning content is freely available from a public
facing website, which can be accessed by anyone at any time (Figure 10.1). It is an open educational resource
that is Creative Commons licensed (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) so it can be freely used and adapted for training
purposes.

    Figure 10.1 AIRS Home Page by QUT Library, used under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

The model and curriculum

AIRS is a mandatory, accredited, coursework unit for all Queensland University of Technology (QUT)
higher degree researchers enrolled in Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), Master of Philosophy (MPhil), and
Doctor of Education programs. QUT Library has delivered advanced information literacy training via
AIRS since 1989. The reputation and credibility of AIRS is evidenced through its acknowledgement or
144 | 10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS

adoption by many other higher education institutions across Australia, for the purpose of training higher
degree researchers.

AIRS seeks to set the standard in information literacy training for higher degree researchers by providing
current, relevant, and credible learning outcomes, and enables active engagement through quality,
innovative learning and teaching strategies. There is a focus on ensuring AIRS meets the transdisciplinary
and transferable skill needs of contemporary researchers, while continuing to meet organisational priorities,
as well as industry and Australian higher education standards.

To best meet higher degree researcher needs, the AIRS program focuses on knowledge and skill
development that is important for the early stages of candidature, namely finding, organising, and using
information, and embeds the skills required to effectively scope the initial literature review for the research
topic. Offering AIRS at the commencement of the research degree builds researcher confidence as they
approach the first program milestone. This is evidenced by extensive data showing that most higher degree
researchers achieve strong outcomes in the unit. Research also indicates that information literacy training
attendees are more likely to seek support in later stages of their research degree from library staff, having
developed those connections already. This can clearly have a flow on effect beyond any training in which
higher degree researchers participate (Zhao et al., 2023).

AIRS currently consists of a series of online modules (Figure 10.2), workshop recordings, learning
activities, and knowledge checks that step learners through information literacy development in a logical
way. This aligns with the research lifecycle and the journey that higher degree researchers are likely to
take during their program. More specifically, attention is focused on the development of essential skills for
finding, evaluating, managing, and using information relevant to a research topic. This is supplemented by
enhancing capabilities in research integrity, research data management, scholarly publishing, publication
metrics, and research impact.
              10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
                                                                                                                                    RESEARCHERS | 145

Figure 10.2 Modules offered by AIRS by QUT Library, used under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence

The AIRS learning objectives and learning resources have been informed by organisational information
literacy frameworks, based on the Australian and New Zealand Information Literacy Framework standards
(Bundy, 2004). Further, practitioner research and feedback from students and supervisors have also
continued to shape the curriculum. This has led to an increased focus on the development of transferable
skills, as the needs of many higher degree research graduates have shifted to include other career pathways
outside academia.
Evaluation is key to delivering a program that meets user needs. The ongoing effectiveness of information
literacy training can be evaluated in a number of ways. Without an accredited form of instruction that
includes formal assessment, these evaluation strategies may be more informal. This could include
consideration of session attendance numbers, the qualitative and quantitative data from participant
feedback surveys, or the results of learner self-assessment of skill levels before and after training. These
mechanisms can enable the development and evaluation of higher degree researchers' learning outcomes
and skills, to support them throughout their research studies and beyond (Zhao et al., 2023).

Learning and supervisory support for skills development

AIRS is one example of a framework that provides supervisors and higher degree researchers with a clear
approach for the development of capabilities in a contemporary research context. We know that higher
146 | 10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS

degree researchers start their programs with a variety of experience, expertise, and cultural and education
backgrounds. It is further acknowledged and understood that higher degree researchers don't know what
they don't know. By supporting and promoting an AIRS-style approach to information literacy training,
supervisors can ensure that higher degree researchers do not miss the opportunity to develop important
skills from ignorance or over confidence.

When information literacy training is mandatory, expectations are formal and clear, and participants
develop consistent, generic skills in finding and managing information for research. However, building on
these generic skills with subject specific information resources and tools is vital for information literacy
in any field of research. Supervisors can play a key role by explaining the merits of time and effort spent
in building these skills. This may extend to guidance on conducting literature reviews and synthesising
information from multiple sources and using designated referencing styles and citation management tools.
There are further opportunities for supervisors to share information about key authors, journals, and other
scholarly publications, conferences, and relevant transdisciplinary and emerging research areas, for higher
degree researchers to monitor. Other university or institutional support staff, such as librarians, can offer
further support in the use of highly specific information searching tools.

To assist, supervisors can access and use the AIRS modules as a framework for guiding higher degree
researchers through the research process. The ability to openly access the online learning resources for the
AIRS program under a Creative Commons licence has long aligned with the principles of open education,
as supported by reputable educational institutions and research organisations globally. This type of free
access means that training providers, such as academic libraries and higher educational institutions, can use
and adapt the materials as part of their own programs based on the specific context and institution.

Apply these ideas in your practice

AIRS has shown us that higher degree researchers can develop a stronger skills foundation when partnering
with supervisors who actively engage in their progress and encourage them to cultivate relationships with
key research support staff. That support network will be different depending on individual higher degree
researchers, the supervisors, and the institution. Further, the development of a community of learners
engaging with information literacy training at the same time is of added benefit, providing peer learning
and support, transdisciplinary networking, and opportunities for collaboration.

As such, developing and maintaining professional relationships with research support and library staff is
a way that you can model good networking and collaborative practices. Partnering with colleagues and
library staff can help you to introduce research skills training for higher degree researchers. You will see
longer term benefits from making time to introduce higher degree researchers to key stakeholders and help
them to build their personal learning networks. As a supervisor, you are ideally positioned to explain the
value of setting up systems, and using appropriate tools, for managing information to your higher degree
researcher. By sharing personal stories of successes and failures, you can demonstrate the importance of
              10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
                                                                                                                                    RESEARCHERS | 147

planning and preparing to find, retrieve, evaluate, store, and use information. You can step your higher
degree researcher through the approaches you have developed and used for managing literature and other
information. This may include a range of analogue and/or digital systems and tools that enable you to
effectively record and access your information. There is no one right way in which to do this. What works
for one may not work for others. Higher degree researchers will find approaches that work for them, but
you can prompt consideration by providing examples of approaches that have worked for you.

A key benefit of supervising is what you can also learn from your higher degree researcher. As they
progress through their research journey, they will be exposed to the latest tools, practices, and services
that take advantage of emerging technologies. As a supervisor, you can access the AIRS units for your
own professional development. Working through the AIRS modules on an annual basis may be a useful
practice. Where available, you can attend advanced training sessions hosted by your library. Researchers
can also benefit from training provided by vendors on their databases or other subscription information
resources that may be hosted by institutional libraries. There are a range of openly available training
resources, such as AIRS, that focus on finding and evaluating information through an open (e.g., Creative
Commons) license, that can be freely reused and adapted for teaching and research purposes.

Evidence your practice

One way to demonstrate supervisory capabilities is by emphasising your awareness of the value of advanced
information literacy. Additionally, you can implement proactive strategies and model a commitment to
supporting higher degree researchers to both develop these skills and seek assistance from relevant experts
when required.

An inclusive approach can ensure you gain access to the wealth of knowledge and experience available from
fellow supervisors and other research support experts. Knowledge-sharing between supervisors and higher
degree researchers can create pathways to further training options and support services that can enhance
the effective use of information for research. By using and adapting existing resources and tools, you can
positively contribute to shaping the information literacy of your higher degree researchers, resulting in
improved research outcomes.
148 | 10. EMPOWERING RESEARCH SUPERVISORS: DEVELOPING INFORMATION LITERACY IN HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Bundy, A. (Ed.). (2004). Australian and New Zealand information literacy framework: Principles,
   standards and practice (2nd ed.). Australian and New Zealand Institute for Information Literacy.
   https://kushima38.kagoyacloud.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/InfoLiteracyFramework.pdf

Chen, L., Mewburn, I., & Suominen, H. (2023). Australian doctoral employability: A systematic review
   of challenges and opportunities. Higher Education Research & Development. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   07294360.2023.2240715

Harrington, M. R. (2009). Information literacy and research-intensive graduate students: Enhancing the
   role of research librarians. Behavioral & Social Sciences Librarian, 28(4), 179-201. https://core.ac.uk/
   download/pdf/61656845.pdf

QUT Library. (2012, May 15). AIRS - Advanced Information Research Skills. Queensland University of
   Technology. https://airs.library.qut.edu.au/

United Kingdom Research Information Network. (2011). The role of research supervisors in information
   literacy. https://dfdf.dk/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Research_supervisors_report_for_screen.pdf

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2023). Information literacy.
   UNESCO Information for All Programme. https://www.unesco.org/en/ifap/information-literacy

Zhao, S. (2019). A study of graduate students' information literacy needs in the electronic resource
   environment [Doctoral thesis, University of Windsor]. Scholarship at UWindsor.
   https://scholar.uwindsor.ca/etd/7747

Zhao, S., Luo, R., Sabina, C., & Pillon, K. (2023). The effect of information literacy training on graduate
   students' ability to use library resources. College and Research Libraries, 84(1), 7-29. https://crl.acrl.org/
   index.php/crl/article/view/25747
                                                    11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING | 149

11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE
RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING

   Alan McAlpine

     Why read this chapter?

     From this chapter you will learn:
          · to best support the future career needs of your higher degree research (HDR) students
          · about frameworks/theories that describe career development
          · to have a conversation in a student-centred way
          · to help your students broaden their possible future opportunities.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=116

As supervisors, chances are that the majority of your career has been primarily in an academic role. You
may view your purpose as supervisors to encourage, educate, and train the next wave of career academics.
This is an admirable goal and a very important part of your role. However, the reality is that your higher
degree researchers (despite their current desires) may not become academics; indeed, the statistics show
(see Table 11.1) that more will end up in non-academic roles. Many will secure opportunities in industry
(indeed they may have come from industry and intend to return with their newfound research skills),
and some may even venture into producing start-up ventures. Others may end up working in local, state,
or federal government jobs utilising the strong critical thinking skills they have acquired. A number will
end up in roles that have nothing to do with the discipline for which they are currently being trained. As
supervisors and mentors to higher degree researchers, you can open their eyes to the multiple pathways
(which include academic roles) that a research degree can provide. However, this does not mean you need
to have, or provide, all the answers. You can enable higher degree researchers to use their current studies as
the stepping stone to whatever future they desire, to keep them motivated through research degree studies,
150 | 11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING

and to use challenges as opportunities for skills development and rely upon and use to become independent
researchers pursuing career futures.

             Table 11.1. Analysis of the QILT national GOS data file 2016-2022

Year   HDR grads in employment  HDR Grads employed in  % HDR Grads employed in higher
                                higher ed              ed
2018
2019   5163                     2413                   47%
2020
2021   5278                     2416                   46%
2022
Total  5238                     2609                   50%

       4827                     2323                   48%

       5045                     2309                   46%

       25551                    12070                  47%

This chapter offers some tips and techniques for supervisors working with higher degree researchers on
empowering them to find their own pathways and to value the role of their studies in progressing their
future careers. These ideas can have relevance for higher degree researchers, and early career researchers
working with supervisors as they seek to pursue career futures.

The higher education sector has encountered a huge increase in the number of students undertaking
research degrees and increases in academic roles have not kept pace... this should not discourage the higher
forms of formal education. Doctoral completions are good for our economy as a whole and offer higher
degree researchers' multiple options and pathways (Casey, 2009). We have invested in their education, why
would we not invest in their future? It will pay back dividends to society as a whole.

Career development - What is it and why is it
important?

The majority of us have careers and so we may believe we are experts in career development. This statement
may only be partly true. We often believe that our experience is the only experience; however, if we have a
conversation with our networks, we will find that all our experiences are unique.

Like any other skill or attribute, if we can access tools, develop techniques, and practice these skills we can
become more accomplished in their use. At a basic level some of the key features of career development are:

  · Understanding self, skills, and qualities.
  · A career comprises everything we do, not just paid employment.
  · Understanding the job market (in and beyond the current field of study).
  · Developing job searching strategies.
                                                     11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING | 151

  · Building networks and connections.
  · Seeking out mentors.

So, in a certain way of thinking about it, Career Development is a process. As supervisors, your role is not to
provide the answers or assume you know what the future direction of your higher degree researchers will be
(you may have a view), but to support them in applying the process. Supervisors can be a starting point for
higher degree researchers in building networks and as their mentors. One of the biggest challenges higher
degree researchers may face is that they have become very specialised in their research, and so can struggle
to see the big picture. This big picture can help those seeking opportunities outside of their research
specialisation or outside of academia.

All of this can provide a strong foundation for higher degree researchers as they begin to navigate the ever-
changing world and find their career pathway.

The world of work in the 21st Century is highly complex and continually evolving. The impact of
technology has made the possibilities of work both more exciting and challenging. Many of the jobs that
higher degree researchers will take up in the future have possibly not yet even been imagined.

In this VUCA (Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Ambiguous) world, career resilience has become far more
important (Bennis & Nannus, 2007). Lyons et al. (2015) demonstrated the growing importance of career
resilience within career development interventions, proposing it as a way of coping with the challenges the
new world of work is throwing at us. Thus, it is highly likely that today's higher degree researchers will
come across numerous challenges that they are required to overcome. As supervisors, you can, through
discussion, support your students to unpack these challenges and help them apply coping and problem-
solving skills they are developing to move forward. These experiences and skills will all inform their future
career progression.

Career frameworks

In the career world, there is no overarching unifying theory. Numerous theories and frameworks continue
to evolve in response to the dynamic world of work. Early in the development of Career Theory, Parsons
& Wigtil (1974) showed that individuals could be matched to groups of occupations based upon certain
personality traits. While certain parts of this theory still hold true (the personality of a person often
will determine what occupational types are attractive to them), the interactions that guide a person in a
particular career direction have been shown to be far more complex.

Here I briefly describe a well-known, and commonly referenced/used, framework (Systems Theory
Framework) and a theory (Chaos Theory) that I hope can guide and inform supervisor's conversations with
higher degree researchers. My intention here is not to create career development experts or advisors but
simply to provide and inform some of the practices for working with higher degree researchers to realise
their research independence and career direction.
152 | 11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING

Systems Theory Framework (STF)

The Systems Theory Framework (STF) as outlined by Patton & McMahon (2006) brings together several
theories and models of career development. It acknowledges that an individual's life and career choices are
influenced by many and varied factors. It puts the individual at the centre of the framework and recognises
the interpersonal concepts that can influence that person. It is important to note, at this point, that often
in non-Western cultures this may not be the case; in some instances, collectivist cultures, the value of group,
community or family is viewed as more important than that of the individual in a decision-making process.
It is worth keeping this in mind when working with higher degree researchers from cultural backgrounds
that may be different from your own.
The framework includes the influence of external factors in the decisions an individual may make and
opportunities available to them, e.g., current socio-economic situation, geographical location, etc. It then
considers the influence of past, present, and future experiences, because the importance of certain factors
are likely to change over time.
The occurrence of chance also plays a factor in an individual's influences, and, as Chaos theory shows, we
can take advantage of this too.

                              Figure 11.1 Systems Theory Framework by Patton and
                              McMahon. All Rights Reserved. Used with permission
                                                     11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING | 153

Chaos theory of careers

This theory as outlined by Pryor & Bright (2011) takes account of the fact that we live in a world that
is both stable and constantly changing. It recognises that while we cannot control the chance events that
occur in our world, we can take proactive actions to take advantage of chance events when they happen.
We can still plan.

This theory proposes that trying different things and pushing ourselves outside of our comfort zone
helps generate the occurrence of more chance events, and so opportunities. The trick is then to be able
to recognise which opportunities fit with our desires, plans, and future aspirations. Self-awareness is
everything.

I have introduced two of the many theories in career development. A simple Google search will identify
numerous others. The two briefly outlined here provide an overarching framework to support supervisors
in conducting career conversations with higher degree researchers. But they need to be applied in a
conversational way - you cannot simply provide your higher degree research student with the theories
alone.

Your practice

When to have a career conversation

It is never too late, or too early, to have a career conversation with a higher degree researcher. For some
individuals a formal, regular conversation might be more appropriate (e.g., once per year, or every 6
months), where there is a date set and expectations are clear prior to the conversation. For other higher
degree researchers, ad-hoc, unplanned conversations may arise when supervisors (and possibly they) least
expect it. Supervisors need to be well prepared to make the most of both of these opportunities.

The term of a research degree in proportion to the length of a career is very short. With some good and
deliberate career conversations, supervisors can set up higher degree researchers with the foundations for
the rest of their careers.

How to have a `narrative' conversation

Narrative Therapy is a counselling technique that puts the individual as the expert in their own lives
(Ackerman, 2017). Often supervisors are in a position of power as higher degree researchers come to them
for advice. Supervisors can feel pressured to provide all the answers for them. A narrative conversation is
one where supervisors can empower higher degree researchers to make decisions based upon their own
experiences and expertise based more firmly in the realities of their lives. A narrative conversation seeks to
154 | 11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING

`externalise' the issue at hand and encourages the individual to seek other `narratives' that best describe and
deal with the issue or challenge.

This approach seeks to open the conversation up using open questioning techniques and seeks to
investigate strengths in the individual to best tackle the challenges presented. The conversation may result
in some homework where higher degree researchers apply their practice of going off and conducting
research to find ways of tackling the issue at hand that can be discussed later with their supervisors. For
example:

Higher Degree Researcher - "My issue is that this is all too hard. I don't have the ability to work through this
problem and I don't have the right skills and knowledge."

Supervisor - "So there is a challenge, and you need to find the right tools to help solve it. What tools do you
usually rely on when things get tough?"

The tendency (or the strong desire) to provide solutions can be overwhelming for some supervisors in
conversations with higher degree researchers. The narrative conversation does not preclude providing
advice or ideas; however, it has to be undertaken in a way that provides choice and empowers higher degree
researchers.
Instead of:

"What I suggest you do here is..."

The following may provide alternative approaches to the conversation:

"Have you thought about other ways you might approach this matter?"

"What other ways have you thought about this?"

"I wonder who else you could talk to about this who may have had a similar experience?" (Creates action).

If you did wish to share an example from your own experience, then:
"I found myself in a similar situation and what I did was..." This approach does not `tell' the individual
what to do but provides guidance to one possible solution.

     Case study

       A higher degree researcher approaches a supervisor regarding future opportunities. They
       are a local higher degree researcher and have recently become aware that the future
                                                     11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING | 155

       research opportunities (in their specialisation) are all overseas. They have close family ties
       locally, and have no great desire to leave the local area to pursue.
       Supervisor - What interested you in your topic area in the first instance?
       Higher Degree Researcher - The topic area is of great interest personally, and I was keen to
       pursue a research degree.
       Supervisor - Why was the topic of particular personal interest?
       Higher Degree Researcher - The desire to make a difference in people's lives in my
       community.
       Supervisor - That is an admirable motivation. What have you learned about yourself
       through doing research studies?
       Higher Degree Researcher - That it can be a long slow process to break new ground, that
       the impact upon the field can take a while.
       Supervisor - What skills have you developed in undertaking research?
       Higher Degree Researcher - patience, persistence, resilience....
       Supervisor - Where else, locally, could you apply those skills?
       Higher Degree Researcher - I am not sure?
       Supervisor - Given your passion for making a difference locally, in your topic area, I wonder
       where else you could apply those qualities.
       Higher Degree Researcher - Mmm, not sure. Maybe there are some local businesses I could
       apply to.
       Supervisor - True. I wonder who you could chat with first before looking for specific work?
       Higher Degree Researcher - Yeah. Maybe I could ask my cousins who work in some of those
       areas?
       Supervisor - That sounds like a great plan.

Some useful tips

  · Learn and practice how to have a `narrative' conversation. Ask your colleagues and higher degree
      researchers to tell their stories.

  · Try not to be an advice giver; learn and practice to do this in a way that provides the student with a
      choice.

  · Give the benefit of your experience (it is valuable).
  · You cannot be what you cannot see (much used in the equity space, but valid in all - from a careers
156 | 11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING

      perspective, that is seeing the types of roles you would like to engage with or making contacts to
      build experience or networks).
  · The importance of understanding what the student's underlying motivator may be, e.g., perhaps
      they have had a parent who suffered from a particular ailment, and this is the presenting motivator
      for undertaking the current research. This is a valid motivator, however there may be other ways to
      meet this important and inherent need.
  · Validate higher degree researchers' thinking.
  · For some the motivation to find gainful employment may be the driving force...and that is OK.
  · Refer to career experts (your university may/should have a career service - if not, there are plenty of
      resources to be found online).

Mentoring and networking

The use of mentors from industry and broader disciplinary networks to build effective networks is an
extremely useful way of helping higher degree researchers. Mentors can provide other voices into the
career conversation as well as links to opportunities that higher degree researchers may not yet have
considered. Supervisors will have many other networks to offer as well (maybe you haven't considered
how wide your own network is - other academics, industry partners, etc.) The often-used catchcry of
`It's not what you know but who you know' holds some truth but is only partly correct. It is both
"what you know" and "who you know" that is important. The creation of networks, both large and
small, feeds into the Chaos Theory model mentioned earlier, and opens both untapped and unimagined
opportunities. As supervisors, you can show higher degree researchers how to leverage contacts to develop
new networks and mentors. It is important that higher degree researchers learn to engage with new
contacts, rather than supervisors directly handing them over to possible contacts. Building higher degree
researchers' abilities and confidence in proactively reaching out is another valuable skill for them to develop.
Encouraging higher degree researchers to join student clubs and professional associations will also help
them to develop skills and build their network. Supervisors can monitor the success, or otherwise, of higher
degree researchers in making a connection and this can be monitored during career conversations.

Applying this to your practice

Now is your opportunity to practice some of the techniques:

  · Arrange a Career Conversation with one of your higher degree researchers.
  · Prepare by setting out some broad questions to help guide your thoughts in the conversation.
  · Consider some questions that allow the higher degree researcher to understand what may be

      influencing their decision-making process (influencers). Ask them to decide on at least one action to
      take.
  · Take time to reflect on the conversation afterwards:
                                                     11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING | 157

          What appeared to work well?
          What might you choose to change?
          What in particular did you notice about the higher degree researcher's story?
          Did it fit with any particular framework introduced here?
          What, if any, were the particular motivations or influencers on the higher degree researcher's

            decision(s)?
  · Arrange a follow up conversation and hear about what happened with any agreed actions.

Conclusion

This chapter has been written to provide supervisors with practices in supporting higher degree researchers
in pursuing future careers. The world of work is rapidly changing and the many and varied opportunities
that they have before them can be overwhelming, some of which we probably haven't even as-yet imagined.
Supervisors are supporting the best and brightest in our community - higher degree researchers are the
most highly educated cohorts in our country and world. These frameworks and approaches are intended
to help supervisors to provide the best support they can to succeed in their future careers.

     Additional Resources

             While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
             lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

     Denholm, J.C., & Carey, T.D. (Eds.) (2012). Doctorates Downunder: Keys to successful doctoral
     study in Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand. ACER Press.

References
158 | 11. EMPOWERING HIGHER DEGREE RESEARCHERS' CAREER PLANNING

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Ackerman, C. E. (2017). 19 best narrative therapy techniques and worksheets. Positive Psychology.com.
https://positivepsychology.com/narrative-therapy/

Casey, B. H. (2009). The economic contribution of PhDs. Journal of Higher Education Policy and
   Management, 31, 219-227.

Bennis, W. & Nanus, B. (2007). Leaders: Strategies for taking charge (2nd ed.). Harper Business Essentials.
Lyons, S. T., Schweitzer, L. & Ng, E. S. W. (2015). Resilience in the modern career. Career Development

   International, 20(4), 363-383.

Parsons, G. E. & Wigtil, J. V. (1974). Occupational mobility as measured by Holland's theory of career
   selection. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 5(3), 321-330.

Patton, W. & McMahon, M. (2006). The systems theory framework of career development and
   counselling: Connecting theory and practice. International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling
   28(2), 153-166.

Pryor, R.G.L. & Bright, J. (2011). The chaos theory of careers. Journal of Employment Counselling, 48(4),
163-166.

Quality Indicators for Learning and Teaching. (2023). 2022 graduate outcomes survey. Australian
   Government Department of Education. https://www.qilt.edu.au/docs/default-source/default-
   document-library/2022-gos-national-report.pdf?

Trevor-Roberts. (2021). 5 tips on how to have a career conversation with your employees that is effective and
   meaningful. https://blog.trevor-roberts.com.au/how-to-have-a-career-conversation
                                                                                                      12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY | 159

12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY

   Helen Titchener and Bronwyn Greene

     Why read this chapter?

     The supervisory relationship is at the heart of an emerging researcher's grounding in the
     responsible, ethical conduct of research. It is largely through their relationship with you, the
     supervisor, that a higher degree researcher learns what it means to conduct their research with
     integrity. While the responsibility for modelling exemplary conduct rests with the entire
     scientific community, it is the supervisor who is in the key position to mentor the higher degree
     researcher and ensure they have an appropriate and robust grounding in both the conduct of
     their research and in their own conduct as researchers.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=114

Introduction

Challenges around matters of integrity will arise throughout a candidature and you should aim to identify
and resolve them promptly; both as a teaching opportunity and in order to avoid the development of
inappropriate practices that can become rooted in your higher degree researchers' ways of operating as
future researchers.
Rules and guidelines around research integrity and codes of conduct may seem bureaucratic or irrelevant
to your supervisory practice. Unfortunately, if you do not establish shared protocols around the
candidature, the research and your supervisory relationship, when something does go wrong, or when one
party calls into question the actions of another, it can be very difficult to sort out what has happened and
find a way forward.
160 | 12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY

This chapter summarises the principles of research integrity and presents tools that you and your higher
degree researchers can adopt to ensure that everyone has a clear understanding of their rights and
responsibilities as the various elements of the research project unfold.

Structure of the chapter

The chapter is presented in two parts.

Part One outlines definitions, meanings and resources relating to research integrity that are available to help
you and your higher degree researchers understand:

  · The meaning of research integrity and how it differs from research ethics
  · International principles of research integrity
  · National and institutional resources.

Part Two provides some tools that you can use to help you embed matters of research integrity into your
ongoing supervisory practice.

Part one

Definitions and meanings

What is research integrity and how does it differ from research
ethics?

In general terms, research integrity relates to the principles and standards that promote honesty,
transparency, and reliability throughout the research process. It involves the responsible conduct of
research, which includes the design, execution, analysis, and dissemination of findings. Research integrity
requires researchers to uphold the fundamental values of honesty, accuracy, fairness, and accountability. It
emphasises the importance of maintaining intellectual honesty, avoiding conflicts of interest, and ensuring
the reproducibility and reliability of research outcomes.

In academic contexts, research integrity involves upholding the norms and practices of the scholarly
community. This includes appropriately citing and referencing the work of others, respecting intellectual
property rights, and avoiding plagiarism. Research integrity also encompasses the responsible use of
research funds and resources, the appropriate handling and reporting of data, and the commitment to the
principles of confidentiality and privacy.

Research ethics, on the other hand, focuses on the moral principles and guidelines that govern the
                                                                                                       12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY | 161

treatment of human subjects and the use of animals in research. It involves the ethical considerations and
decision-making processes associated with conducting research involving living beings. Research ethics
aims to protect the rights, welfare, and dignity of individuals or groups participating in research studies.

Ethical research practices require obtaining informed consent from participants, ensuring voluntary
participation, protecting confidentiality, and minimising any potential harm or risks. Researchers must
also consider issues of equity, justice, and fairness when recruiting participants and conducting research.
Additionally, research ethics entails maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of research subjects, and
handling sensitive data with care and respect.

Although research integrity and research ethics share common principles, they differ in scope and focus.
Research integrity pertains to the broader spectrum of research practices, extending beyond the treatment
of subjects to encompass all aspects of responsible research conduct. Both concepts are crucial in upholding
the highest standards of conduct in research.

Resources around the principles of research integrity

There are a number of resources that you may find helpful to use in discussions framing your supervisor/
candidature agreements (see also Part Two).

The Singapore Statement

The Singapore Statement on Research Integrity (available under CC BY 4.0) forms the basis of most
national and institutional research integrity frameworks and is a useful starting point for discussions with
your higher degree researchers.

The Statement, included below, was developed in 2010 as an international effort to promote greater
research integrity worldwide, and to foster a common approach to the fundamental aspects of the
responsible conduct of research.

The Statement is based on the four principles of honesty, accountability, professional courtesy and fairness,
and good stewardship, and sets out 14 key responsibilities that are fundamental to maintaining these
principles in the conduct of research.

Australian code for the responsible conduct of research

In Australia, matters of research integrity are governed by the principles of responsible research conduct
as established in the Australian Code for Responsible Conduct of Research 2018 (the Australian Code).
The code was co-authored by the Australian Research Council (ARC), The National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC), and Universities Australia. The principles of the code are:
162 | 12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY

  · Honesty and rigour in the development, undertaking and reporting of research
  · Transparency in declaring and managing conflicts of interest and in the reporting of research

      methodology, data and findings
  · Fairness in the treatment of others
  · Respect for research participants, the wider community, animals, and the environment
  · Recognition of the right of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to be engaged in research

      that affects or is of particular significance to them
  · Accountability for the development, undertaking, and reporting of research
  · Promotion of responsible research practices.

The Code is supported by a number of short and accessible guides that expand on various topics that
are likely to arise throughout the candidature lifecycle. Topics of the guides are authorship, collaborative
research, conflicts of interest, managing breaches of the Code, management of data, peer review, publication,
supervision, and the role of research integrity advisors. Each guide outlines the responsibilities of both
institutions and researchers in these particular areas. A useful way of ensuring that your higher degree
researchers understand their obligations in each facet of their research journey would be to schedule a
discussion of these key topics at relevant times during candidature and use the guideline as a basis for your
conversations.

Other national resources

Many other countries have developed their own sets of principles and resources. The following list is not
exhaustive but may be a helpful starting point for those of you who are based outside Australia.

European Science Foundation        Fostering Research Integrity in Europe
All European Academies (ALLEA)     The European Code of Conduct for Research Integrity
Research Council of the United
Kingdom                            Policy and Guidelines on Governance of Good Research Conduct

Council of Canadian Academies      Honesty, Accountability and Trust: Fostering Research Integrity in
                                   Canada
Office of Research Integrity, USA  Multiple resources

Institutional requirements and resources

Your own institution will have research integrity policies, procedures and guidelines. These are designed to
provide you with as much specific information as possible to help guide your practice as both a researcher
and supervisor.

At the highest level:
                                                                                                      12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY | 163

  · Policies provide the must-dos; they are the legal position of your institution
  · Procedures set out the actions and processes that should be undertaken
  · Guidelines provide a plain English version of the key points from the policy and procedure

      documents.

In addition to any specific research integrity policy documents, your institution may also have Codes of
Conduct for both staff and students.

When questions are raised or allegations are made around the actions of a higher degree researcher, or a
supervisor, these documents are used to establish whether a breach has occurred and what course of action
is appropriate. In many institutions, you will find Research Integrity Officers who are available to assist you
with any questions you have and to manage allegations of breaches of integrity.

Other institutional resources available to you and your higher degree researchers may be provided through
your library or dedicated research training unit. Here you are likely to find a raft of training resources
around all facets of research integrity and ethics. Note that some of these may form a mandatory
component of the candidature, while others will be available to tap into on an as-needed basis.

     The Singapore Statement

      Preamble

       The value and benefits of research are vitally dependent on the integrity of research. While
       there can be and are national and disciplinary differences in the way research is organized
       and conducted, there are also principles and professional responsibilities that are
       fundamental to the integrity of research wherever it is undertaken.
       Principles

            · Honesty in all aspects of research
            · Accountability in the conduct of research
            · Professional courtesy and fairness in working with others
            · Good stewardship of research on behalf of others

      Responsibilities

       1. Integrity: Researchers should take responsibility for the trustworthiness of their research.
       2. Adherence to Regulations: Researchers should be aware of and adhere to regulations and
       policies related to research.
164 | 12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY

       3. Research Methods: Researchers should employ appropriate research methods, base
       conclusions on critical analysis of the evidence and report findings and interpretations fully
       and objectively.

       4. Research Records: Researchers should keep clear, accurate records of all research in ways
       that will allow verification and replication of their work by others.

       5. Research Findings: Researchers should share data and findings openly and promptly, as
       soon as they have had an opportunity to establish priority and ownership claims.

       6. Authorship: Researchers should take responsibility for their contributions to all
       publications, funding applications, reports and other representations of their research. Lists
       of authors should include all those and only those who meet applicable authorship criteria.

       7. Publication Acknowledgement: Researchers should acknowledge in publications the
       names and roles of those who made significant contributions to the research, including
       writers, funders, sponsors, and others, but do not meet authorship criteria.

       8. Peer Review: Researchers should provide fair, prompt and rigorous evaluations and
       respect confidentiality when reviewing others' work.

       9. Conflict of Interest: Researchers should disclose financial and other conflicts of interest
       that could compromise the trustworthiness of their work in research proposals, publications
       and public communications as well as in all review activities.

       10. Public Communication: Researchers should limit professional comments to their
       recognized expertise when engaged in public discussions about the application and
       importance of research findings and clearly distinguish professional comments from
       opinions based on personal views.

       11. Reporting Irresponsible Research Practices: Researchers should report to the appropriate
       authorities any suspected research misconduct, including fabrication, falsification or
       plagiarism, and other irresponsible research practices that undermine the trustworthiness of
       research, such as carelessness, improperly listing authors, failing to report conflicting data,
       or the use of misleading analytical methods.

       12. Responding to Irresponsible Research Practices: Research institutions, as well as
       journals, professional organizations and agencies that have commitments to research,
       should have procedures for responding to allegations of misconduct and other irresponsible
       research practices and for protecting those who report such behavior in good faith. When
       misconduct or other irresponsible research practice is confirmed, appropriate actions should
       be taken promptly, including correcting the research record.

       13. Research Environments: Research institutions should create and sustain environments
                                                                                                      12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY | 165

       that encourage integrity through education, clear policies, and reasonable standards for
       advancement while fostering work environments that support research integrity.
       14. Societal Considerations: Researchers and research institutions should recognize that
       they have an ethical obligation to weigh societal benefits against risks inherent in their
       work.

Part two

This section presents you with some tools that you can use to help you embed matters of research integrity
into your ongoing supervisory practice.

Supervisory agreement

Even if your institution does not mandate it, it is good practice to develop a supervision agreement with
your higher degree researchers in the first weeks of candidature. The agreement should define the goals,
roles, rights and responsibilities of all parties including the higher degree researcher and all members of the
supervisory team.

In Australia, the NHMRC guideline on how supervision of research degree candidates supports the
responsible conduct of research (National Health and Medical Research Council, 2019) provides the
following points of guidance:

  · Supervisors must work cooperatively with those whom they supervise, and with any co-supervisors,
      to establish and maintain an appropriate level of engagement.

  · Supervisors and those whom they supervise should agree, in writing, on:

          Expectations related to progression and development
          The appropriate level of oversight of the development and conduct of the research
          Expectations related to work product or deliverables, if relevant
          Expectations related to the involvement of the supervisor in the work of the individual/s under

            supervision, or vice versa, if relevant
          Arrangements related to any planned co-authorship
          Any necessary training for the individual/s under supervision
          The frequency and format of meetings
          Expectations related to contact between meetings
          The nature and format of feedback
166 | 12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY

          How any disputes will be resolved
          When and how the agreement will be reviewed during the supervisory relationship.

  · Where remote supervision is provided, supervisors should ensure that the individual/s being
      supervised are not disadvantaged because of these arrangements and should consider the use of
      appropriate technology.

Other issues to consider in constructing your agreements might include the following:

  · How the supervisory team will operate, clearly outlining roles and responsibilities of all members,
      both supervisors and the graduate researcher. This is a helpful reference when difficulties or conflicts
      arise.

  · When draft texts are to be submitted, read, and discussed, and by which member(s) of the team,
  · Which members of the team should be involved in the analysis and interpretation of the data, who

      holds rights to the data, and how they should be stored,
  · How to ensure that your higher degree researchers have adequate time and opportunity to engage in

      additional training around research integrity matters,
  · How to ensure that all members of the team have current knowledge of the institution's research

      integrity policies and resources, including around emerging areas such as the use of generative
      artificial intelligence.

Research integrity checklist for higher degree research
supervisors

The following checklist is provided to help summarise all the points raised above and provide you with a
quick-access tool that you can use to help ensure you have considered and integrated those issues into your
supervisory practice.

Communicate

  · Continuously communicate research integrity expectations: Clearly communicate the
      importance of the responsible conduct of research...not just once, but throughout their candidature.
      This should include clearly articulating the research integrity principles and guidelines they are
      expected to follow throughout their candidature and beyond.

  · Embed responsible research practices into everyday practice: Encourage your higher degree
      research students to adopt responsible research practices, such as accurate data collection and record-
      keeping, rigorous analysis, and transparent reporting of results.

  · Encourage a culture of research integrity: Foster a culture of research integrity within your
      research group and institution. Encourage collaboration, respect, and open communication among
      researchers. Promote discussions on research integrity and ethics to facilitate learning and awareness.
                                                                                                      12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY | 167

      Offer mentorship and support by being available to openly address their concerns and provide
      guidance on ethical decision-making.

Build knowledge

  · Know your research integrity policies: Review your national research integrity code/institution's
      research integrity policies and guidelines to ensure you have a clear understanding of the
      expectations and standards for research integrity. If there isn't a national code or institutional one,
      the Singapore Statement is a good starting point.

  · Provide training on research integrity: Ensure that your higher degree researchers receive
      appropriate training on research integrity and the responsible conduct of research. This may include
      any institutional workshops, seminars, or online modules, but you should also share with them
      relevant literature that promotes responsible conduct of research.

  · Stay updated and seek guidance: Stay informed about research integrity. Stay updated with
      relevant research integrity guidelines, policies, and best practices. Seek guidance from institutional
      research integrity advisors.

Manage misconduct

  · Address plagiarism and intellectual property: Higher degree researchers should already know
      what plagiarism is by now. Talk to them about plagiarism, intellectual property rights, and proper
      citation practices. Emphasise the importance of attributing ideas and other work appropriately and
      seeking permission when necessary, especially copyright permission.

  · Monitor and address research misconduct: Be vigilant in monitoring your higher degree research
      students' work, and promptly address any signs of research misconduct, such as fabrication,
      falsification, or plagiarism. Educate your students about the consequences of research misconduct
      and the potential impact on their academic and professional careers.

Foster good practice

  · Ensure ethical treatment of humans, animals and the environment: If the research involves
      human subjects, ensure that your higher degree research students understand the principles of
      informed consent, privacy, confidentiality, and the ethical treatment of participants. If the research
      involves animals, ensure that your student understands the importance of the ethical, humane, and
      responsible care and use of animals in research. Guide them in obtaining the necessary approvals
      before commencing any research involving human subjects or animals, or any other research
      requiring permits or approvals.

  · Good data management and sharing is good research: Encourage good data management
      practices, including proper storage, backup, and organisation of research data. Check to see that the
      student has indeed appropriately stored and managed their data. Have you seen it? Do you know
168 | 12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY

      where it is? Discuss the importance of data sharing and archiving, while also considering
      confidentiality and data protection issues.
  · Encourage open and transparent research: Encourage higher degree researchers to share their
      research findings openly and honestly. Promote the principles of pre-registration, data sharing, and
      open access publishing, where applicable and ethically appropriate.
  · Disclose and manage conflicts of interest: Ensure that your higher degree researchers understand
      what constitutes a conflict of interest and how to identify and manage such conflicts. Discuss the
      importance of disclosing any potential conflicts of interest that may arise during the research process,
      including in peer review.
  · Promote responsible authorship and publication: discuss and agree on responsible authorship
      practices with your higher degree researchers, including understanding authorship criteria and order,
      acknowledging contributions appropriately, where and how outputs will be published, and
      publication ethics. Help them understand the importance of avoiding predatory publishers,
      duplicate publication, and salami slicing (where one project is "sliced" into smaller pieces for
      multiple publications), and ensure that they understand the importance of properly disclosing
      conflicts of interest.
  · Discuss dealing with unexpected results: help your higher degree researchers to understand
      appropriate ways of understanding negative research results; reporting them appropriately and
      framing them as opportunities for learning not failure.

Display leadership

  · Lead by example: as an HDR supervisor, your students will learn from you and they will model the
      behaviours that they observe. Walk the talk and ensure that you engage in the responsible conduct of
      research at all times. Your actions as a supervisor will carry more weight than your words.

Conclusion

Hopefully, the issues and resources presented above will have reinforced the need to ensure that matters of
research integrity are woven into the candidature from the earliest days and that this chapter has provided
some resources and tools to help you achieve that aim. When this is done well, integrity becomes part of the
fabric of the candidature that helps to build and maintain both strong supervisory relationships and future
researchers who embrace the four principles outlined in the Singapore Statement - honesty, accountability,
professional courtesy and fairness, and good stewardship of research.
            12. BUILDING RESEARCH INTEGRITY | 169

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

National Health and Medical Research Council. (2019). Guidance to support the code: Supervision.
   https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/about-us/publications/australian-code-responsible-conduct-
   research-2018#download
170 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
SUPPORT

13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT:
A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER
DEGREE BY RESEARCH SUPPORT

   Wade Kelly and Lisa M. Given

     Why read this chapter?

     Universities, governments, and funders are increasingly asking researchers to articulate how
     their work will produce a positive impact on society. Yet, many supervisors (and their higher
     degree researchers) have not been trained to communicate their work beyond academe, or to
     consider how their research can contribute to both immediate and longer-term societal change,
     beyond the scholarly contributions of their research. This societal impact imperative requires
     new approaches to the supervision of higher degree researchers, to best position them for
     future success. This chapter explores how to move beyond considerations related to
     preparation for thesis-related research work, to adopt a holistic approach to supervision that
     prepares higher degree researchers for societal impact work. Whether higher degree
     researchers wish to pursue careers in academe, or in industry, government, or community
     settings, embedding external engagement and impact-related skills throughout the journey will
     position them for success.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can
                   view them online here: https://jcu.pressbooks.pub/confidentsupervisors/?p=302

Introduction

We have all heard horror stories of poor research supervision; those supervisors who only met with their
higher degree researchers during milestone meetings refused to provide feedback on writing, furnished no
                   13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                            SUPPORT | 171

introductions, made no connections, and provided no encouragement. Sadly, the list of poor supervision
stories is long and, occasionally, dark. Graduate supervision is a critical aspect of the academic mentoring
process that should extend far beyond the context of providing support for thesis development but, too
often, does not.

The core of the problem may be attributed to a lack of communication about and preparation for the
responsibilities of supervisors. Supervisory training is increasingly common for new academics, but even
seasoned supervisors need guidance to respond to particular situations and challenges their higher degree
researchers may face. Professional development and mentoring beyond early career training is limited. This
leaves too many supervisors to replicate their own (often poor) supervisory experiences and fail to adapt to
rapid and ongoing changes in higher education. The higher degree experience of ten years ago is not the
higher degree experience of today. The job market and the sector are different, and the skills required to
flourish must evolve.

While this chapter focuses on preparing higher degree researchers for generation of societal impact, in
their future work, the approach we advocate will also enable you to respond to other, new changes in
the graduate experience by adopting a holistic style of supervision. That is, we look at the higher degree
researcher as a whole person and address how best to support your higher degree researchers for success
based on their desires and career aspirations. The thesis is an artefact; the higher degree is a future. To
prepare higher degree researchers for their future, an evolving dialogue throughout the higher degree
journey will focus on their activities, skills, knowledge, connections, and potential to generate societal
impact, which will serve them well beyond graduation.

As researchers transition from their higher degrees into practice environments, they need to understand
how to meaningfully engage beyond academe. In this chapter, we explore the significance of supervising for
societal impact and discuss strategies to integrate this approach into graduate research programs.

The research landscape

The landscape of higher education is changing rapidly. Funders are increasingly requiring researchers to
respond to specific requirements aimed at generating impact in their communities, with industry, or with
government, throughout the research process. In this chapter, we refer to this as societal impact work to
distinguish it from the scholarly impact of research (e.g., h-index and citations). Many funders now include
societal impact statements as part of the application process; and universities have responded by offering
sessions to higher degree researchers on crafting these statements for thesis work. However, to prepare
higher degree researchers appropriately, we must move beyond instruction in the genre of writing impact
statements, to fully embrace a societal impact mindset.

A good (societal) impact statement is the icing on the (research) cake. Funders are moving from asking
about the icing to critically questioning how the cake was made, who was involved in making it, where the
172 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
SUPPORT

ingredients were sourced, how big the slices are, who is getting a piece, how it is being delivered, the costs
involved, and whether a cake is the correct end-product, at all. Calls for co-design of research problems,
participatory methods, co-production of solutions, and co-funding of research activities, position external
beneficiaries of university research at the heart of the enterprise. Supervisors must prepare their higher
degree researchers for this new world, which reaches far beyond where a thesis-as-cake will take them.

Where thesis supervisors may once have been able to focus purely on research outcomes to support higher
degree researcher success, contemporary career paths require more diverse preparation for post-graduation
career success. Supervisors need to be aware of the changes happening beneath their feet in the higher
education landscape to set up higher degree researchers for research success and to prepare them for the
emerging societal impact reality in universities, government, and industry. Conversations and experiences
regarding publishing, scholarships, and awards remain important, but supervisors must also consider how
best to foster success for future impact generation throughout the higher degree.

Supervision for Societal Impact Ecosystem (SSIE)
Framework

The Supervision for Societal Impact Ecosystem (SSIE) is a practical framework that explores the potential
pathway from community engagement to impact within the context of higher degree research preparation.
The sections that follow provide background on various dimensions of the framework; we argue that being
exposed to societal impact-related thinking and approaches in terms of presentation, writing, research
design and funding, are critical to embed an impact mindset and to develop higher degree researchers'
societal impact-related skills.

The framework (see Figure 13.1) is a starting point for supervision, rather than an end point. The diagram
is intended to foster discussion and exploration between higher degree researchers and supervisors and can
be revisited throughout the program. Practically, it can be adopted as a mapping tool to address higher
degree expectations and needs, and to track researchers' progress across domains.
                   13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                            SUPPORT | 173

    Figure 13.1 Supervision for Societal Impact Ecosystem by Lisa Given and Wade Kelly, used under a
    CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 licence

A holistic approach to research "training"

The thesis artefact (whether in manuscript form, or as a collection of published papers) remains the
primary end-product of the higher degree process. It is little wonder, then, that higher degree researchers
and supervisors often focus on the conceptual, theoretical, and technical aspects of research, such as
methodological design, project planning, and data analysis. These are critical to research success and,
typically, involve new areas of investigation and work for higher degree researchers. Yet, some supervisors
encourage higher degree researchers to focus primarily (or only) on thesis-related work, while neglecting
the broader research ecosystem and its implications for higher degree researchers' futures. Higher degree
preparation must also address future career paths, which may be uncertain or precarious, whether inside
universities or beyond. Higher degree researchers must gain experience communicating and working with
potential beneficiaries of their research, outside of the academy.
Supervisors can adopt holistic approaches to research training irrespective of higher degree researchers'
anticipated career trajectories, in academia, government, community, or industry. Effective supervision
means expanding the conversation scope with higher degree researchers beyond the confines of the thesis
(as also discussed in the chapter on "careers" in this volume). A higher degree is not solely about completing
a thesis; it encompasses a spectrum of experiences and opportunities for holistic career development. By
174 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
SUPPORT

acknowledging and building on higher degree researchers' previous experiences, supervisors can create a
supportive and inclusive learning environment. This entails considering the whole person by engaging
in mentoring conversations that extend into the higher degree researcher's past (drawing on previous
experience), acknowledging their present (current goals and expectations), and projecting into their future
(where they want to go, post-graduation, and what skills they need to get there). All stages of this
conversation should include discussions of the potential societal impact they wish to generate across their
career.

This approach revolves around developing a comprehensive understanding of higher degree researchers'
potential career trajectories and strategically embedding activities throughout the higher degree program
to develop a wide complement of skills. For example, higher degree researchers should be exposed to
budgeting, ethics, stakeholder engagement, writing and presenting for non-academic audiences, policy
development work, pitching to industry funders and philanthropists, and other crucial skills and
experiences required to understand and deliver societal impact from research.

The following sections explore various dimensions of the "engagement to impact" continuum and provide
possible approaches for supervisors to take in supporting higher degree researchers in skill acquisition and
development related to this work.

Modelling an impact mindset from day one

In the first year of the higher degree, supervisors should emphasise the importance of considering potential
societal impact of the proposed research during the project scoping phase. Among other considerations,
this could include designing needs assessments, exploring ethical considerations, and planning to share
research findings with relevant stakeholders. While not all higher degree researchers can design a study with
direct involvement of an external partner or anticipate where their research will have an immediate impact,
exploring what might be possible within the constraints of the higher degree should be encouraged. Many
higher degree researchers may have pre-existing relationships with community organisations, for example,
which could become potential sites for data collection and for addressing an organisation's needs. Other
higher degree researchers may need to learn strategies for building connections with potential research
partners, which could be pursued after graduation. This is an apt opportunity to discuss the nature of
relationship building, including what equitable partnering looks like, as well as the logistics involved in
contracting processes, in ethics review, and in co-authoring publications with partners. Collaborating with
external partners can amplify the reach and relevance of higher degree researchers' projects, but it must
be done with reciprocity and trust, and appropriate to the higher degree researchers' individual needs and
circumstances.

Supervisors play a vital role in preparing higher degree researchers to understand the potential impact of
their research. By exploring different methodologies and emphasising the translation of research findings
into practical outcomes, supervisors can empower higher degree researchers to plan for, evaluate, and
report the societal relevance of their work. This approach ensures that higher degree researchers view the
                   13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                            SUPPORT | 175

higher degree as an opportunity to make contributions to their field, as well as to the collective good of
society, by planning ahead for impact-related work.

For those higher degree researchers who may not be able to engage with external stakeholders during
the degree, conversations can still be had about ethical practices, whether it be around sustainability and
waste in medical research, reduction of animal models in biological research, or strategies for engaging
with government policymakers. All of these are contemporary issues in higher education related to societal
impact.

For those higher degree researchers with ready access to potential partners, stakeholder engagement
throughout the research process is crucial for research to have an impact. Supervisors can help higher
degree researchers to identify potential partners using stakeholder mapping processes, to communicate
appropriately with stakeholders, and to involve partners in co-design and co-production processes.

Supervisors can also explore the potential for industry and community partners to be involved in formal
co-supervision of the research. This is done as part of the formal contracting process between the university
and the partner organisation and needs to be managed by Principal Supervisors on behalf of their higher
degree researchers. Of course, external partners will likely need mentoring and support in the supervision
role, which can be provided by both academic supervisors and the university's graduate research office.

Modelling a holistic approach: What it means to be an
academic

The routines and expectations embedded within early levels of education -- from K-12 to the
undergraduate experience -- often require disruption and unsettling. The higher degree is not -- at least,
it should not be -- as highly prescribed as previous educational experiences. Supervisors are not bosses,
friends, coaches, or teachers. Supervisors are guides; the higher degree researchers are apprentices. This
relationship can be confronting to higher degree researchers who have come to expect rote learning and
highly structured processes and outcomes. Supervisors share the breadth of their roles and responsibilities,
and discuss local and global socio-political constraints, providing a clearer picture of what the academic
experience entails. Engaging for impact necessitates supervisors address several key areas during their
conversations and interactions with higher degree researchers, ensuring they are exposed to a range of
experiences to shape their understanding. A diversity of experiences also provides opportunities for higher
degree researchers to determine what skills they wish to use (or not use) in future.

Sheltering higher degree researchers from service opportunities (such as committee work, for example),
may mean the thesis is completed more quickly, but it comes at a cost. Being able to develop a higher
degree researcher's concept of an academic trajectory starts with a conversation about the nature of higher
education and the roles and responsibilities contained within it. Sitting on a university-level committee,
serving as a peer reviewer for conference presentations, or joining a disciplinary awards committee are
experiences that can help higher degree researchers to grow their skills and extend their professional
176 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
SUPPORT

networks. Discussing these experiences with supervisors can support higher degree researchers to critically
reflect on their skill profiles and identify areas for further growth. The engagement skills relating to systems
thinking, governance structures, committee processes, and even how to challenge senior colleagues and
advocate for your needs, can all be learned through service within the academy and the broader discipline.
While these skills can be acquired in an academic context, they are not limited to it; such skills are highly
valued within, and transferable to, industry, government, non-profit organisations, and other contexts
outside of the academy.

The development of impact skills can be fostered across various other dimensions of the higher degree.
Most supervisors have teaching, research, and service responsibilities, yet the experience for many higher
degree researchers is limited to the research realm. In addition to research and academic service
opportunities, supervisors should consider how they can promote engagement for impact through
teaching and community-based service activities. Planning for sessional teaching opportunities from the
outset of the higher degree helps the higher degree researcher to plan their research time, accordingly, while
also helping the academic unit to plan for future workforce needs. Sitting on a non-profit organisation's
working committee can help higher degree researchers gain critical insights into the challenges and benefits
faced in the community while providing the non-profit organisation with expert advice and a pathway
for broader engagement within the university. Higher degree researchers can also undertake industry
placements, service learning, or contribute to campus-based science camps for K-12 schools, to gain
relevant experience.

Engaging in conversations about the nature of higher education, global trends in the sector, and political
forces shaping research and teaching priorities, are important for researcher development. Some higher
degree researchers will move overseas; many will hold a series of different, short-term roles, while they look
for permanent work; and others will juggle caring responsibilities alongside higher degree completion and
the transition to work. Their thinking must extend beyond the local culture and the immediate future.
Supervisors should encourage higher degree researchers to lift their heads up, look around them, and
understand what is happening in their departments, schools, faculties, and in their cities, states, countries,
and globally. This will help them to see their place in the world and anticipate where they can contribute,
in future. Understanding the internal and external forces that shape universities will help researchers in
navigating a post-doctoral life.

In the context of societal impact, this conversation may be shaped by sharing relevant contemporary articles
on higher education and impact. It may include reviewing granting requirements from various funders or
discussing how changes in policies in other countries can put pressure on local institutions to adjust their
practices.

A good starting point for discussing higher education is to consider the meaning and intention behind
the social contract between universities and society. There is no single answer to this question, but many
higher degree researchers have never considered this issue. Why do we do what we do at universities?
                   13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                            SUPPORT | 177

What is our social responsibility to the environment, people, heritage, or the economy? Given rising dis/
misinformation, what role do universities have in fostering expertise and knowledge sharing?

Conversations will likely take different forms for those in applied, professional, theoretical, and creative
practice disciplines. Yet this is a core part of building an understanding of the discipline and how it relates
to others, of the broader sector, and of emerging pressures and expectations that shape how each discipline
evolves. As much societal impact work embeds transdisciplinary thinking and experiences (i.e., where
interdisciplinary research embeds stakeholder interaction and benefit), extending higher degree researchers'
understandings of what academic work looks like within this context is paramount for future research and
impact work.

Communicating for societal impact

In any job, communication skills are vitally important. Historically, academic programs prepared higher
degree researchers to communicate with people who think and behave in similar ways to them -- other
academics. If societal impact is the destination, engagement outside of academe must be part of the journey.
Being able to communicate with a wide range of audiences, in various sectors, is an increasingly valuable
skill. This takes many forms, including science communication, knowledge mobilisation, mass media
engagement, social media postings, public presentations, funding pitches, policy briefings, translating
research for practice change, and much more. The following sections address writing and presenting
skills, as these are the most common (and most overlooked) strategies for engaging beyond academe. The
communication continuum extends beyond these areas, and supervisors would do well to consider how
interpersonal skills are being fostered, as well.

Writing skills

Writing the thesis allows higher degree researchers to hone their academic voices and learn disciplinary
expectations for scholarly publishing. Higher degree researchers absorb what they see modelled in journal
articles, conference papers, book manuscripts, and other sources of academic writing to inform the thesis
style. Through an acculturation process, higher degree researchers begin to perform in ways that are
consistent with the established norms of their disciplines. Increasingly, higher degree researchers are
engaging in interdisciplinary research and are publishing articles and book chapters alongside (or as part of)
the thesis itself.

Supervisors can provide advice on solo publishing, but they can also serve as co-authors on higher degree
researchers' publications; in this way, supervisors can model and support publishing practices that higher
degree researchers need to pursue academic careers and to work in industry-based research contexts.
Building a track record of publications is also important for scholarship and small grant applications,
  178 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
  SUPPORT

  and for future career development. Supervisors should take active roles in supporting their higher degree
  researchers in these endeavours.

  Writing for academic peers is a critical component of the higher degree experience; however, developing the
  ability to write for various audiences, beyond academe, is crucial for the types of engagement work that can
  lead to societal impact. Unfortunately, this type of writing often receives minimal attention during higher
  degree studies.

  Encouraging higher degree researchers to develop a translational writing voice can take many forms. It starts
  with supervisors emphasising the value of writing for non-academic audiences and modelling what this
  style of writing entails. This can include sharing articles in The Conversation, blog posts, newspaper articles,
  artwork, or stories authored by academics from various disciplines. By discussing what elements make
  for quality pieces (e.g., explaining terms, accounting for jargon, reducing complexity, using metaphors),
  supervisors can normalise the practices of crafting research outcomes for generalist readers and of
  establishing a public voice alongside one's academic reputation. Being able to synthesise complexity for
  various audiences is critically important for getting research outcomes in front of policymakers,
  community groups, and corporate decision-makers, among other types of non-academic stakeholders.

  While academic publications take countless hours, producing public-facing news articles, briefing notes,
  executive summaries, and trade publication articles based on research outcomes takes much less time. This
  presents an excellent opportunity for supervisors to co-author these types of publications with higher
  degree researchers.

  When supervising higher degree researchers in science or other disciplines where thesis-by-publication is
  the norm, co-authoring a piece for The Conversation can extend the reach of a newly published work.1 For
  higher degree researchers in humanities or social sciences disciplines completing manuscript-style theses,
  supervisors and higher degree researchers can pitch an article to The Conversation to connect research
  outcomes to a current event or popular culture.2 The university's media team can provide training and
  support for writing for this venue, as well as post-publication profiling of the work.

1. Here is an example for a thesis publication: Keith, R., Hochuli, D., Martin, J., & Given, L.M. (2021). 1 in 2 primary-aged kids have strong
  connections to nature, but this drops off in teenage years. Here's how to reverse the trend. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/
  1-in-2-primary-aged-kids-have-strong-connections-to-nature-but-this-drops-off-in-teenage-years-heres-how-to-reverse-the-trend-165660 This
  piece was co-authored by the full supervisory team (Hochuli, Given, and Martin) in support of their PhD student (Keith). The PhD research
  involved an external organisation, with Martin co-supervising as an industry partner. This piece has been read more than 11,000 times and
  garnered significant media attention.

2. Here is an example linked to a major popular culture event: Forcier, E., & Given, L.M.. (2019). After 8 years of memes, videos and role playing,
  what now for Game of Thrones' multimedia fans. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/after-8-years-of-memes-videos-and-role-
  playing-what-now-for-game-of-thrones-multimedia-fans-117254 This piece was co-authored by the student (Forcier) and principal supervisor
  (Given), following the supervisor's recommendation to pitch an article ahead of the release of the final episode of Game of Thrones. This piece
  has been read almost 15,000 times and was featured in international media.
                   13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                           SUPPORT | 179

Higher degree researchers should be encouraged to write for and with non-academic audiences, co-
authoring articles and reports that are accessible and relevant to a broad readership. It is important to stress
that all outputs, including media coverage, policy reports, popular publishing, and other non-academic and
community engagement pieces should be listed on higher degree researchers' CVs. The research degree is
a balancing act, so the natural caveat is that some public-facing writing is valuable, but too much may be
counterproductive and delay degree completion.

Presenting skills

Higher degree researchers come from varied backgrounds, have different life experiences, and are different
ages. However, for many, their first presentations to peers will be during their research degrees. For higher
degree researchers who have progressed through undergraduate, honours and/or masters-level degrees, and
onto the PhD, the knowledge of how to present, and what makes a good presentation, may be limited.
As with finding their writing "voice," higher degree researchers will replicate what they see in classrooms,
seminars, and academic conferences.

Unfortunately, even the most compelling academic presentations may not translate well (or easily) for a
public or practitioner audience. It can take years for academics to hone their presentation skills (including
the design of excellent slides) even within their own disciplines. Presenting to interdisciplinary teams
requires translation of disciplinary content across academic contexts, where even the style and format
vary. In the creative disciplines, for example, interactive exhibitions are the norm; in the humanities, it is
common practice for researchers to write full papers, which they read to the audience. In the social sciences,
PowerPoint slides are the norm, where academics "speak to" (rather than read) the content displayed.
And, in the sciences, academic poster presentations provide for interactive engagement with the audience.
All these forms of presentation are demonstrated to, and expected of, higher degree researchers by their
supervisors and other scholars in their disciplines.

A person who cannot present well to academics will likely not present well to government, community,
and industry stakeholders. However, the risks can often be greater for the individual, and for the reputation
of the institution, in these contexts. Showing poor verbal communication skills, with slides packed with
too much content, or based on a paper that has not been translated well for the specific audience, can have
dramatic negative consequences in front of politicians and the media. Making a pitch for funding from
an industry or community group that does not speak to that audience's needs, or using terminology they
cannot understand, is almost certainly doomed to fail.

Most universities have media training programs for researchers that are available to higher degree
researchers. Some universities have generated training modules that offer guidance, as well. The Three
Minute Thesis (3MT) competition is one opportunity for higher degree researcher to consider how to
present their research in a digestible and accessible format. And, many countries host events like Social
  180 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
  SUPPORT

  Sciences Week,3 Pint of Science, or Nerd Nite, which welcome speakers from across disciplines.
  Encouraging higher degree researchers to engage in these activities, or training exercises like Toastmasters,
  will pay dividends in unexpected ways, including enhancing professional networks and gaining media
  exposure.

          Putting it into Practice -- Holistic "Supervising for Impact" Discussion Prompts

          A holistic approach should be used (and will evolve) throughout the research higher degree
          journey.
          Step one: prepare for the conversation. Explain why an emerging dialogue around
          engagement and societal impact is important in terms of personal motivation, development,
          and career trajectory, and to get the most out of the higher degree by research experience.
          Step two: make the time. These conversations can be challenging and sprawling. Adding
          them to the end of a conversation about thesis revisions may not be ideal, as the higher
          degree researcher will be focused on thesis work. Set aside dedicated time for these
          conversations.
          Step three: encourage thinking aloud. Take notes and reflect on what the higher degree
          researcher has shared. Use open ended questions (including asking "why?") and paraphrase
          to foster dialogue. Play devil's advocate to foster critical reflection about impact-related
          work.
          Step four: ask questions. Prompts could include: What kind of career will you pursue? Are
          you considering careers beyond academe? How can your research make a positive change in
          the world? What excites you about the potential contribution your research could make to
          society? Do you have experience communicating with the public? What kinds of skills do
          you need to engage with industry, government, or community? How can you make contacts
          outside academia to share research results?
          Step five: follow-up. Continue the conversation and adjust supervisory practices to align
          with each person's higher degree goals. Higher degree researchers will need different
          supports and opportunities to develop impact-related skills.

3. For example, the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia hosts an annual Social Sciences Week event https://socialsciencesweek.org.au/
                      13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                               SUPPORT | 181

 Building your academic profile: Be Googleable

  Many institutions feature higher degree researchers on their websites, often as members of labs or research
  centres, and in relation to funded projects and scholarships. Unfortunately, the small amount of content
  that is typically profiled, and the lack of control by individuals to edit university-based pages quickly and
  easily, means higher degree researchers struggle to extend their reach.

  Supervisors should develop their own publicly-facing websites to profile their work, and they should
  encourage their higher degree researchers to do the same. Researchers change roles and institutions and
  they need to have robust, stable websites that can follow them throughout their career. Using WordPress
  or other tools to create a professional website is a critical first step for supervisors and higher degree
  researchers. Personalised domain names and hosting are relatively inexpensive; and, websites can be as
  simple as an online CV and a short bio, or they can include listings of projects, partners, and multimedia
  presentations.4 In addition to scholarly achievements, the personal website can communicate capabilities
  (e.g., "I'm adept at mixed-methods, co-design, and knowledge translation") and values (e.g., "my focus is
  on making life better for young mothers"), can showcase external engagement (e.g., reports, blog entries,
  podcasts), and provide evidence of societal impact (e.g., "my framework has been adopted in 31 care
  facilities across the country").

  The value of establishing a website early in the research degree process is that search engine optimisation
  (SEO) can take years to promote new sites to the front page of search results in Google and other search
  engines. When a higher degree researcher first creates their website, it may not be easily findable; but, by
  the time they are on the job market, employers and potential partners will find them quickly. Prospective
  higher degree applicants also use Google to locate potential supervisors, and they want to see project details
  for higher degree researchers who have been supervised previously. Robust websites can go a long way to
  attracting potential partners, funders, media, and individuals who want to read and cite researchers' work.
  Professional websites can also help event organisers to quickly locate headshots, social media links, and
  biographies for inclusion in event programs.

  In addition to creating professional websites, higher degree researchers should create profiles on
  international academic sites (such as Google Scholar) and maintain a current ORCID. Researchers should
  devote time during their higher degrees to building and maintaining these profiles, as well as growing
  their scholarly reputation through LinkedIn, X (formerly Twitter), Threads, BlueSky, and other social
  networking spaces. Higher degree researchers should also include these details on business cards and
  publications, to foster outreach through various channels.

4. See https://www.wadekelly.com/ and https://lisagiven.com/ for inspiration.
182 | 13. SUPERVISING FOR SOCIETAL IMPACT: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO HIGHER DEGREE BY RESEARCH
SUPPORT

Conclusion

Supervising higher degree researchers to prepare them for societal impact work requires a holistic approach
extending far beyond the traditional boundaries of thesis preparation. By emphasising the importance
of the entire, end-to-end research process, including engagement with non-academic stakeholders and
planning for potential societal impact, supervisors can empower higher degree researchers to make
meaningful contributions to society. It is essential for supervisors to think beyond their institutional
presence, to guide higher degree researchers in building both their academic and public-facing profiles,
and to encourage engagement with industry, community, and government. By adopting these strategies,
supervisors can shape a new generation of researchers who prioritise societal impact and contribute to a
better future through strategic engagement.
                                                       CONCLUSION | 183

CONCLUSION

   Abbe Winter; Jillian Blacker; and Lauren Woodlands

This chapter concludes the book Confident Supervision - Creating Independent Researchers and reinforces
the supervisory practices that the authors and editors have provided to help you become a more confident
supervisor for your higher degree researchers. This chapter ends the book with a call for you to continue
your own professional development as a research supervisor by continuing to make use of the resources
provided here by the authors of the various chapters.

The focus of this eBook is on enhancing your professional practice as a research supervisor. It contains
a range of information, from the importance of building a network to ways to help your higher degree
researchers think about their futures, and hopefully you will be able to adapt some of these lessons into
your own practice.

What this book has provided

Although this book is divided into four clear sections - Collaborative Approaches, Capacity Building,
Diverse Research Environments, and Future Focus, a thematic analysis of the content shows a much closer
alignment of concepts across the book. Despite our disciplinary and national differences, we are all largely
writing about addressing the same key issues in research supervision - working together, writing, time,
resources, and the higher degree by research process.

Theme 1: Collaboration

The theme of working together has been a core concept throughout this book, as well as being the
explicit focus of Chapter 2. Many of the chapters are co-authored, clearly indicating the value we place
on collaborative practices. One of the key things we want to reiterate here is the importance of building
trusted and respectful collaborations and diverse and inclusive networks (including, but not limited to,
communities of practice), as supervisory strategies for enabling independent researchers. To build your
network, begin by reaching out within your own research area, whether that's in your own department or
your university more broadly. Then look for ways to expand this network to include colleagues from other
education providers as well as government, business, and community sectors. You could also reach out to
the authors of the various chapters in this book, as well as to the editors, to continue the conversations they
have started here.
184 | CONCLUSION

As part of this process, it can be useful to think about the tangible markers of collaboration that you can
use to track your progress and development. For example:

  · What does collaboration look like for you as a supervisor?
  · Do you collaborate with colleagues?
  · Do you collaborate with your higher degree researchers?
  · What might collaboration look like for your higher degree researchers?
  · Who could they be collaborating with?
  · Are there people you can introduce your higher degree researchers to, who they could start

      collaborating with?

Theme 2: Writing

In higher education a lot of our collaboration occurs through writing together. Although only Chapter 6
explicitly addresses the mechanics of creating writing ecologies, writing practices are woven throughout the
book, because the thesis is a key requirement for the completion of the higher degree, and is often the most
significant piece of writing a person will complete, at least in terms of size.

It is important to reflect on how you can leverage this for your higher degree researchers, and yourself. For
example:

  · Where are the opportunities for you and your higher degree researchers to write, so that you
      normalise the cyclic process of drafting, reviewing, and having multiple iterations of a document-in-
      progress?

  · How can you model the reading and reflection which is integral to thesis writing?
  · How can you enable peer discussion of ideas and concepts throughout the writing process?

Theme 3: Time

Time is needed for all of the practicalities discussed throughout this book - all of the drafts and iterations
of the analysis, as discussed in Chapter 2. Building a network (Chapter 3) takes time, becoming employable
(Chapter 11) takes time, and even designing and enacting the data collection process (Chapters 9 and 12)
often takes longer than we anticipated! Within the research journey, time can be viewed through different
competing lenses which all vie for the attention of a higher degree researcher. It is your role as a supervisor
to help your higher degree researchers to know the requirements for the successful completion of their
studies and how familiarity with various time requirements supports this success.

It is useful to think about how this can be done. For example:
                                                                                                                                     CONCLUSION | 185

  · What is your relationship with research time?
  · How do you manage your workload to achieve work-life harmony?
  · How have you explained candidature timeline requirements to your higher degree researchers?
  · What is your own relationship with the timelines required by the university?
  · Do you describe time in punitive terms or do you use a strengths-based approach to maximising time

      and energy?
  · How do you discuss time with your higher degree researchers?
  · How do you discuss time with your colleagues?
  · Do you harness time, manage it, plan for it, work with it?
  · How do you celebrate reaching goals with your higher degree researchers?

Theme 4: Resources

We now approach the more prevalent themes discussed within this book. The first one is resources - the
people, policies, and practicalities available both within and beyond our universities to help support and
sustain us and our higher degree researchers. These resources are the things beyond us that we can draw
upon - from the magnificent support of librarians, through to the clear guidance of ethicists, and on to the
precious partnerships with Indigenous support units.

It is important to consider how you can connect with relevant resources available to you and your higher
degree researchers. For example:

  · Take a moment to make a list/mind map of the resources available to you.
  · Is anything missing?
  · Where can you go for what you need?
  · How have you shared these with your higher degree researchers?
  · How and with whom can you advocate for what your higher degree researchers need?

Theme 5: The Degree

Finally, we come to the degree itself - the reason that our higher degree researchers are with us. Our goal
as research supervisors is to build our higher degree researchers' capacity, to help them become confident
and capable researchers in their own right, able to share with the world their original ideas and analysis. The
various chapters throughout this book have provided numerous suggestions for ways to assist our higher
degree researchers to complete their degrees, as well as ways for us to reconceptualise our own work as
academic supervisors.

When reflecting on this theme, consider the following:
186 | CONCLUSION

  · What did achieving your research degree mean for you?
  · What does it represent in the life of your higher degree researchers?
  · How has the title of Doctor changed you as a thinker and a learner?
  · What completion and milestone celebration rituals do you encourage and pass on to your successful

      higher degree researchers?

Conclusion

As research supervisors, we need to be constantly reflecting on and in our practice (Schön, 1983) to ensure
we are actioning, enabling, creating, and modelling our best practice for our higher degree researchers. To
be successful supervisors, we all need to be lifelong and continuous learners. No matter where you are in
your supervisory journey, there are always ways to learn and improve. As humans, we learn as well from
the actions (and mistakes) of others as we do from our own - indeed, people often learn better from the
mistakes of others, because we have distance (spatial, emotional, and temporal) from the mistakes and can
more clearly see the lessons.

This book was developed as a professional development resource for you, so take what you need from
it now, and feel free to come back to it again in the future when your needs have changed. As Edwards
et al. (1995) argue in the Tracking Postgraduate Supervision appendix to this eBook, it is important to
revisit your supervisory practices, and to select what you need from the available resources. Remember that
your practice and needs as a supervisor will also change and evolve as your experience grows, so checking
back every year will give you plenty of opportunities to make use of this free resource to support your
supervisory practice.

     Additional Resources

     To build and evidence your practice:

         1. Review the contents of this book - are there any chapters that you need to re-visit to
             help you become a more confident supervisor of independent researchers?

         2. In a year or so, come back and see if your needs and experience have changed what you
             can take from the existing chapters. Then come back each year and do the same.

         3. Use the book to make a plan for mentoring your higher degree researchers - you may
             want to use a chapter as a focus for a few weeks or months, or you may wish to choose
             one suggestion to enact for a while.
                                                                                                                                     CONCLUSION | 187

         4. Keep reflecting on your practice - what can you action, enable, create, and model?

References

       While most of these sources and additional readings are freely available, some are not. The
       lock icon beside an entry indicates that the source may be available from your library.

Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action.Temple Smith.
          GLOSSARY | 189

GLOSSARY

AIRS

      An information literacy training tool for higher degree researchers. The framework highlights
      resources available from libraries and other areas of higher education institutions. AIRS learning
      content is freely available from a public facing website, which can be accessed by anyone at any time.
      It is an open educational resource that is Creative Commons licensed (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) so it can
      be freely used and adapted for training purposes.

collaborations

      Research collaborations could occur within your institution, nationally, internationally or with
      external partners such as government and industry.

collaborative capacity

      The use of distributed leadership and faces of the informed researcher to activate the collaborative
      process.

Distributed leadership

      A form of leadership that overcomes power imbalances, empowering deeper engagement, and
      acknowledge of contribution.

DOI

      A digital object identifier (DOI) is a unique string of letters and numbers used to identify to a specific
      research output and to provide a persistent link to it online.

engagement

      The Australian Research Council defines research engagement as "the interaction between
      researchers and research end-users outside of academia, for the mutually beneficial transfer of
      knowledge, technologies, methods or resources". (Reference: Australian Research Council.
      (n.d.). Engagement and impact assessment 2018-19. https://dataportal.arc.gov.au/ei/nationalreport/
      2018/pages/introduction/index.html?id=definitions )
190 | GLOSSARY

Graduate Research Engagement Assessment Tool (GREAT)

An early intervention communication tool to assist supervisors and higher degree researchers identify,
assess, and problem-solve potential risks.

higher degree researchers (HDRs)

A term used to reference students enrolled in masters and doctorates by research, reflecting their status
as researchers in development.

impact

The Australian Research Council defines research impact as "the contribution that research makes to
the economy, society, environment or culture, beyond the contribution to academic research".

Australian Research Council. (n.d.). Engagement and impact                         assessment
2018-19. https://dataportal.arc.gov.au/ei/nationalreport/2018/pages/introduction/
index.html?id=definitions

ORCID

ORCID stands for Open Researcher and Contributor Identification and is an example of a persistent
identifier. An ORCID number looks like 0000-0002-2771-9344 or is sometimes expressed as
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2771-9344.

PNGUoT

Papua New Guinea University of Technology

productivity

A researcher's productivity is often measured by the number of quality published research outputs
over a set timeframe.

quality

Research output quality is often determined by the number of citations an article, book or book
chapter attracts over a set timeframe.

research integrity

relates to the principles and standards that promote honesty, transparency, and reliability throughout
the research process.
                                    GLOSSARY | 191

seven faces of informed researcher

Seven perspectives that can be applied to enable effective information sharing and sustainable
collaboration between stakeholders from different disciplines and sectors.
192 | ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT

ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT

The web version of this resource has been designed with accessibility in mind and incorporates the
following features:

  · Designed to consider the needs of people who use screen reading technology.
          All content can be navigated using a keyboard.
          Links, headings, and tables are formatted to work with screen readers.
          Images have alt text.

  · Information is not conveyed by colour alone.

Other File Formats Available

In addition to the web version, this book is available in several file formats, including PDF and EPUB (for
ereaders). Choose from the selection of available file types from the `Download this book' drop-down
menu. This option appears below the book cover image on the eBook landing page.

       Note: This accessibility disclaimer is adapted from BCampus's Accessibility Toolkit, and
       licensed under a CC BY 4.0 licence.
                      VERSION HISTORY | 193

VERSION HISTORY

This page provides a record of changes made to this eBook after publication. Each set of edits is
acknowledged with a 0.1 increase in the version number. The downloadable export files available for this
eBook reflect the most recent version.

Version  Date         Details
1.0      15 Dec 2023
1.1      15 Sep 2025  This guide was first published on the JCU Open eBooks platform.
1.2
                      Chapter 9: Building Literacies for the Research Lifecycle has been
                      revised and updated to include updates on AI.
