University of Northern Colorado

Scholarship & Creative Works @ Digital UNC

Open Textbooks & Reviews                             Open Educational Resources @ UNC

2024

Content Area Language and Literacy

Saadia Ali
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

Margaret A. Berg
University of Northern Colorado

Follow this and additional works at: https://digscholarship.unco.edu/textbooks

    Part of the Bilingual, Multilingual, and Multicultural Education Commons, Curriculum and Instruction
Commons, Junior High, Intermediate, Middle School Education and Teaching Commons, Language and
Literacy Education Commons, Secondary Education Commons, and the Secondary Education and
Teaching Commons

Recommended Citation
Ali, Saadia and Berg, Margaret A., "Content Area Language and Literacy" (2024). Open Textbooks &
Reviews. 5.
https://digscholarship.unco.edu/textbooks/5

This Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Open Educational Resources @ UNC at Scholarship &
Creative Works @ Digital UNC. It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Textbooks & Reviews by an authorized
administrator of Scholarship & Creative Works @ Digital UNC. For more information, please contact
Nicole.Webber@unco.edu.
Content Area Language and Literacy

          An OTB edited by Saadia Ali
               and Margaret A. Berg

                                     Contents                    Author(s)          Page
                                                     Margaret A. Berg and             3
                             Chapter                 Saadia Ali                      11
Preface: Introduction and Overview of the Open       Saadia Ali and                  29
Textbook                                             Margaret A. Berg                51
                                                     Margaret A. Berg                61
Chapter 1: Word Recognition and the Simple View                                      83
of Reading                                           Rachel Beckwith
                                                                                    117
Chapter 2: Language Comprehension and the            Jia Gui and
Simple View of Reading                               Luciana C. de Oliveira         136
                                                     Karen Terrell, Tara Willging,  151
Chapter 3: Recounts and Narratives in the Middle     Allessandra Elisabeth dos
School                                               Santos, & Destini Braxton
                                                     Tammy Slater and
Chapter 4: Integrating a Language-Based              Gulbahar Beckett
Approach to Content Instruction into Civics Lessons
                                                     Faika Tahir
Chapter 5: A Functional Approach to STEAM:
Teaching to Argue about Sound                        Saadia Ali

Chapter 6: Developing Critical Thinking and
Language Skills through Project-based Learning
and the Knowledge Framework
Chapter 7: Alternative Frameworks for
Incorporation of Generative AI Usage as a
Functional Approach to Language Development

Chapter 8: Unleashing the Power of Multilingual
Minds: Translanguaging for Deeper Learning
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                                              2

                                               Dedication and Thanks

         I want to extend my sincere gratitude to all the authors who contributed chapters to
this groundbreaking open education textbook on Content Area Language and Literacy.

         Your expertise and dedication to sharing knowledge freely for the benefit of students
and educators worldwide exemplifies the spirit of open education. By generously donating
your time and insights to create an accessible, high-quality resource, you are helping to
advance equity, collaboration, and functional language development in the field. This
collaborative work would not have been possible without each of you.

         Thank you for being part of this project to empower learners from all backgrounds.
The impact of open textbooks like this will be felt for years to come.

                                                                                                  --Saadia Ali

My thanks are given in the Conclusion of the Introduction chapter. --Margaret A. Berg

CC BY-NC-SA
This license enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any
medium or format for noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given
to the creator. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified
material under identical terms. CC BY-NC-SA includes the following elements:

      BY: credit must be given to the creator.

      NC: Only noncommercial uses of the work are permitted.

       SA: Adaptations must be shared under the same terms.
Content Area Language and Literacy              3

Introduction and Overview of the Open Textbook
              Margaret A. Berg and Saadia Ali

         This Open Textbook (OTB) arises from a place of humility and the need for inclusion.
In 2020, my colleagues and I were given a mandate to attend a Colorado Department of
Education online training for "literacy" that rehashed the same research and instructional
strategies provided to me (Berg) when I studied for my doctorate in Curriculum and Teaching
with a focus on Literacy and Linguistics. Most distressing to me was the fact that no attention
was given in the state training for the inclusion of children who did not speak English in the
home. Meanwhile, I have raised a child who speaks both English and Russian in the home
with the schooling context providing the addition of Spanish to her repertoire of languages. I
found myself angry that we were administratively forced to sit through training for
monolingualism.

         The materials for teaching monolingual English speakers abound in the US for
historical reasons, foremost because of the active destruction of our heritage bilingual
schools during the "Americanization" movement of the "great wars" era (Ramsey, 2010). As
the training progressed, a rich discussion emerged with my colleague Saadia who enjoyed
much of the material provided by the state. Saadia had a more accepting attitude toward the
training and asserted that any idea which can be used in teaching is beneficial even if it is
presented in a deluge of information that is otherwise known or useless. Her words cooled
my anger and humbled me to recognize, once again, the variety of perspectives that exist at
our university and in our state.

         Saadia has since moved on to a bigger institution to expand her educational
knowledge to technology and design, but this OTB represents one result of those
conversations that began with the state mandated training. The first two chapters of the
textbook are the synthesis of much of the state's workshop about the Simple View of Reading
and instructional strategies to support it. Most of the material merges their instructional ideas
with the verbiage of an Open Educational Resource text (Munger, 2016). As multilinguals who
are raising multilinguals, dubious ideas from the state materials are either brought into
question or were eliminated completely. For example, my daughter is a Russian speaker and
Elkonin Boxes allow children in Russia to see and slide each sound of a word (represented by
a single symbol in the language) into a box situated in a schoolbook. In English, it makes
Content Area Language and Literacy  4

more sense to simply slide chips for sounds without boxes since several spelling patterns in
English lack direct sound to symbol correspondences. (Consider how the long "a" sound is
represented in these four words: pain, mane, vein, and reign. Yet all four contain only three
phonemes with different initial sounds but similar rhymes with a long "a" followed by an "n".)
English often lacks the phonetic transparency required for the Elkonin Box that implies a one
symbol and one sound correspondence, so it makes little sense to force upon children a
pedagogical approach that comes from a culture and language that has that one-to-one
advantage. But the attack on educators since the Reagan Administration era's A Nation at Risk
(1983) publication has been unrelenting and has resulted in an acute teacher shortage;
therefore, if an individual is entering a classroom with very little knowledge about world
languages and they are expected to teach young children, they may need some of the ideas
presented in the first two chapters of this book.

         The Simple View of Reading theorizes two strands of cognition, with several smaller
strands or skills, that must twist together for a child to read well. The "Word Recognition"
strand consists of (a) phonological awareness, (b) decoding, and (c) sight word recognition.
The "Language Comprehension" strand includes (a) background knowledge, (b) vocabulary,
(c) language structures, (d) verbal reasoning, and (e) literacy knowledge. These two stands are
explained in Chapters 1 and 2 respectively. We then turn attention to the reality of the
increasing linguistically diverse children in schools and the imperative to immerse them in the
language of various curricular content supporting them instructionally for success. This focus
on the return to, and growth of, multilingualism is informed by the 2020 WIDA Standards
framework that is anchored by four Big Ideas: 1) Equity of Opportunity and Access, 2.)
Integration of Content and Language, 3.) Collaboration among Stakeholders, and 4.) A
Functional Approach to Language Development. These ideas are not exclusive and separate
but rather are integrative, overlapping, and complementary as the various chapters that make
up the rest of the book demonstrate. Although the chapters emphasize the secondary levels
of schooling, the techniques discussed can be employed at lower levels of education and the
final two chapters extend considerations for Multilingual Learners into higher education.

          In Chapter 3, Rachel Beckwith argues that middle school is the period in which
students transition from a simple recount genre, that emphasis a chronological order of
events, to much more complex narratives. She provides examples of recounts and narratives
challenging the reader to consider the nuances of each and how one builds upon or
Content Area Language and Literacy  5

complements the other in an English Language Arts curriculum. Since students come to
classes with varied experiences, she asserts that they must be exposed to many examples of
each genre before they are expected to write them. She also emphasizes the need for
extensive work at the sentence structure level so that students can add greater variety to their
stories to achieve their intended functions and purposes.

         In Chapter 4, Gui and de Oliveira delineate the 6Cs of their Language-based
Approach to Content Instruction (LACI) and use it to provide greater scaffolding to
multilingual learners during the Teaching Learning Cycle, an older approach that is an
outgrowth of the Sydney School's research project Learning to Write, Reading to Learn (Rose
and Martin, 2012) based in M.A.K. Halliday's Functional Linguistics (2004). The authors
provide an example scaffolded lesson on Birthright Citizenship from a Civics program from
the New York City school system where 42% of the students speak a language other than
English in their homes. The 6Cs that educators are to consider and integrate into planning are
Connection, Culture, Code-breaking, Challenge, Community/Collaboration, and Classroom
Interactions.

         In Chapter 5, Terrell et al. bring together several frameworks--including the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development's PISA exam's competencies for
scientific literacy, the Next Generation Science Standards, and WIDA standards--to
contextualize the importance of argument in the science curriculum. They then take a science
lesson on sound from the state of Virginia and make alterations to it to better support
multilingual and culturally diverse learners. They employ LACI's Teaching-Learning Cycle with
ideas on how to develop language objectives that will be realized in a lesson. Common
instructional practices like anchor charts are integrated, for example, a CER--Claim, Evidence,
and Reasoning--visual helps keep the students focused on the genre of argument as students
gather scientific evidence.

         In Chapter 6, Slater and Beckett provide two instructional units for Project-based
Learning that employ Mohan's Knowledge Framework to assist students in recognizing how
language conveys ideas as they explore "truth in advertising." They introduce Appraisal
Theory that assists in identifying the stance of a speaker or writer about the topics they are
presenting. These ideas bolster Critical Thinking (CT) skills that are emphasized in the
frameworks of TESOL and WIDA among other professional pedagogical organizations. The
Content Area Language and Literacy  6

chapter provides instructional ideas for teachers to incorporate CT with Project-based
Learning.

         In Chapter 7, Faika Tahir draws on the WIDA ideas of equity, collaboration, and equal
access to make an argument for the use of AI to assist students in their writing for academia.
She briefly outlines the controversy surrounding the Generative AI writing platforms, the need
to motivate students with Social Justice ideas for writing, the Expectancy-Value-Cost Model of
Motivation, and the imperative to move away from summative writings to smaller formative
assessments of writing. She pushes the readers to think beyond the secondary level and
envisions Higher Education that more fully supports and accommodates multilingual learners.

         In Chapter 8, Saadia Ali draws on the ninth Guiding Principle of the 2020 WIDA
Standards Framework to explain the construct of "translanguaging" used in that Principle. She
openly draws on the tool of Generative AI to assist in the construction of the chapter that
expounds a definition of translanguaging, trends in the practice, benefits of translanguaging,
advantages of multilingualism, and challenges to translanguaging practice for multilinguals.
She ends with advocacy for translanguaging and provides an appendix with instructional
ideas and videos to assist teachers. Saadia also ends this introductory chapter with the
significance of translanguaging in her own development as a scholar

                                         Saadia's Passion for Languages
         My inspiration for languages started in my childhood when I used to see my father
reading the Holy Quran in three different languages, Arabic, Urdu, and English, in a special
version where the Arabic language was written on the right side, Urdu in the middle, and
English on the left side. Using Persian couplets in his literary discussions with his friends and
talking to his siblings in Saraiki (a regional dialect of Punjabi), I used to get fascinated. I
wondered how we could become fluent and understand different languages simultaneously.
As time passed, my passion for languages increased, and I started noticing multilingual
speakers, their pronunciation, and their fluency in family, friends, and community.
         As a native Urdu speaker, I had the privilege to get exposed to other languages. Urdu
and English are Pakistan's official languages. Therefore, I am equally fluent in English, Punjabi
(a regional dialect used by speakers in Pakistan and India), and Hindi. My parents speak Urdu,
English, and Punjabi. As an elective course, I studied Arabic for three years in middle school
and Persian for two years as an undergraduate and graduate student. I also learned
Content Area Language and Literacy  7

introductory phrases in Korean and Spanish when I moved to a larger city in 2007 to greet the
immigrant salespersons in their native languages. The level of motivation would increase
tremendously in dealing with a customer using their native languages, and I could see a glow
on their faces as well.

         As soon as I started my Master in English and Literature at the National University of
Modern Languages (N.U.M.L.) in Islamabad, Pakistan, I was introduced to Phonetics and
Phonology, History of Linguistics, and Teaching English as a Foreign Language coursework.
These courses ignited the flame of languages and looking at language, particularly syntax
and semantics, with a new lens. Moving forward in the program, the studies and hands-on
approaches in semantics, syntax, and stylistics added a bit more flavor to my language
learning and code-switching experimentation.
Love for Translanguaging

         The idea of empowering multilingual learners in classrooms through translanguaging
began during the Master of Science program at Southern Connecticut State University, where
I completed a capstone study on translanguaging in the Fall of 2017. I went on to teach ESL
classes utilizing translanguaging techniques at Islamic centers in Connecticut in 2018 and in
Colorado from 2019 through 2020. Between 2015 and 2018, I implemented translanguaging
practices in Intensive English Programs at E.L.S. West Haven, Connecticut, and the University
of Northern Colorado's of International Education Center, seeking guidelines and ideas from
NYSIEB Educator's Translanguaging Practices (CUNY, 2011). I was fascinated to see how
languages, especially native languages, bring spark and excitement in the eyes of my
undergraduate immigrant English Language Learners (ELLs) at E.L.S., West Haven. At the
same time, when I started to use and apply various strategies of Translanguaging practices
acquired from CUNY NYSIEB Educator's Translanguaging in the Intensive English Programs, I
saw a sudden shift in learning from least interested students to thriving students.

         When my students tried to use their native languages during my English-intensive
language classrooms, sometimes I would pick up the meaning of their spoken words,
especially if I had known some phrases or words of their languages. They used to get excited
and scared simultaneously to learn that their English teacher knew a few words from their
native languages. I used to ask them to teach me some words in every class from their native
languages, which regularly aligned with the class's objectives. It started reducing their anxiety
Content Area Language and Literacy  8

and fear of learning English as a Second Language (ESL) and motivated and empowered
them to teach me the words from their native languages.

         I started memorizing songs in their native languages or a few couplets from the songs
to show association and correlation to their culture in the ESL classes. I also used to pay
special attention to the content and language objectives to make the content understandable
for them with cultural connections. They slowly and steadily showed better and increased
participation in class discussions and activities. The learning outcomes of each class were met
in a smooth and enjoyable environment. This response motivated me to the extent possible
that I coordinated and implemented ESL programs in two Islamic centers and experienced a
tremendous shift of anxiety and fear to confidence, motivation, and empowerment in adult
English Language Learners (ELLs).
Urdu and my Homeland

         Pakistan is my homeland country, and Urdu is Pakistan's native language. As I go
deeper into my understanding of WIDA and the Teaching-Learning Cycle, my language
background informs my ideas. My language journey started with Urdu.

           "Urdu is an Indo-Aryan language and the official language of Pakistan. It is very
           similar to Hindi, with the main differences being that Urdu borrows vocabulary from
           Persian, Arabic (and English) while Hindi uses more words from Sanskrit. Linguists see
           Standard Urdu and Standard Hindi as two formal versions of the same Hindustani
           language. Urdu and Hindi are virtually identical in informal spoken settings and can
           be considered dialects of one language. In addition to being widely used in Pakistan
           and India, Urdu is also spoken by communities in Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
           Botswana, Fiji, Germany, Guyana, Malawi, Mauritius, Nepal, Norway, Oman, Qatar,
           Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom,
           and Zambia. Urdu has been written in a Perso-Arabic script since the 12th century,
           usually in a calligraphic style called Nastaliq. The word Urdu `derived' from the Turkish
           word meaning `foreign'" (UNESCO paras 1-3).
The intersections of language in my own identity are as diverse and unique as the students
who enter the classrooms where I have taught and will teach.
         I am pursuing a doctoral degree in Instructional Design and Technology at Virginia
Tech. I am motivated to add a flavor of translanguaging practices directly or indirectly in my
teaching and learning assignments. It feels uplifting to use it in my social contexts and
Content Area Language and Literacy  9

communication within the academic and professional community of educational
professionals and researchers to bring everyone together. The participants involved in the
discussion proudly share funds of knowledge and immense resources from their ethnic
backgrounds, native languages, and traditional foods and festivities.

         Most recently, I conducted qualitative research on culturally responsive teaching
through translanguaging with ESL students in Virginia. I presented findings from this 2022
study at a graduate research competition in Spring 2023. I continue participating in
professional development on translanguaging through the U.S Department of Education
while submitting conference proposals to share my work. My commitment to expanding
translanguaging research, refining instructional techniques, and advocating for multilingual
learners remains strong.

         Sharing my passion for Translanguaging with the readers is essential. You need to use
the lens of a linguistic, multilingual researcher and learner to feel the direct and deep
connection between the native language and its user. Once that lens is set to target the
communication barriers and gaps in learning, the overarching learning and content
objectives can be met in an enjoyable setting.

                                                        Conclusion
         Saadia's love of knowledge cannot be denied and I want to thank her for allowing me
an opportunity to come to know her through this process. Even after losing potential
contributors and our third editor, Saadia held on to the dream that we could develop an
Open Educational Resource Textbook (OTB) that we could share with students and scholars
who may not have access to materials that are low cost and aligned with the Big Ideas of
WIDA. It has been a humbling, and at times harrowing, experience but here we are at the
end/beginning of the first edition. I would also like to add my own thanks to Saadia's that
appears earlier in this book. I want to thank our colleagues throughout the United States who
willingly peer-reviewed chapters the designated chapters in this book. Thank you again to the
contributing authors; may the contents of this OTB be read, recycled, revised, remixed, and
redistributed across contexts throughout the world as needed. Everyone deserves an
education.
Content Area Language and Literacy  10

                                                        References
CUNY. (2011). City University of New York-New York State's Initiative for Emergent Bilinguals.

         https://www.cuny-nysieb.org/

Halliday, M.A.K. (2004). An Introduction to Functional Grammar. London, UK: Hodder.

Munger, K.A. (2016). Steps to Success: Crossing the Bridge Between Literacy Research and
         Practice. [Creative Commons Textbook.] https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/steps-
         to-success/

Ramsey, P.J. (2010). Bilingual Public Schooling in the United States: A History of American's
         "Polyglot Boardinghouse". New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

Rose, D. & Martin, J.R. (2012). Learning to Write, Reding to Learn: Genre, Knowledge, and
         Pedagogy in the Sydney School. Bristol, CT: Equinox.

UNESCO. (n.d.). Silk Roads Programme. https://en.unesco.org/silkroad/silk-road-
         themes/languages-and-endanger-languages/urdo

WIDA. (2020). English Language Development Standards Framework, 2020 Edition. Madison,
         WI: Wisconsin Cener for Education Research.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                          11

                                                 Chapter 1
                   Word Recognition and the Simple View of Reading

                                 Saadia Ali, Virginia Tech University
                  Margaret A. Berg, Ph.D., University of Northern Colorado

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

   · Recognize the two strands in the Simple View of Reading.
   · Understand the Word Recognition elements in the Simple

       View of Reading.
   · Gain instructional ideas for supporting young learners in

       learning to read an alphabetic language, i.e. English.

                                                       Introduction
         The Simple View of Reading is a model, or a representation, of how skillful reading
comprehension develops. Although the Report of the National Reading Panel (NRP; NICHHD,
2000) concluded that reading instruction should incorporate explicit instruction in five areas
(phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension), the Simple View of
Reading shows how these subskills are intertwined to ultimately contribute to skillful reading
and the importance of background knowledge for increased comprehension. Although the
Comprehension and Vocabulary chapter focuses predominately on these two areas along
with some mention of fluency for use in the arts-based activities, this first chapter focuses on
the skills that should be, and need to be, acquired by children in the earliest years of
education--phonemic awareness and phonics. It is important to note that phonics, or letter-
sound correspondence in written language, is most applicable in phonetic based written
language systems like English, Spanish, Russian, etc. Furthermore, it is worth noting that the
NRP meta-analysis research employed English instruction as its base ideology and
population. Little to no attention was given in the NRP research to multilingual students,
particularly those emerging from an oral language into a written languages in other systems
other than phonetic like Chinese. Most students enter schools with a rich oral language store

 Editors' note: This chapter was blind peer-reviewed prior to online publication.
Content Area Language and Literacy    12

of vocabulary, stories, and experiences though not all these language encounters are of use
within the school setting. The ability to read words begins the journey of what has been
recorded by literate people of previous generations, and what is missing or absent, an issue
that the emergent reader/writer may seek to set right. This journey begins by taking the
spoken sounds swirling in an environment and learning to capture them in a system of
symbols, and for the purposes of this chapter, the written system of English is the focus.

         Word recognition, or the ability to read words accurately and automatically, is a
complex, multifaced process. Reading comprehension is defined as "the process of
simultaneously extracting and constructing meaning through interaction and involvement
with written language" (Snow, 2002, p. xiii), as well as the "capacities, abilities, knowledge,
and experiences" one brings to the reading situation (p. 11). The Simple View of Reading
(Gough & Tunmer, 1986) is a research-supported representation of how reading
comprehension develops. It characterizes skillful reading comprehension as a combination of
two separate but equally important components--word recognition skills and language
comprehension ability. This idea is illustrated in a visual model that was created by Dr. Hollist
Scarborough (2001, see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Scarborough's Reading Rope

As this model implies, students who have success with reading comprehension are those who
are skilled in both word recognition and language comprehension. In the lower strand of the
image, "Word Recognition" is composed of three elements: Phonological Awareness, the
recognition and manipulation of sounds in spoken language; Decoding, the task of gaining a
sound from a written symbol or symbols; and Sight Recognition of familiar and high
frequency words that may not follow a common phonemic pattern (for example, "said" has a
short /e/ sound while a broader pattern in English provides a long /a/ sound for the a-I
combination--paid, maid, braid, etc.) This chapter will focus on this lower strand though not
exclusively since a student's background knowledge impacts their experiences in, and
beyond, the school. The comprehension of written texts requires two essentials--being able to
read the words on the page and understanding what the words and language mean. If a
student cannot recognize words on the page accurately and automatically, fluency may be
Content Area Language and Literacy  13

affected, and in turn, reading comprehension will suffer. Likewise, if a student has poor
understanding of the meaning of the words, reading comprehension will suffer.

         Historically, it was thought that since children learn language and how to speak just by
virtue of being spoken to, reading to and with children should naturally lead to learning to
read, or recognize, words. Now we know it is not natural, even though it seems that some
children "pick up reading" like a bird learns to fly. The human brain is wired from birth for
speech, but this is not the case for reading the printed word. This is because what we read--
our alphabetic script--is an invention, only available to humankind for the last 3,800 years
(Dehaene, 2009). As a result, our brains have had to accommodate a new pathway to
translate the squiggles that are our letters into the sounds of our spoken words that they
symbolize. This seemingly simple task is, in actuality, a complex feat. The alphabet is an
amazing invention that allows us to represent both old and new words and ideas with just a
few symbols. Despite its efficiency and simplicity, the alphabet is also a root cause of reading
difficulties for many people. The letters that make up our alphabet represent phonemes--
individual speech sounds--or according to Dehaene, "atoms" of spoken words (as opposed to
other scripts like Arabic whereby the written symbols represent larger units of speech such as
syllables or whole words). Individual speech sounds in spoken words (phonemes) are difficult
to notice for approximately 25% to 40% of children (Adams, Foorman, Lundberg, & Beeler,
1998). In fact, for some children, the ability to notice, or become aware of the individual
sounds in words (phoneme awareness) proves to be one of the most difficult academic tasks
they will ever encounter. If we were to ask, "How many sounds do you hear when I say `gum'?"
some children may answer that they hear only one, because when we say the word "gum," the
sounds of /g/ /u/ and /m/ are seamless. (Note the / / marks denote the sound made by a
letter.) This means that the sounds are coarticulated; they overlap and melt into each other,
forming an enveloped, single unit--the spoken word "gum." There are no crisp boundaries
between the sounds when we say the word "gum." The /g/ sound folds into the /u/ sound,
which then folds into the /m/ sound, with no breaks in between.

         Our speech consists of whole words, but we write those words by breaking them
down into their phonemes and representing each phoneme with letters. To read and write
using our alphabetic script, children must first be able to notice and disconnect each of the
sounds in spoken words. They must blend the individual sounds together to make a whole
word (read). And they must segment the individual sounds to represent each with alphabetic
Content Area Language and Literacy  14

letters (spell and write). This is the first stumbling block for so many in their literacy journeys--a
difficulty in phoneme awareness simply because their brains happen to be wired in such a
way as to make the sounds hard to notice. Research, through the use of brain imaging and
various experiments, has shown how the brain must "teach itself" to accommodate this
alphabet by creating a pathway between multiple areas (Dehaene, 2009). Instruction
incorporating phoneme awareness is likely to facilitate successful reading (Adams et al.,
1998; Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998), and it is for this reason that it is a focus in early school
experiences. For some children, phoneme awareness, along with exposure to additional
fundamentals, such as how to hold a book, the concept of a word or sentence, or knowledge
of the alphabet, may be learned before formal schooling begins. In addition to having such
print experiences, oral experiences such as being talked to and read to within a literacy rich
environment help to set the stage for reading. Children lacking these literacy experiences
prior to starting school must rely heavily on their teachers to provide them.

         Simple View of Reading, as illustrated by Scarborough (see Figure 1), represents the
underlying skills and elements that come together to form two necessary braids of reading
comprehension. Although the model itself is called "simple" because it points out that
reading comprehension is comprised of reading words and understanding the language of
the words, in truth the two components are quite complex. For either of the two essential
components to develop successfully, students need to be taught the elements necessary for
automatic word recognition (i.e., phonological awareness, decoding, sight recognition of
frequent/familiar words), and strategic language comprehension (i.e., background
knowledge, vocabulary, verbal reasoning, literacy knowledge, etc.). The sections below will
describe the importance of the three elements that lead to accurate word recognition and
provide some instructional methods for each element.

                                                 Word Recognition
         Word recognition is the act of seeing a word and recognizing its pronunciation
immediately and without any conscious effort. If reading words requires conscious, effortful
decoding, little attention is left for comprehension of a text to occur. Since reading
comprehension is an important goal in teaching children to read, a critical early objective is to
ensure that they can read words with instant, automatic recognition (Garnett, 2011).
Content Area Language and Literacy  15

         Consider your own reading as an example of automatic word recognition. Assuming
you are a skilled reader, it is likely that as you are looking at the words on this page, you
cannot avoid reading them. It is impossible to suppress reading the words that you look at on
a page. Because you have learned to instantly recognize so many words to the point of
automaticity, a mere glance with no conscious effort is all it takes for word recognition to take
place. Despite this word recognition that results from a mere glance at print, it is critical to
understand that you have not simply recognized what the words look like as wholes, or
familiar shapes. Even though we read so many words automatically and instantaneously, our
brains still process every letter in the words subconsciously. This is evident when we spot
misspellings. For example, when quickly glancing at the words in the familiar sentences, "Jack
be nimble, Jack be quick. Jack jamped over the canbleslick," you likely spotted a problem
with a few of the individual letters. Yes, you instantly recognized the words, yet at the same
time you noticed the individual letters within the words that are not correct. To teach students
word recognition so that they can achieve this automaticity, students require instruction in
phonological awareness, decoding, and sight recognition of high frequency words (e.g.,
"said," "put"). Each of these elements is defined and their importance is described below,
along with effective methods of instruction for each.

                                              Phonological Awareness
         Phonological awareness is a broad term encompassing an awareness of various-sized
units of sounds in spoken words such as rhymes (whole words), syllables (large parts of
words), and phonemes (individual sounds). Hearing "cat" and "mat," and being aware that
they rhyme, is a form of phonological awareness, and rhyming is usually the easiest and
earliest form that children acquire. Likewise, being able to break the spoken word "teacher"
into two syllables is a form of phonological awareness that is more sophisticated. Phoneme
awareness, as mentioned previously, is an awareness of the smallest individual units of sound
in a spoken word--its phonemes; phoneme awareness is the most advanced level of
phonological awareness. Upon hearing the word "sleigh," children will be aware that there
are three separate speech sounds--/s/ /l/ //--despite the fact that they may have no idea what
the word looks like in its printed form and despite the fact that they would likely have
difficulty reading it. Because the terms sound similar, phonological awareness is often
confused with phoneme awareness. Teachers should know the difference because awareness
Content Area Language and Literacy  16

of larger units of sound--such as rhymes and syllables--develops before awareness of
individual phonemes, and instructional activities meant to develop one awareness may not
be suitable for another.

         Teachers should also understand and remember that neither phonological awareness
nor its most advanced form--phoneme awareness--has anything whatsoever to do with print
or letters. The activities that are used to teach them are entirely auditory. A simple way to
remember this difference is just as you can talk on the phone without using your eyes,
phonological awareness does not require the eyes. Adults can teach phonological awareness
activities to a child in a car seat during a drive. The child can be told, "Say `cowboy.' Now say
`cowboy' without saying `cow.'" Adults can teach phoneme awareness activities as well by
asking, "What sound do you hear at the beginning of `sssun,' `sssail,' and `ssssoup'?" or, "In the
word `snack,' how many sounds do you hear?" or by saying, "Tell me the sounds you hear in
`lap.'" Notice that the words would not be printed anywhere; only spoken words are required.
Engaging in these game-like tasks with spoken words helps children develop the awareness
of phonemes, which, along with additional instruction, will facilitate future word recognition.
Phoneme Awareness

         An abundance of research emerged in the 1970s documenting the importance of
phoneme awareness (the most sophisticated form of phonological awareness) for learning to
read and write (International Reading Association, 1998). Failing to develop this awareness of
the sounds in spoken words leads to difficulties learning the relationship between speech
and print that is necessary for learning to read (Snow et al., 1998). This difficulty can
sometimes be linked to specific underlying causes, such as a lack of instructional experiences
to help children develop phoneme awareness, or neurobiological differences that make
developing an awareness of phonemes more difficult for some children (Rayner et al., 2001).

         Phoneme awareness facilitates the essential connection that is "reading": the
sequences of individual sounds in spoken words match up to sequences of printed letters on
a page. To illustrate the connection between phoneme awareness and reading, picture the
steps that children must perform as they are beginning to read and spell words. First, they
must accurately sound out the letters, one at a time, holding them in memory, and then blend
them together correctly to form a word. Conversely, when beginning to spell words, they
must segment a spoken word (even if it is not audible, they are still "hearing the word" in their
minds) into its phonemes and then represent each phoneme with its corresponding letter(s).
Content Area Language and Literacy  17

Therefore, both reading and spelling are dependent on the ability to segment and blend
phonemes, as well as match the sounds to letters, and as stated previously, some students
have great difficulty developing these skills. The good news is that these important skills can
be effectively taught, which leads to a discussion about the most effective ways to teach
phonological (and phoneme) awareness.

         Activities. A scientifically based study by Bradley and Bryant (1983) featured an
activity that teaches phonological awareness and remains popular today. The activity is
sorting or categorizing pictures by either rhyme or initial sound (Bradley & Bryant, 1983). Sets
of cards are shown to children that feature pictures of words that rhyme or have the same
initial sound. Typically, one picture does not match the others in the group, and the students
must decide which the "odd" one is. For instance, pictures of a fan, can, man, and pig are
identified to be sure the students know what they are. The teacher slowly pronounces each
word to make sure the students clearly hear the sounds and has them point to the word that
does not rhyme (match the others). This is often referred to as an "oddity task," and it can also
be done with pictures featuring the same initial sound as in key, clock, cat, and scissors (see
Blachman, Ball, Black, & Tangel, 2000 for reproducible examples). The Words Their Way
program has sorts that teachers and students can easily cut out and then sort for several
"oddity tasks" (Bear et al., 2006).

         Before moving to print, teachers can promote blending, segmenting, and
manipulating of sounds in a word. A simple game called "human robot" can be played with a
child at an early age. The teacher informs the child that they are a robot and they can't speak
like a human but the child can teach them. The adult then segments simple words putting a
short pause between each phoneme, for example, c-a-t. Then ask the child, "How does a
human say that?" They may mimic the adult sounds but if the adults blend for "cat," they need
only do it once or twice more for the child to gain the sense of the game. Once the adult has
segmented and the child has blended, then roles can be switched, and the child can segment
words for the adult to blend. Manipulation of sounds can happen with any rhyming game
including the song, "The Name Game." The task is to change a phoneme in a word to create
another word, or a nonsense word for fun. "Say It and Move It" (Blachman et al., 2000) is an
excellent way to transition from spoken language to a desktop or table. This activity requires
students to listen to a word, or say a word, and move a chip for each phoneme to indicate the
segmented sounds they hear.
Content Area Language and Literacy  18

         Evidence-based activities to promote phoneme awareness typically have students
segment spoken words into phonemes or have them blend phonemes together to create
words. In fact, the NRP (2000) identified segmenting and blending activities as the most
effective when teaching phoneme awareness. This makes sense, considering that segmenting
and blending are the very acts performed when spelling (segmenting a word into its
individual sounds) and reading (blending letter sounds together to create a word). The NRP
noted that if segmenting and blending activities eventually incorporate the use of letters,
thereby allowing students to make the connection between sounds in spoken words and
their corresponding letters, there is even greater benefit to reading and spelling. Making
connections between sounds and their corresponding letters is the beginning of phonics
instruction.

                                                         Decoding
         Like phonological awareness, neither understanding the alphabetic principle nor
knowledge of letter-sound correspondences come naturally. Additionally, students who come
from homes where English is not the dominant language, or is absent completely in the
home, are likely to be less quick in mapping sounds to symbols for a language they neither
see nor hear (often) in the home. Regardless, some children can gain insights about the
connections between speech and print on their own just from exposure and rich literacy
experiences, while many others require instruction. Such instruction results in dramatic
improvement in word recognition (Boyer & Ehri, 2011). Students who understand the
alphabetic principle and have been taught letter-sound correspondences, using
phonological awareness and letter-sound instruction, are well-prepared to begin decoding
simple words such as "cat" and "big" accurately and independently. These students will have
high initial accuracy in decoding, which is important since it increases the likelihood that
children will willingly engage in reading, and as a result, word recognition will progress. Also,
providing students effective instruction in letter-sound correspondences and how to use
those correspondences to decode is important because the resulting benefits to word
recognition lead to benefits in reading comprehension (Brady, 2011).
Alphabetic Principle
         When teaching children to accurately decode words, they must understand the
alphabetic principle and know letter-sound correspondences. When students make the
Content Area Language and Literacy  19

connection that letters signify the sounds that we say, they are said to understand the
purpose of the alphabetic code, or the "alphabetic principle." Letter-sound correspondences
are known when students can provide the correct sound for letters and letter combinations.
Students can then be taught to decode, which means to blend the letter sounds together to
read words. Decoding is a deliberate act in which readers must "consciously and deliberately
apply their knowledge of the mapping system to produce a plausible pronunciation of a
word they do not instantly recognize" (Beck & Juel, 1995, p. 9). Once a word is accurately
decoded a few times, it is likely to become recognized without conscious deliberation,
leading to efficient word recognition.

         The instructional practices teachers use to teach students how letters (e.g., i, r, x) and
letter clusters (e.g., sh, oa, igh) correspond to the sounds of speech in English is called
phonics (not to be confused with phoneme awareness). For example, a teacher may provide a
phonics lesson on how "p" and "h" combine to make /f/ in "phone," and "graph." After all, the
alphabet is a code that symbolizes speech sounds, and once students are taught which
sound(s) each of the symbols (letters) represents, they can successfully decode written words,
or "crack the code."

         Decoding instruction. As mentioned previously, systematic instruction features a
logical sequence of letters and letter combinations beginning with those that are the most
common and useful, and ending with those that are less so. For example, knowing the letter
"s" is more useful in reading and spelling than knowing "j" because it appears in more words.
Explicit instruction is direct; the teacher is straightforward in pointing out the connections
between letters and sounds and how to use them to decode words and does not leave it to
the students to figure out the connections on their own from texts. The notable findings of the
NRP (2000) regarding systematic and explicit phonics instruction include that its influence on
reading is most substantial when it is introduced in kindergarten and first grade, it is effective
in both preventing and remediating reading difficulties, it is effective in improving both the
ability to decode words as well as reading comprehension in younger children, and it is
helpful to children from all socioeconomic levels. It is worth noting here that effective phonics
instruction in the early grades is important so that difficulties with decoding do not persist for
students in later grades.

         When providing instruction in letter-sound correspondences, we should avoid
presenting them in alphabetical order. Instead, it is more effective to begin with high utility
Content Area Language and Literacy  20

letters such as "a, m, t, i, s, d, r, f, o, g, l" so that students can begin to decode dozens of words
featuring these common letters (e.g., mat, fit, rag, lot). Another reason to avoid teaching
letter-sound correspondences in alphabetical order is to prevent letter-sound confusion.
Letter confusion occurs in similarly shaped letters (e.g., b/d, p/q, g/p) because in day-to-day
life, changing the direction or orientation of an object such as a purse or a vacuum does not
change its identity--it remains a purse or a vacuum. Some children do not understand that for
certain letters, their position in space can change their identity. It may take a while for children
to understand that changing the direction of letter b will make it into letter d, and that these
symbols are not only called different things but also have different sounds. Until students gain
experience with print--both reading and writing--confusions are typical and are not due to
"seeing letters backward." To reduce the likelihood of confusion, teach the /d/ sound for "d"
to the point that the students know it consistently, before introducing letter "b."

         To introduce the alphabetic principle, the "Say It and Move It" activities described
above can be adapted to include letters on some of the chips. For example, the letter "n" can
be printed on a chip and when students are directed to segment the words "nut," "man," or
"snap," they can move the "n" chip to represent which sound (e.g., the first, second, or last) is
/n/. As letter-sound correspondences are taught, children should begin to decode by
blending them together to form real words (Blachman & Tangel, 2008).

         For many students, blending letter sounds together is difficult. Some may experience
letter-by-letter distortion when sounding out words one letter at a time. For example, they
may read "mat" as muh-a-tuh, adding the "uh" sound to the end of consonant sounds. To
prevent this, letter sounds should be taught in such a way to make sure the student does not
add the "uh" sound (e.g., "m" should be learned as /mmmm/ not /muh/, "r" should be
learned as /rrrr/ not /ruh/). To teach students how to blend letter sounds together to read
words, it is helpful to model (see Blachman & Murray, 2012). Begin with two letter words such
as "at." Write the two letters of the word separated by a long line: a_______t. Point to the "a"
and demonstrate stretching out the short /a/ sound--/aaaa/ as you move your finger to the "t"
to smoothly connect the /a/ to the /t/. Repeat this a few times, decreasing the length of the
line/time between the two sounds until you pronounce it together: /at/. Gradually move on to
three letter words such as "sad" by teaching how to blend the initial consonant with the vowel
sound (/sa/) then adding the final consonant. It is helpful at first to use continuous sounds in
Content Area Language and Literacy  21

the initial position (e.g., /s/, /m/, /l/) because they can be stretched and held longer than a
"stop consonant" (e.g., /b/, /t/, /g/).

         An excellent activity that teaches students to decode a word thoroughly and
accurately by paying attention to all of the sounds in words rather than guessing based on the
initial sounds is word building using a pocket chart with letter cards (see examples in
Blachman & Tangel). Have students begin by building a word such as "pan" using letter cards
p, a, and n. (These can be made using index cards cut into four 3 x 1.25 sections. It is helpful
to draw attention to the vowels by making them red as they are often difficult to remember
and easily confused). Next, have them change just one sound in "pan" to make a new word:
"pat." The sequence of words may continue with just one letter changing at a time: pan--pat--
rat--sat--sit--sip--tip--tap--rap. The student will begin to understand that they must listen
carefully to which sound has changed (which helps their phoneme awareness) and that all
sounds in a word are important. As new phonics elements are taught, the letter sequences
change accordingly. For example, a sequence featuring consonant blends and silent-e may
look like this: slim--slime--slide--glide--glade--blade--blame--shame--sham. Many decoding
programs that feature word building and provide samples ranging from easy, beginning
sequences to those that are more advanced (Beck & Beck, 2013; Blachman & Tangel, 2008).

         A final important point to mention about decoding is that teachers must consider what
makes words (or texts) decodable to allow for adequate practice of new decoding skills.
When letters in a word conform to common letter-sound correspondences, the word is
decodable because it can be sounded out, as opposed to words containing "rule breaker"
letters and sounds that are in words like "colonel" and "of." The letter-sound correspondences
and phonics elements that have been learned must be considered. There are many programs
and methods available for teaching students to decode, but extensive evidence exists that
instruction that is both systematic and explicit is more effective than instruction that is not
(Brady, 2011; NRP, 2000).

                                              Sight Word Recognition
         The third important component for successful word recognition is sight words. A small
percentage of words cannot be identified by deliberately sounding them out, yet they appear
frequently in print. They are "exceptions" because some of their letters do not follow common
letter-sound correspondences. Examples of such words are "once," "put," and "does." (Notice
Content Area Language and Literacy  22

that in the word "put," however, that only the vowel makes an exception sound, unlike the
sound it would make in similar words such as "gut," "rut," or "but.") As a result of the
irregularities, exception words must be memorized; sounding them out will not work.

         Since these exception words must often be memorized as a visual unit (i.e., by sight),
they are frequently called "sight words," and this leads to confusion among teachers. This is
because words that occur frequently in print, even those that are decodable (e.g., "in," "will,"
and "can"), are also often called "sight words." Of course, it is important for these decodable,
highly frequent words to be learned early (preferably by attending to their sounds rather than
just by memorization), right along with the others that are not decodable because they
appear so frequently in the texts that will be read.
High Frequency Words and Automaticity

         For the purposes of this chapter, sight words are familiar, high frequency words that
must be memorized because they have irregular spellings and cannot be perfectly decoded.
One third of beginning readers' texts are comprised of familiar, high frequency words such as
"the" and "of," and almost half of the words in print are comprised of the 100 most common
words (Fry, Kress, & Fountoukidis, 2000). These words need to be learned to the point of
automaticity so that smooth, fluent word recognition and reading can take place.

         Interestingly, skilled readers who decode well tend to become skilled sight word
"recognizers," meaning that they learn irregular sight words more readily than those who
decode with difficulty (Gough & Walsh, 1991). This reason is because as they begin learning
to read, they are taught to be aware of phonemes, they learn letter-sound correspondences,
and they put it all together to begin decoding while practicing reading books. While reading
a lot of books, they are repeatedly exposed to irregularly spelled, highly frequent sight words,
and because of this repetition, they learn sight words and develop automaticity. Therefore,
irregular sight words can be learned from wide, independent reading of books. Children who
encounter irregular sight words less often and struggle learning to decode may need to
spend a lot more time practicing reading books. These students will also need more
deliberate instruction and additional practice opportunities with a teacher who fosters a love
and excitement for independent and shared reading.

         Sight word recognition instruction. Teachers should notice that most letters in many
irregularly spelled words do in fact follow regular sound-symbol pronunciations (e.g., in the
word "from" only the "o" is irregular), and as a result attending to the letters and sounds can
Content Area Language and Literacy  23

often lead to correct pronunciation. That is why it is still helpful to teach students to notice all
letters in words to anchor them in memory, rather than to encourage "guess reading" or
"looking at the first letter," which are both highly unreliable strategies as anyone who has
worked with young readers will attest. Interestingly, Tunmer and Chapman (2002) discovered
that beginning readers (at the end of their first year in school and at the middle of their third
year in school) who read unknown words by "sounding them out" outperformed children who
employed strategies such as guessing, looking at the pictures, rereading the sentence on
measures of word reading and reading comprehension.

         Other than developing sight word recognition from wide, independent reading of
books or from exposure on classroom word walls, instruction in learning sight words is like
instruction used to learn letter-sound correspondences. Sources of irregularly spelled sight
words can vary. For instance, they can be preselected from the text that will be used for that
day's reading instruction. Lists of irregularly spelled sight words can be found in reading
programs or on the Internet (search for Fry lists or Dolch lists). When using such lists,
determine which words are irregularly spelled because they will also feature highly frequent
words that can be decoded, such as "up," and "got." These do not necessarily need deliberate
instructional time because the students will be able to read them using their knowledge of
letters and sounds.

         Regardless of the source, sight words can be practiced using flash cards or word lists,
making sure to review those that have been previously taught to solidify deep learning.
Gradual introduction of new words into the card piles or lists should include an introduction
such as pointing out features that may help learning and memorization (e.g., "where" and
"there" both have a tall letter "h" which can be thought of as an arrow or road sign pointing to
where or there). Sets of words that share patterns can be taught together (e.g., "would,"
"could," and "should"). Games such as Go Fish, Bingo, or Concentration featuring cards with
these words can build repetition and exposure, and using peer-based learning, students can
do speed drills with one another and record scores.

         Any activity requiring the students to spell the words aloud is also helpful. "Can You
Match It?" is a game in which peers work together to practice a handful of sight words. An
envelope or flap is taped across the top of a small dry erase board. One student chooses a
card, tells the partner what the word is, and then places the card inside the envelope or flap
so that it is not visible. The student with the dry erase board writes the word on the section of
Content Area Language and Literacy  24

board that is not covered by the envelope, then opens the envelope to see if their spelling
matches the word on the card. The goal in all of these activities is to provide a lot of repetition
and practice so that highly frequent, irregularly spelled sight words become words students
can recognize with just a glance.

                                                         Summary
         For students to comprehend text while reading, it is vital that they be able to read the
words on the page. Teachers who are aware of the importance of the essential, fundamental
elements which lead to successful word recognition--phonological awareness, decoding, and
sight recognition of irregular words--are apt to make sure to teach their students each of
these so that their word reading becomes automatic, accurate, and effortless. According to
Garnett (2011), fluent execution of the underlying elements involves teaching "accompanied
by supported and properly framed interactive practice" (p. 311). It is easy to see how success
in the three elements that lead to automatic word recognition are prerequisite to reading
comprehension.
         Learning to decode and to automatically read irregularly spelled sight words can
prevent the development of reading problems. Students who are successful in developing
effortless word recognition have an easier time reading, and this serves as a motivator to
young readers, who then proceed to read a lot. Students who struggle with word recognition
find reading laborious, and this serves as a barrier to young readers, who then may be
offered fewer opportunities to read connected text or avoid reading as much as possible
because it is difficult. Stanovich (1986) calls this disparity the "Matthew Effects" of reading,
where the rich get richer--good readers read more and become even better readers and
poor readers lose out. Stanovich (1986) also points out an astonishing quote from Nagy and
Anderson (1984, p. 328): "the least motivated children in the middle grades might read
100,000 words a year while the average child at this level might read 1,000,000. The figure for
the voracious middle grade reader might be 10,000,000 or even as high as 50,000,000."
Imagine the differences in word and world knowledge that result from reading 100,000
words a year versus millions! As teachers, it is worthwhile to keep these numbers in mind to
remind us of the importance of employing instructional practices to ensure that all students
learn phoneme awareness, decoding, and sight word recognition--the elements necessary for
learning how to succeed in word recognition.
Content Area Language and Literacy  25

         Word recognition, the act of seeing a word and recognizing its pronunciation without
conscious effort, is one of the two critical components in the Simple View of Reading that
must be achieved to enable successful reading comprehension. The other component is
language comprehension discussed in another chapter. The two essential components in the
Simple View of Reading, automatic word recognition and strategic language comprehension,
contribute to the goal of developing skilled reading comprehension. Because the two strands
are so crucial, reading comprehension is likened to a two-lock box, with both "key"
components needed to open it (Davis, 2006). Young learners, who can both recognize the
words on the page and understand the language of the words and sentences, are much more
likely to enjoy the resulting advantage of comprehending the meaning of the texts that they
read. Accuracy and effortlessness, or fluency, in reading words serves to clear the way for
successful reading comprehension.

Questions:
    1. What are some of the assumptions underlying the "Word Recognition" strand of
         Scarborough's Reading Rope?
    2. Explain in your own words how phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, and
         decoding are interconnected.
    3. How might a child know a word in print without ever having studied it formally in
         school?
    4. Brainstorm a list of words that do not follow commonly accepted rules of letter-sound
         correspondence, for example, "said" vs. paid, raid, maid, etc. Is there any word that
         struck you as an "oddball" like said? To whom did you report this discovery, if at all?
    5. How might a teacher better support a student from a home where English is not the
         (only) language used? What cultural connections can be made to this approach to
         reading?

Author's Note: Much of this chapter was taken from the Creative Commons textbook, Steps to Success: Crossing
the Bridge Between Literacy Research and Practice from the chapter by Maria S. Murray, "Word Recognition Skills:
One of Two Essential Components of Reading Comprehension." https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/steps-to-
success/chapter/3-word-recognition-skills-one-of-two-essential-components-of-reading-comprehension/
Content Area Language and Literacy  26

                                                        References

Adams, M. J., Foorman, B. R., Lundberg, I., & Beeler, T. (1998). The elusive phoneme: Why
         phonemic awareness is so important and how to help children develop it. American
         Educator, 22, 18-29. Retrieved from http://literacyconnects.org/img/2013/03/the-
         elusive-phoneme.pdf

Bear, D.R., Invernizzi, M., Johnston, F., & Templeton, S. (2010). Letter and Picture Sorts for
         Emergent Spellers. Boston, MA: Pearson.

Beck, I. L., & Beck, M. E. (2013). Making sense of phonics: The hows and whys (2nd ed.). New
         York, NY: Guilford Press.

Beck, I. L., & Juel, C. (1995). The role of decoding in learning to read. American Educator, 19,
         8-25. Retrieved from
          http://www.scholastic.com/Dodea/Module_2/resources/dodea_m2_pa_roledecod.p
         df

Blachman, B. A., Ball, E. W., Black, R., & Tangel, D. M. (2000). Road to the
         code: A phonological awareness program for young children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H.
         Brookes Publishing Co.

Blachman, B. A., & Murray, M. S. (2012). Teaching tutorial: Decoding instruction.
         Charlottesville, VA: Division for Learning Disabilities. Retrieved from
         http://teachingld.org/tutorials

Blachman, B. A., & Tangel, D. M. (2008). Road to reading: A program for preventing
         and remediating reading difficulties. Baltimore: Brookes Publishing.

Boyer, N., & Ehri, L. (2011). Contribution of phonemic segmentation instruction with letters
         and articulation pictures to word reading and spelling in beginners. Scientific Studies
         of Reading, 15, 440-470. doi:10.1080/10888438.2010.520778

Bradley, L., & Bryant, P. E. (1983). Categorizing sounds and learning to read: A causal
         connection. Nature, 303, 419-421. doi:10.1038/301419a0

Brady, S. (2011). Efficacy of phonics teaching for reading outcomes: Indicators from post-NRP
         research. In S. A. Brady, D. Braze, & C. A. Fowler (Eds.), Explaining individual
         differences in reading: Theory and evidence (pp. 69-96). New York, NY: Psychology
         Press.

Davis, M. (2006). Reading instruction: The two keys. Charlottesville, VA: Core Knowledge
         Foundation.

Dehaene, S. (2009). Reading in the brain. New York, NY: Penguin Books.

Fry, E., Kress, J., & Fountoukidis, D. (2000). The reading teacher's book of lists (4th ed.).
         Paramus, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Content Area Language and Literacy  27

Garnett, K. (2011). Fluency in learning to read: Conceptions, misconceptions, learning
         disabilities, and instructional moves. In J. R. Birsh (Ed.), Multisensory teaching of
         basic language skills (p. 293-320). Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.

Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading, and reading disability. Remedial
         and Special Education, 7, 6-10. doi:10.1177/074193258600700104

Gough, P. B., & Walsh, M. (1991). Chinese, Phoenicians, and the orthographic cipher of
         English. In S. Brady & D. Shankweiler (Eds.), Phonological processes in literacy (pp.
         199-209). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

International Reading Association. (1998). Phonemic awareness and the teaching of reading:
         A position statement from the board of directors of
         the International Reading Association. Retrieved
         from http://www.reading.org/Libraries/position-statements-and-
         resolutions/ps1025_phonemic.pdf

Nagy, W., & Anderson, R. C. (1984). How many words are there in printed school
         English? Reading Research Quarterly, 19, 304-330. doi:10.2307/747823

NICHHD: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (2000). Report of the
         National Reading Panel: Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of
         the scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction:
         Reports of the subgroups. (NIH Publication No. 00-4754). Washington, DC: U.S.
         Government Printing Office. Retrieved
         from http://www.nichd.nih.gov/publications/pubs/nrp/documents/report.pdf

Rayner, K., Foorman, B. R., Perfetti, C. A., Pesetsky, D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2001). How
         psychological science informs the teaching of reading. Psychological Science in the
         Public Interest, 2, 31-74.

Scarborough, H. S. (2002). Connecting early language and literacy to later reading
         (dis)abilities: Evidence, theory, and practice. In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson
         (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 97-110). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Snow, C. E. (Chair). (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward an R & D program in
         reading comprehension. Santa Monica, CA: Rand. Retrieved
         from http://www.prgs.edu/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2005/MR146
         5.pdf

Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young
         children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Stanovich, K. E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of individual
         differences in the acquisition of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 360-407.
         doi:10.1598/RRQ.21.4.1

Tunmer, W. E., & Chapman, J. W. (2002). The relation of beginning readers' reported word
         identification strategies to reading achievement, reading-related skills, and academic
Content Area Language and Literacy  28

         self-perceptions. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 15, 341-358.
         doi:10.1023/A:1015219229515

                                                      Contributors

Saadia Ali and Margaret Berg are the editors of this Open Educational Resource Textbook.
Their contact information and biographies appear following their respective individually
authored chapters.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                  29

                                    Chapter 2
Language Comprehension and the Simple View of Reading

    Margaret A. Berg, Ph.D., University of Northern Colorado

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

· Differentiate among three principal elements of Scarborough's
    Model of Simple Reading: background knowledge, vocabulary, and
    language structures.

· Explain their interconnectedness.
· Examine concrete examples of instructional strategies for each

    element.
· Articulate the importance of background knowledge to language

    comprehension.
· Understand fluency in Scarborough's Model vs. common practice.

                                                       Introduction
         Comprehension of printed text (as opposed to other modes such as visual or audio
that would not require a person to aim for reading comprehension) requires two essential
skills: the ability to read the words on the page and the ability to understand the meaning of
the words (Davis, 2006). This chapter will cover the central component of successful reading
comprehension referred to as "language comprehension" in Scarborough's 2001 Reading
Rope Model (see, Figure 1). As you can see from the Scarborough model, language
comprehension includes background knowledge, vocabulary, language structure, verbal
reasoning, and literacy knowledge.

Figure 1: Simple View of Reading: Scarborough's Model

         In Scarborough's illustration for what has been called the "Simple View of Reading",
the two necessary braids that contribute to skilled reading comprehension are themselves
comprised of underlying abilities and strands. While the duality of the model lends to its
`simplicity,' each strand is quite complex due to its underlying elements. In the case of

 Editors' note: This chapter was blind peer-reviewed prior to online publication.
Content Area Language and Literacy  30

language comprehension, students need to steadily accumulate a fundamental base of the
five elements, discussed below, and the ability to strategically apply them during reading to
comprehend texts. Strategic application of these elements requires readers to continually
monitor how well they comprehend its meaning and recall any knowledge they have about
the topic, words, sayings, and more. This process is called "metacognition," or thinking about
thinking and it can be explicitly developed through reading instructions.

         A brief commentary about language comprehension is covered before a close
examination of the language comprehension rope with instructional ideas. It is important to
note that the instructional approaches should be integrated into a well aligned lesson for
planned outcomes, and that all students benefit from explicit instruction about reading.
Furthermore, literacy in one language benefits other languages a learner is studying or
acquiring so teachers should encourage extensive independent reading in any language.

                     Language Comprehension and Connections to Knowledge
         Reading comprehension includes "the process of simultaneously extracting and
constructing meaning through interaction and involvement with written language" (Snow,
2002, xiii), as well as the "capacities, abilities, knowledge, and experiences" one brings to the
reading situation (p. 11). In line with the first part of this definition, it is expected that once
children have been taught decoding of sounds and letters through blending and segmenting
for integration with sight words, and built-up vocabulary related to school topics, they will be
on their way to successful reading comprehension. Reading instruction in schools focuses so
heavily on developing comprehension because this ability is a central goal of teaching written
texts.
         A surface skim through the teacher's manuals from published reading programs
reveals a multitude of comprehension skills and corresponding strategies are often taught at
each grade level (e.g., finding main idea, summarizing, using graphic organizers). Used
exclusively, however, these skills and strategies do not necessarily transition students to
successfully comprehending texts. Effective reading instruction must also recognize the
critical role language comprehension plays in reading comprehension. Language
comprehension includes the interaction among someone's background knowledge,
vocabulary, language structures like grammar, verbal reasoning abilities, and genre
knowledge. Language comprehension is a more general term than listening comprehension,
Content Area Language and Literacy  31

which is the ability to understand and make sense of spoken language. Complex and
multifaceted, the ability to comprehend a text requires an understanding of the text's
vocabulary, familiarity with the topic, and a grasp of language structures, such as grammar,
verbal reasoning abilities, and genre knowledge (see Cain & Oakhill, 2007). In other words,
discerning a text's complete meaning depends on one's ability to both differentiate pieces of
a whole and integrate those pieces to gain the gist of an author's meaning.

         An aspect of reading comprehension that is often overlooked during instruction is
students' language comprehension. For example, a student who has general difficulty with
reading comprehension, may comprehend a text about sharks or reefs quite well if his/her
parents are marine biologists because he or she has accumulated experiences with ocean-
related "language"--its words, phrases, and facts. This same student may not comprehend
another text about ham radio operation or the Appalachian Trail. Successful reading
comprehension, then, often depends on the language of a text because the more familiarity
and knowledge students have with its language, the stronger comprehension will be.
Students from disadvantaged backgrounds often struggle with reading comprehension,
despite being able to decode accurately and read fluently. They are often believed to have
poor reading comprehension ability when the issue is a lack of language comprehension
stemming from less world knowledge and fewer experiences aligning with the language
encountered in school and school texts. Often, reading comprehension instruction involves
teaching students how to engage with written text strategically through deliberate mental
actions such as questioning, visualization, and summarizing. However, without prior
knowledge to aid sense-making, such strategies are futile.

         Not surprisingly, in the earliest grades, an important facilitator of reading
comprehension is automatic word recognition since comprehension of a text cannot take
place if its words cannot be read or recognized. However, once students can more
competently recognize words, the dominant factor driving reading comprehension
transforms from decoding words to deciphering language (Foorman, Francis, Shaywitz,
Shaywitz, & Fletcher, 1997). Once students can read the words, they extract meaning from
texts using their prior and world knowledge (background knowledge), their knowledge of
words (vocabulary), and their knowledge of how words go together to create meaning
(language comprehension). This accumulation of knowledge can last a lifetime and is never
"finished."
Content Area Language and Literacy  32

         Subtle differences exist between the concepts of "knowledge" and "background
knowledge." In this chapter, "knowledge" is broadly defined as the total accumulation of facts
and information a person has gained from previous experiences (it may also be called
general or world knowledge). Knowledge is composed of concepts, ideas, and factual
information, which eventually coalesce to contribute to understanding in various situations.
While facts, concepts, and ideas are necessary elements of procedural knowledge (e.g.
ordering historical events on a timeline, editing a paper for mechanical errors, read a map,
etc.), they are also vital for situations or conditions requiring synthesis of information (e.g.
writing a comprehensive argumentative essay, interpreting an author's message, etc.;
Marzano & Kendall, 2007). "Background knowledge," on the other hand, is a term used in
education for a specific subset of knowledge needed to comprehend a particular situation,
lesson, or text (it is also called "prior knowledge"). This subset of knowledge stems from prior
experiences in life, engagement with others, and interactions with text. When reading a text
about dog training, for example, any background (prior) knowledge of dog behavior,
vocabulary related to dogs, aspects of training, and so on, can be accessed to support their
understanding of the text's overall meaning or gist. Any knowledge of unrelated topics (such
as outer space, photosynthesis, or baking) in this particular instance is irrelevant. Thus, the
wider the breadth of knowledge a student has accumulated from prior experiences,
relationships, and interactions, the better equipped they will be to understand new texts. Of
course, it is unrealistic for educators to teach the required background knowledge for every
text that students will encounter as they progress through their school years. They can,
however, provide the next best thing which is to activate and/or teach prior knowledge
essential to understanding a particular text and to teach students to recognize when they lack
knowledge on a topic to advocate for instruction or pursue investigation. Over years of
instruction, a wide base of general knowledge builds and can be drawn upon to problem
solve and create meaning from written texts.

         World or general knowledge comes from years of exposure to books, internet sites,
streaming services showings, experiences, conversations, and knowledge-rich school
curricula. Its value cannot be understated. Willingham (2006) summarizes the findings in
cognitive science regarding the significance of knowledge in education this way:

         Those with a rich base of factual knowledge find it easier to learn more--the rich get
         richer. In addition, factual knowledge enhances cognitive processes like problem
Content Area Language and Literacy  33

         solving and reasoning. The richer the knowledge base, the more smoothly and
         effectively these cognitive processes--the very ones that teachers target--operate. So,
         the more knowledge students accumulate, the smarter they become. (p. 30)
Difficulties comprehending complex texts encountered in college and careers have been
attributed to a lack of general knowledge. Both the Council of Chief State School Officers
(CCSSO, 2013) and the National Research Council's Committee on Defining Deeper Learning
and 21st Century Skills (NRC; 2012) call for an increase in rigorous content knowledge in
order for today's students to achieve college, career, and citizenship readiness. According to
the CCSSO (2013), students must also be able to demonstrate "their ability to apply that
knowledge through higher-order skills including but not limited to critical thinking and
complex problem solving, working collaboratively, communicating effectively, and learning
how to learn" (p. 6).
         Meanwhile, college professors like Duke University's Bernard Schweizer are
attempting to address students' deficiencies. Schweizer (2009), a freshman composition
instructor wrote about an eye-opening incident he experienced during his classes. After
assigning both his remedial and advanced classes a four-page article on climate change from
a popular college-level anthology of essays (see McKibben, 2006), he realized his students'
comprehension of the essay was "flat, anemic, and literal rather than deep, rich, and
associative" (p. 53). Upon questioning his students on the general knowledge items within the
text--general facts, figures, locations, words, and common expressions--he reached a
sobering conclusion. In the remedial class, just one student could identify Gandhi, none knew
Ernest Hemingway, and two knew that Job was a character in the Bible. In the more advanced
class, four out of 15 students recognized Gandhi or Hemingway, none knew the word
"quixotic," and few could comprehend certain expressions within the text (e.g., "something is
in the offing") or its allusions (e.g., "the snows of Kilimanjaro are set to become the rocks of
Kilimanjaro"). Reflecting on the literacy-related consequences of this lack of word and world
knowledge, Schweizer noted that his students were "not only hampered by a lack of factual
knowledge, but that this shortcoming translates into problems with diction and literacy as
well" (p. 52). Remarkably, comprehension of this paragraph alone requires familiarity with and
a basic understanding of these words and phrases: Duke University, attributed, "eye-opening
incident," remedial, anthology, "sobering conclusion," and allusions. A lack of language
comprehension related to these words will hamper your reading comprehension indeed!
Content Area Language and Literacy  34

                                              Background Knowledge
         One of the elements necessary for language comprehension is background
knowledge. As previously discussed, background knowledge is a particular subset of
knowledge (e.g., facts about the world, events, people, sayings, and phrases) necessary to
comprehend and learn from a particular situation, lesson, or text. Young readers learn to
strategically apply their background knowledge to interpret a text's meaning. As a small
example, consider the following sentence: "Initially Richard was upset when police told him
they found bugs in his office, but to avoid prosecution he agreed to let them remain until the
investigation was completed." To comprehend this sentence either in isolation or within the
context of an entire text, one will need to have learned that (a) "bugs" are spying devices, (b)
being watched secretly is upsetting, and (c) Richard is cooperating with the police. Without
this background knowledge, the author's intended meaning may be misconstrued as having
to do with insects.
         Consider another example in which students read a story about a boy who is angry
that he was not selected to play on the football team. The boy insists, "I really didn't want to
play football anyway!" His mother responds, "Sounds like a case of sour grapes to me!"
Students familiar with the Aesop's fable "The Fox and the Grapes" will understand the
reference to "sour grapes" in this particular story and in all subsequent texts, and they will be
able to interpret the subtle nuances of resentment that comes about after rejection. A student
with no exposure to the fable may believe that the boy really did not want to play football and
will not understand why the mother is talking about grapes. Thus, the meaning is incomplete.
The familiarity associated with background knowledge allows readers to strategically infer the
author's meaning with much less effort. Knowledge leads to more knowledge, making
learning easier (Willingham, 2006).
         As summarized in Willingham (2006), research in cognitive science shows how
background knowledge helps students not only comprehend what they read but, just as
importantly, remember what they have learned. Recall is supported in a variety of ways. First,
as seen in the sour grapes example, background knowledge for a text makes stopping for
clarification unlikely; thus, the author's point can be comprehended more easily. Second, a
diverse store of background knowledge allows readers to arrange sequences of events in
texts into connected, meaningful units or sequences that can be more easily analyzed,
understood, and remembered. Without background knowledge, words and sentences in a
Content Area Language and Literacy  35

text easily become disjointed, unrelated, random sequences. For instance, imagine that a
passenger in a small plane who is likely unfamiliar with the mechanics of an aircraft is asked
by the pilot to read off the items from preflight checklists. Due to lack of background in
technical aviation, the items seem arbitrary and unrelated rendering dozens of unfamiliar
words and terms essentially meaningless (e.g., throttle 2000 RPM, magnetos max drop 175
RPM, press-to-test annunciator panel, electric fuel pump off, fuel pressure check).
Consequently, if asked to recall the information after the flight, it is unlikely that the passenger
would be able to remember. Conversely, if a different traveler possessing the necessary
background knowledge is asked to read the same checklists, it would stand to reason that
their comprehension and recall would be greater. This understanding is not only because the
items on the list would probably be familiar and meaningful, but also because background
knowledge stimulates one's access to `chunking.' As they read the list, the second passenger
would likely "chunk" items together, grouping similar items into meaningful categories and
sequences, a skill that supports stronger recall. For example, the second passenger would
recognize that some items relate to engine speed, while others are associated with the fuel
system. Identifying relationships is one way to reduce the amount of information one is
required to memorize. The information is stored more efficiently, thereby making recall
quicker and easier. because the items on the list would be familiar and meaningful. Thus, the
background knowledge of the second passenger supports stronger and longer lasting
comprehension of the experience.

         The frequently cited experiments of DeGroot (1946/1978) and Chase and Simon
(1973) illustrate this phenomenon of "chunking." In both studies, researchers examined how
the differences in background knowledge (via the experiences) between master and novice
chess players influenced their memories. Chess masters, supported by experiences of
participating in thousands of chess matches, were pitted against novices in a simple
experiment. For just a few seconds, chess masters and novices were shown pictures of
chessboards in which the pieces were configured in positions from advanced level matches.
The pictured pieces were not arranged on the boards randomly; their positions were realistic.
After momentarily viewing the pictures, players were asked to reconstruct the positions of
each piece using a real board. The masters recreated the positions almost perfectly, while the
novices only placed about half of the pieces successfully. The researchers attributed the
accuracy of the masters' recall to their ability to categorize and chunk information, or, in the
Content Area Language and Literacy  36

case of chess, to chunk multiple, meaningful groups of pieces. The novices could only
memorize positions of single pieces, whereas the masters memorized positions of sets of
pieces that made sense to them in terms of familiar play-structures accessed via a wealth of
experience. This knowledge, accumulated from years of playing chess, ultimately contributed
to their expertise.

         In a video recreating this experiment, chess grandmaster Patrick Wolff (Simons, 2012)
reveals his strategy in recreating the board placements. Wolff states that he noticed where the
pieces clustered and that he noted the logical connections between the pieces. He
recognized the meaningful chunks. In a book about the contributions of effort and practice to
talent, Colvin (2008) comments on chess player experiments, noting that, "instead of seeing
twenty-five pieces, they may see just five or six groups of pieces" (p. 100). In any realm,
meaningful chunks can only be formed by those having the knowledge and background
experiences to understand relevant associations. In the case of chess players, certain pieces
defend others in strategically particular positions and masters have learned to pay close
attention to a potential line of attack. Similarly, skilled readers group certain elements of a text
to support their understanding of written texts. Chunking certain letters within long words
enables rapid and accurate decoding, and chunking certain words and ideas enables
comprehension of an author's message.

         Meurer (1991) links the ability to recognize relationships and purposefully group
words and ideas to the concept of "schemata." Our understanding is structured by reading
schemata that actively organize knowledge in our minds while we read; the resulting patterns
and relationships combine with our prior knowledge to support meaning construction. As
Meurer explains all readers have schema for various concepts, such as when something
"breaks." Along with an understanding of a word's basic meaning, schemata are composed of
subcomponents and ideas related to the concept of "breaks": items that can be broken,
causes for breaking, characteristics of being broken, just to name a few. ways that things can
cause things to be broken, and what it means for something to be broken, just to name a few.
He further illustrates the role schemata play in meaning construction with the following
sentence: "The karate champion broke the cinder block." It is not immediately apparent to the
reader what the champion used to break the cinder block, so the reader must access their
schema for "break" and "karate champion" in order to successfully infer that what broke the
cinder block was not a hammer or a chisel, but the karate champion's hand or foot. The
Content Area Language and Literacy  37

inability to automatically chunk together and activate links between related words and ideas
impedes reading comprehension.

         In any field, setting, or circumstance, new material that has familiarity is more readily
learned because it is easier to understand and because it is supported by and connected
meaningfully to what is already known. The beauty and value of background knowledge is
that it provides the familiarity that is crucial for connections that both create new learning and
allow for the new learning to be remembered.
Background Knowledge Instruction

         General knowledge is gained over many years engaging in multiple contexts and
through multiple texts. A student may not have the necessary background knowledge when a
teacher plans, therefore, any lesson plan must include activities to provide and/or activate
relevant knowledge. The wide variety of content areas in schools overtime provide an
integrated sequence of rich, engaging, multicultural content spanning history, science, music,
visual arts, mathematics, language arts, and more. Knowledge from each of these areas is
likely to appear in texts in subsequent learning but any lesson may need ideas of prior
knowledge activated.

         In the earliest grades, before students can read books independently, the content and
concepts that build background knowledge are usually developed through teacher read-
aloud of a wide variety of texts from different cultures and contents. Although read-alouds are
typically done in the elementary grades, there are many illustrated books related to
significant people and events in various disciplines that can be used at the secondary levels.
The images in picture books have the added benefit of providing visual input of ideas to
students who are new to the language. Teachers can also develop knowledge of a topic with
photographs in a slideshow if no picture book is available, and many of the concepts that will
be encountered in print can be seen before reading.

         Students are expected to extract information from texts by focusing on what the
author intended for them to understand, rather than relying too heavily on their prior
knowledge, experiences, or opinions to construct meaning (Common Core State Standards
for English Language Arts & Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects,
CCSS; 2010). Teachers are informed, by CCSS, to downplay any lengthy, explicit focus on
their students' existing knowledge before reading and in discussions. Some teachers posit
that this may serve to equalize the outcomes for children who have varying degrees of
Content Area Language and Literacy  38

knowledge about various topics. However, as Shanahan (2014) explains, avoiding discussion
of background knowledge will not serve to allow children to interpret and comprehend texts
more equally, because it would be nearly impossible for children to avoid using their world
knowledge to construct meaning while reading. Without background knowledge of a topic, a
student has no advantage when reading and may, mistakenly, be viewed as having poor
comprehension.

    Shanahan (2014) provides some practical instructional suggestions for activating
background knowledge before and during reading. An abridged and modified list appears
below:

    1. When introducing texts, avoid lengthy introductions and tedious contributions of
         students' prior knowledge that could potentially impair comprehension. A simple
         statement such as "We're going to read about how animals camouflage themselves"
         may suffice. The goal is to be brief and strategic (e.g., what is the purpose of the text,
         what will students bring to it, and what information absolutely needs to be provided;
         note all the other suggestions below for more clarification). Too much time spent
         during pre-reading activities may take precious time away from the actual reading,
         may become boring or repetitive, and may steer students to the wrong focus,
         distracting them from the entire lesson. See an additional blog post in which
         Shanahan (2012) speaks specifically about this topic:
          http://www.shanahanonliteracy.com/2012/02/pre-reading-or-not-on-premature-
         demise.html

    2. When introducing a topic or genre that students will be reading, avoid revealing
         information that you will want them to extract from the text(s) on their own.

    3. Pre-teach necessary information students will need if it is not in the text (e.g., a text on
         climate change may not have been written for young students, so vital references to
         geography or technology may need explanation).

    4. Consider the differing background knowledge needs of students from diverse
         cultures and pre-teach information they may need to comprehend particular texts.

    5. Do not focus on activating background knowledge about topics in the text that are not
         needed for its comprehension (e.g., a text focusing on how an octopus camouflages
         itself does not require discussion or instruction about oceans).
Content Area Language and Literacy  39

6. When using multiple texts to develop background knowledge, introduce them in an
    order that will support and reinforce those resources that may come before or after.
    Initial resources may cover a particular topic in a general manner, followed up by texts
    that cover the material from the initial texts and delve deeper into the topic.

                                                       Vocabulary
         Vocabulary knowledge is a prominent predictor of reading comprehension and is
depicted as a central thread in the language comprehension component of the Simple View
of Reading because of its connections to background knowledge and language structures
(Scarborough, 2001). As stated previously, the level of a child's vocabulary knowledge is a
strong predictor of reading comprehension (Duncan et al., 2007). This seems obvious since
not knowing the meaning of words in a text makes it quite difficult to comprehend it.
As Adams (2010) eloquently points out, "What makes vocabulary valuable and important is
not the words themselves so much as the understandings they afford. The reason we need to
know the meanings of words is that they point to the knowledge from which we are to
construct, interpret, and reflect on the meaning of text" (p. 8). If a student can read well in a
language of the home, many of the same reading skills will transfer to their additional
language of English.
         The development of a child's vocabulary begins at infancy when a baby starts hearing
the speech of caregivers. Oral language experiences, such as in-person conversations, digital
recordings, or voices created during the reading of children's books, are primary means for
accumulating vocabulary. By the age of two, children usually speak about 200 to 300 words
and understand many more, and once in school, they learn approximately 3,000 words per
year, and can comprehend many more than they can read (Nagy, 2009). To accomplish this
rate of word learning, it is critical to ensure that students are learning new words each day.
This is especially true for students with less educated parentage who are likely exposed to
fewer words in their first three years of life that align with the language required in schools
(Hart & Risley, 1995). Children from more affluent households tend to know thousands more
words upon entering school, which benefits their ability to understand, participate in, and
profit from the language of schooling. Additionally, students from homes with multilingual
families and parents may have exposure to ideas and words in several languages that fail to
benefit them in a schooling system that teaches extensively and/or exclusively in a single
Content Area Language and Literacy  40

language like English. Although, students from multilingual homes often know the content
ideas in a language other than English, they need teachers skilled in providing background
knowledge and vocabulary in a variety of modes to transfer ideas into the language
necessary to promote additional learning.
Vocabulary Instruction

         Instruction in vocabulary should begin with thinking about the different levels of
"knowing" a word. Upon hearing a word, we can say (a) that we have never heard of it, (b) that
we have heard of it, but we do not know it, (c) that we know it, or (d) that we both know it and
can use it (Nagy, 2009). The more deeply we know a word, the more likely we will be to
understand it when we hear it or read it, and the more likely we are to use it when we speak
or write. Ideally, instruction supports students to a level of knowing and using words when
they converse, write, or read. Vocabulary learning occurs either incidentally (words are
learned through exposure and experiences) or intentionally (words are deliberately and
directly taught). Most words in our vocabulary are learned incidentally, through conversations
or independent reading (Adams, 2010). This means that most vocabulary learning will not
occur through explicit instructional means but through opportunities available in the child's
environment to encounter and resolve meanings of new words. Children who have learned to
read independently are at an advantage in terms of learning words incidentally because they
are able to independently encounter new words and infer their meaning while reading.

         Incidental vocabulary instruction is enhanced through rich and varied oral language
discourse and independent reading. Even though "incidental" learning occurs because of
activities that may not involve any deliberate teaching, incidental learning often involves a
level of intentionality on the part of teachers. Teachers should consciously fill their everyday
classroom language with rich, unique words to foster incidental learning. A classroom that is
rich with words promotes awareness of new vocabulary and a curiosity for learning new
words. Rather than simplifying language for students, conversations should be embedded
with sophisticated words: "Jordan, why don't you amble over here and let me glance at that,"
"Please shut the door; those students in the hall are causing quite a commotion! What
a ruckus!" and "Oh my, Jake, the lion on your t-shirt has such sinister eyes! It terrifies me!"

         Vocabulary words that should be intentionally taught are those essential for
understanding texts, those that are likely to be encountered across multiple texts, or those
that are particularly difficult to understand (Beck, McKeown, & Kucan, 2002). Activities for
Content Area Language and Literacy  41

directly teaching vocabulary include using graphic organizers (for a collection of free graphic
organizers visit https://www.teachervision.com/graphic-organizers/printable/6293.html), or a
three-column chart with a first column providing the word, students' written definition in the
second column, and a drawing to assist the student in remembering the word. Repetition of
vocabulary may happen through reconstructing popular word games (for example,
Hangman, Taboo, Articulate, Heads Up, Pictionary, etc.) with vocabulary from an instructional
unit.

         Text Talk (Beck & McKeown, 2001) is an evidence-based vocabulary (and
comprehension) building intervention that can be easily built into activities. Teachers pre-read
the selected text, choosing three to five vocabulary words that are "Tier 2" words. Tier 2 words
are sophisticated, occur frequently in conversation and print, and are used across multiple
domains and contexts. Examples of Tier 2 words are unique, convenient, remarkable,
and misery (See Beck et al., 2002). Tier 1 words are those that are basic and, for speakers of
English, do not require instruction in school (e.g., wall, water, fun), and Tier 3 words are low-
frequency words that are specific to domains or content areas (e.g., photosynthesis,
Constantinople). During a reading activity that is done in Text Talk fashion, open-ended
comprehension questions are asked. Open-ended questions require a meaningful interactive
response rather than a one-word reply. Examples of an open-ended question are "How do
you think that made the boy feel?" and "Why did the man decide to share his food?" To
answer each of these questions, an extended, multiple-word response is required. Examples
of close-ended questions requiring only a single word response include "Is the boy mad?"
and "Which food did the man share?" Interactive extended responses and dialogue promote
oral language development and allow the teacher to monitor students' vocabulary use and
comprehension. After the initial reading or during a second reading of a text, the preselected
Tier 2 vocabulary words are defined by the teacher using simple definitions (e.g.,
"To coax someone means to use your words to get them to do something"). The meanings of
the words are discussed within the context of the text (e.g., "The mother coaxed her daughter
to take a bath, meaning she used words to convince her to get into the bathtub"), and the
teacher provides examples of the words within other contexts ("When my mother got older, I
had to coax her to join us on vacation"). Finally, the students are asked to apply their
knowledge and use the words in a personal context to ensure that they have the correct
understanding of their meanings ("Jared, can you share an example of a time when someone
Content Area Language and Literacy  42

coaxed you to do something?"). Additionally, if the text is a picture book for read-aloud, it is
beneficial to read the text before showing the pictures so that the illustrations do not interfere
with attention or comprehension. This procedure is effective in getting students to pay
attention to the words being read, and thus, is helpful toward their comprehending the
language of the text (Beck & McKeown, 2001). It fosters their ability to comprehend
decontextualized language--language that is "outside the here and now" (p. 10)--and leads to
comprehending the vocabulary and text.

                                                 Language Structures
         Another contributing factor language comprehension is language structure--the
relationships between the words and sentences in a text. Semantics is different from
vocabulary because it extends beyond the individual meaning of words to relationships
among words, phrases, and sentences. Understanding the semantics of language enables
comprehension because it clarifies the content--the network of events and relationships that
exists in texts. For example, reading a sentence about a jug breaking and glass being
scattered all over the floor might cause confusion, since jugs are typically not thought of as
being made of glass. Looking back at the model of skilled reading in Figure 1, it is evident
there are many facets to language structures, including knowledge of genres, grammar, and
strategies for reading different types of texts (e.g., poems versus informational texts). For this
chapter, major interconnected components of language are categorized as form, content,
and use (see Bloom & Lahey, 1978).
Importance of Language Form: Morphology and Syntax
         Language form comprises the rules for how words are structured (see `morphology'
described below) as well as the rules for the arrangement of words within sentences and
phrases (see `syntax' described below). The act of constructing meaning while reading is
complex, so it is not surprising that morphology and syntax also contribute to reading
comprehension.
         Morphology is the study of morphemes in a language. Not to be confused with
phonemes, which are the smallest units of sound in spoken words, morphemes are the
smallest units of meaning in words (to remember this, consider that "morphemes" and
"meaning" both begin with the letter "m"). Words contain one or more morphemes, or units
of meaning. For instance, "locate" is a word that is a freestanding morpheme because it has
Content Area Language and Literacy  43

just one unit of meaning and can stand on its own. By attaching another morpheme, the suffix
"-tion," to create "location," there are now two units of meaning: "locate" and the action or
condition of locating, "tion." "Tion" is a bound morpheme because its meaning depends on
its connection to other words; it cannot stand on its own. A third morpheme, the prefix "dis,"
changes the meaning of the word yet again, "dislocation." In sum, the word "dislocation" is
made up of three morphemes, each of which contributes its own meaning. Similarly, "cat" is a
freestanding morpheme (a singular feline animal) but adding the bound morpheme--s--
signals a change in meaning and the reader now pictures more than one cat.

         Another aspect of language form, syntax, is commonly referred to as grammar. It is the
combining and ordering of words in sentences and phrases that enables comprehension of a
text. For example, in English, when the article "a" or "an" appears in a sentence, it is expected
that a noun will follow. Syntax includes sentence construction elements like statements,
commands, and combined sentences as well as components such as nouns, adjectives, and
prepositional phrases. These are important for future teachers to know because effective use
of these will allow students to comprehend text more successfully, and they will also allow
students to demonstrate command of the conventions of the language in their writing pieces.
Language Form Instruction and Language Use

         The WIDA Consortium advocates for explicit instruction of the rules of morphology
and syntax to benefit learners, especially multilingual learners (see https://wida.wisc.edu/).
For example, morphology instruction includes root words, prefixes, and suffixes along with
derivations of Greek and Latin roots (e.g., "chron" is the Greek root for "time" in chronicle,
synchronize, and "cred" is the Latin root for "believe" in creed, incredible, credulous).
Morphology charts of root words, prefixes, and suffixes can be compiled over time and
displayed on a wall so that students can refer to them while reading or writing. Charts could
feature a list of suffixes that indicate people nouns (e.g., -er, -or, -cian, -ist), suffixes that create
verbs (e.g., -ize, ify), or base words that change spelling and pronunciation (e.g.,
sign/signature/design, deep/depth). Incidental exposure to such morphological elements
enhances word awareness (the act of noticing and attending to features of words),
vocabulary, and, of course, language comprehension. Teachers should teach these in
connection with a text under study to provide context to remember the item(s).

         Semantics. Semantics requires knowledge of vocabulary (a word's meaning, and
perhaps its synonyms and antonyms), as well as syntax. Note that once again, there is an "m"
Content Area Language and Literacy  44

in "semantics," but it is in the middle of the word, which may help you to remember it has to
do with the meaning that ties words and sentences together. Semantics are just as important
as background knowledge in forming correct judgments about the text being read. Part of
this knowledge includes the meaning of humor, slang, idioms (i.e., combinations of words
having a figurative meaning as in "it's raining cats and dogs" or "he was feeling blue"),
metaphors (a comparison of two things as in "she is my sunshine") and similes (comparisons
of two things using "like" or "as" as in "her laughter is like sunshine"). Languages have
thousands of common and often subtle semantic attributes that involve analogy,
exaggeration, sarcasm, puns, and parables to convey world knowledge. Teachers can
explicitly teach these attributes so that they are recognized more readily, explicitly define
sayings and expressions, and demonstrate examples and nonexamples. For example, a
teacher could demonstrate examples and nonexamples of exaggeration ("I have a million
papers to grade!" vs. "I have three papers to grade"). As soon as schooling begins, semantic
conventions should be taught, such as in the way that "once upon a time" signals the
beginning of a fairy tale. Like vocabulary, most semantic knowledge is derived from previous
experiences and background knowledge. Teaching phrases to students through exposure to
discussions, reading, and other venues like shows, movies, and online videos does a lot to
promote language comprehension.

         Pragmatics. Language use is termed pragmatics. Pragmatics are the rules of language
that lead to appropriate use in assorted settings and contexts. Each setting (e.g., school,
home, restaurant, job interview, playground) or context (e.g., greeting, inquiry, negotiation,
explanation) has a particular purpose. To communicate appropriately, students must learn
patterns of conversation and dialogue that occur in assorted settings. For example, use of
language can vary according to a person's status, so whether talking at home to a parent (a
more casual use of language) or talking to a teacher at school (a more formal use of
language), the setting and the status differ, and language use must adapt accordingly.
Understanding the nuances of pragmatics contributes to language comprehension, which in
turn enables a reader to recognize its uses in written text, leading to more successful reading
comprehension.

         The pragmatics of language use in school requires students to comprehend academic
language. Students, especially English language learners and students with social difficulties,
must comprehend the differences between conversation and academic language. Students'
Content Area Language and Literacy  45

language use in assorted settings (e.g., playground conversations, discussions with teachers)
often requires teachers to provide clarification and elaboration. Students can perform
enjoyable skits demonstrating the differences in language use in various situations and
teachers can monitor and model language use as students tell stories, describe events, or
recount personal experiences.
Fluency and Assessment

         In the Scarborough Model, fluency is a result of several strands of reading and
language coming together for skilled reading. None-the-less, schools all over the United
States regularly push children to read "nonsense words" to show their ability to make sound
letter correspondences and then to read out loud a short passage in a timed reading. This
paradigm became incredibly popular after an organization provided these items without cost
and soon teachers turned the tool into a verb. The action became known as "dibeling"
students. The "nonsense words" were rightfully attacked by parents and multilingual
advocates because many of the letters formed legitimate words in other languages. Better
instructional time would be spent having early learners sound out valid English words to
increase their exposure to the authentic language. The passages that followed the nonsense
words would often be read (1) with a teacher holding a stopwatch, an experience that is more
akin to a footrace than an authentic reading experience, and (2) with multiple repetitions of
the passages, a practice that is like wearing the same underwear every day--stale and stinky.
These types of measures are far removed from fostering a love of learning and lifelong
learning. Repeat exposure to texts can be advantageous to gaining language
comprehension, increasing an interest in a content area, and assessing both knowledge and
fluency of authentic texts.

         Skits, readers theatre, choral readings, echo readings, poetry, songs, and other
activities that require students to repeat a text several times for performance has two major
advantages: firstly, they develop fluency, i.e., reading with speed, accuracy, and proper
expression (Snow, 2002); secondly, they promote greater engagement with the information in
the text. For example, at younger ages, students could sing a song about the biome they
inhabit either before or after they read a text about it. At the higher levels of education, a
teacher of chemistry may want students to memorize the first elements of the periodic table
to easily remember what the column and row configuration represents. The instructor could
introduce students to a video clip of a song and have students sing along. The whole class
Content Area Language and Literacy  46

could read a short explanation of the columns and rows together in a choral read, or the
instructor could read a portion of the explanation and have students echo read. After
students have learned about the periodic table, they could create characters for the first
elements of the table and write monologues about them and/or put them into an interaction
for a short skit or re-enactment of a text for readers theatre. The mindless repeating of texts
for a timed measure of fluency is less effective than providing students opportunities to
demonstrate both their fluency of language and knowledge of content. Songs, poetry, and
scripts (for theater, skits, podcasts, etc.) that students develop, write, and perform to
demonstrate their learning of a topic not only promotes fluency but can also be used for
assessment purposes.

                                                         Summary
         To help students develop language comprehension, the underlying meaning-based
elements of reading--background knowledge, vocabulary, and language structures--must be
taught and monitored. Unlike teaching students to recognize words accurately and
automatically so that they become fluent readers, teaching the elements of language
comprehension as students rise in the grades must be done so that students become
increasingly strategic about extracting the meaning from texts they read. Language learning
is an incremental, ongoing, developmental process that lasts a lifetime. With each new bit of
background knowledge, each new vocabulary word, and each new understanding of
language use, students can integrate this knowledge strategically to comprehend text.
The two essential components of the Simple View of Reading, automatic word recognition
and strategic language comprehension, contribute to skilled reading comprehension. Once
students become proficient decoders and can automatically identify words, the role of
language comprehension becomes increasingly important as students shift from paying
attention to the words to paying attention to meaning of increasingly difficult texts across
years of schooling.
         Teachers must be ever mindful of the presence or absence of background knowledge
that students bring to the task. As important as it is for students to monitor their
comprehension, it is equally important for teachers to continually monitor each student's
background knowledge and comprehension so that they can step in to build and supply what
is missing in their understanding. The value of the knowledge that students bring to their
Content Area Language and Literacy  47

reading should never be sacrificed for the sake of comprehension strategy instruction. They
must go hand in hand.

Questions:
    1. The author describes how morphemes might change the meaning of a word. Tell me
         about an instance where you used morphemes (such as Greek and Latin roots) to help
         you understand the meaning of a word.
    2. Have you ever had an experience where you misunderstood the text because you did
         not have the relevant background knowledge?
    3. What is a lesson that you might need to activate background knowledge for?
    4. Provide specific examples from books or digital media that you might use in a middle
         or high school classroom to demonstrate the relationship between comprehension
         and each of the following: background knowledge, vocabulary knowledge, and
         semantics. Explain the relationship.
    5. How do you know if an English language learner does not have the background
         knowledge or if they don't "understand" the information in English?

Author's Note: Most of this chapter comes from the Creative Commons resource of Murray, M.A. (2016). Language
Comprehension Ability: One of Two Essential Components of Reading Comprehension. In Kristen E. Munger (Ed.),
Steps to Success: Crossing the Bridge Between Literacy Research and Practice. Retrieved from
https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/steps-to-success/chapter/4-language-comprehension-ability-one-of-two-
essential-components-of-reading-comprehension/

                                                        References
Adams, M. J. (2010). Advancing our students' language and literacy: The challenge of

         complex texts. American Educator, 34, 3-11, 53. Retrieved
         from https://www.aft.org//sites/default/files/periodicals/Adams.pdf

Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G. (2001). Text talk: Capturing the benefits of read aloud
         experiences for young children. The Reading Teacher, 55, 10-20. Retrieved
         from http://teacher.scholastic.com/products/texttalk/pdfs/Capturing_the_benefits.pdf

Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G., & Kucan, L. (2002). Bringing words to life: Robust
         vocabulary instruction. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Bloom, L., & Lahey, M. (1978). Language development and language disorders. Boston, MA:
         Allyn & Bacon.
Content Area Language and Literacy  48

Cain, K., & Oakhill, J. V. (Eds.). (2007). Children's comprehension problems in oral and written
         language: A cognitive perspective. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Chase, W. G., & H. A. Simon. (1973). Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
         doi:10.1016/0010-0285(73)90004-2

Colvin, G. (2008). Talent is overrated: What really separates world-class performers from
         everybody else. New York, NY: Penguin.

Council of Chief State School Officers (2013). Knowledge, skills, and dispositions:
         The Innovation Lab Network state framework for college, career, and citizenship
         readiness, and implications for state policy. Retrieved December 15, 2014,
         from http://www.ccsso.org/Resources/Publications/ILN_CCR_Framework.html

Cunningham, A.E., & Stanovich, K. E. (1998). What reading does for the
         mind. American Educator, 22(1), 8-15. Retrieved
         from https://www.aft.org//sites/default/files/periodicals/cunningham.pdf

Davis, M. (2006). Reading instruction: The two keys. Charlottesville, VA: Core Knowledge
         Foundation.

DeGroot, A. D. (1946/1978). Thought and choice in chess (2nd ed.). The Hague: Mouton.

Duncan, G. J., Claessens, A., Huston, A. C., Pagani, L. S., Engel, M., Sexton, H., et al. (2007).
         School readiness and later achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1428-1446.
         doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.6.1428

Foorman, B. R., Francis, D. J., Shaywitz, S. E., Shaywitz, B. A., & Fletcher, J. M. (1997). The case
         for early reading intervention. In B. Blachman (Ed.), Foundations of reading acquisition
         and dyslexia: Implications for early intervention (pp. 243-264). Baltimore, MD: Paul
         Brookes.

Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of
         young American children. Baltimore, MD: Paul Brookes.

Marzano, R. J., & Kendall, J. S. (2007). The new taxonomy of educational perspectives (2nd
         ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

McKibben, B. (2006). Worried? Us? In D. McQuade & R. Atwan (Eds.), The writer's presence: A
         pool of readings (pp. 763-768). New York, NY: Bedford.

Meurer, J. L. (1991). Schemata and reading comprehension. Ilha do Desterro, 25/26, 167-
         184.
Content Area Language and Literacy  49

Nagy, W. (2009). Understanding words and word learning: Putting research on vocabulary
         intoclassroom practice. In S. Rosenfield & V. Berninger (Eds.), Implementing evidence-
         based academic interventions in school settings (pp. 479-500). New York, NY:
         Oxford University Press.

National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School
         Officers. (2010). Common Core State Standards for English language arts & literacy
         in history/social studies, science, and technical Subjects. Washington, DC: Author.
         Retrieved from http://www.corestandards.org/wp-
         content/uploads/ELA_Standards.pdf

National Research Council. (2012). Education for Life and Work: Developing
         Transferable Knowledge and Skills in the 21st Century. Retrieved December 15, 2014
         from http://www.nap.edu/catalog/13398/education-for-life-and-work-developing-
         transferable-knowledge-and-skills

Scarborough, H. S. (2002). Connecting early language and literacy to later reading
         (dis)abilities: Evidence, theory, and practice. In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson
         (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 97-110). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Schweizer, B. (2009). Cultural literacy: Is it time to revisit the debate? Thought and Action,
         25, 51-56. Retrieved
         from https://www.nea.org/assets/docs/HE/TA09CulturalLiteracy.pdf

Shanahan, T. (2012, February 21). Special Needs Activities. Retrieved
         from http://www.shanahanonliteracy.com/2012/02/pre-reading-or-not-on-premature-
         demise.html

Shanahan, T. (2014, November 17). Prior Knowledge Part 2. Retrieved
         from http://www.shanahanonliteracy.com/2014/11/prior-knowledge-part-2.html

Shanahan, T., Callison, K., Carriere, C., Duke, N. K., Pearson, P. D., Schatschneider, C., &
         Torgesen, J. (2010). Improving reading comprehension in kindergarten through 3rd
         grade: A practice guide (NCEE 2010-4038). Washington, DC: National Center for
         Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
         Department of Education. Retrieved
         from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/PracticeGuide/14.

Simons, D. (2012, January 12). Memory for chess positions [Video file]. Retrieved
         from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rWuJqCwfjjc

Snow, C. E. (Chair), (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward an R & D program in
         reading comprehension. Santa Monica, CA: Rand. Retrieved
Content Area Language and Literacy  50

         from http://www.prgs.edu/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2005/MR146
         5.pdf

Willingham, D. T. (2006). How knowledge helps: It speeds and strengthens reading
         comprehension, learning--and thinking. American Educator, 30, 30-37. Retrieved
         from http://www.aft.org/periodical/american-educator/spring-2006/how-knowledge-
         helps

                                                       Contributor

Margaret A. Berg, University of Northern Colorado, Margaret.berg@unco.edu

Dr. Berg has taught at the secondary and tertiary levels in China, Russia, Ukraine, and in the
inner-city and on the Mexican border of the United States. She also taught general education
classwork in a state-level, men's maximum security "correctional facility." She began teaching
at 16 years of age--swimming lessons at a public pool. Her area of research and expertise is
educational linguistics. She earned a Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Kansas in
Teaching, Learning, and Curriculum with a focus on Literacy and Linguistics. She entered her
professorship at the University of Northern Colorado in 2009. She achieved the "three
subjects" of linguistic human rights in her child's development: (a) sovereignty of authority
with the State or local level in learning English (also mother tongue), (b) sovereignty of an
ethnos in maintaining and studying the father tongue, Russian, and (c) sovereignty of the
individual human being in choosing to study Spanish in public school (see Alexei A.
Leontiev's chapter in Linguistic Human Rights: Overcoming Linguistic Discrimination). This
chapter is Berg's first play with the 5Rs of OER: to Retain, Reuse, Revise, Remix, and
Redistribute.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                 51

                          Chapter 3
Recounts and Narratives in the Middle School

                      Rachel Beckwith
            University of Northern Colorado

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

   · Explain the differences between recounts and narratives are
       explained.

   · Distinguish between a personal recount and a short narrative
       about the same event.

   · Examine similarities and differences between the two personal
       stories.

   · Gain a few instructional ideas for moving students toward more
       complex narratives.

                                                       Introduction
         Our humanity endures through story; "humans are storytelling organisms who lead
storied lives" (Savin-Baden & Van Niekerk, 2007, p. 461). Braiding the richness and
complexity of our experiences, we use story to communicate our core. It is through the telling
of stories that "we are able...to impose order and coherence on the stream of experience
and work out the meaning of incidents and events in the real world" (Carter, 1993, p. 7).
Essentially, we interpret the world around us through story. However, how we communicate
with story depends on our purpose; our intentions dictate our path. In particular, two strands
of storytelling - recount and narrative - may relate closely but engage the reader in distinctly
different ways.
         This chapter has two purposes. First, I will differentiate between recount and narrative.
Second, I suggest strategies for engaging with each. Let's begin by looking at examples.
Consider the following text:

 Editors' note: This chapter is graciously provided at the request of the editor.
Content Area Language and Literacy  52

     It was a Saturday evening, and I was preparing to turn in for the day. Before I
headed to my bedroom, I gathered my shoes and socks in my arms and gave my cat a
quick pat. Yawning, I plodded to the staircase. I stopped suddenly with the realization
that I forgot to grab my sweater. But when I returned to the living room, the sweater
was not on the arm of the couch where I had left it. It hadn't fallen to the floor either.
My favorite sweater was missing!

     I began searching. First, I looked in the washer and dryer, then the hamper. I also
looked in my car, on the coat rack, and under my bed, but I couldn't find it anywhere.

     Frustrated, I fell heavily on the couch. My cat jumped up next to me and started
purring; I started to pet it. Started by a noise, my cat leaped off the couch. As my hand
dropped onto the cushion, it brushed against a piece of fabric that poked up from the
space between pillows. I grabbed the corner and tugged. It was my sweater!

     I moved it around in my hands, examining the fabric. It looked worn and faded,
and I noticed that a button was missing. There were also a few small holes and snags.
The sweater was certainly old and well-loved.

     I was too tired to get up, so I stretched out on the couch. There, I fell asleep,
clutching the sweater to my chest.

And this one:

     I'd been combing my house for the past hour searching for my favorite sweater.
The one I wear to all the campfires. The one I was wearing when I went into labor. The
one that I've had since I moved into my first apartment those many years ago.

     It's been through a lot with me. And now it's missing.
     I look in the washer and dryer. I look in the hamper. I look in my car and under the
bed. I even call for it (which sounds ridiculous, but I'm desperate).
     Frustrated, I slump on the couch. My cat jumps up with a meow and lazily curls up
next to me, purring. I reach out to absentmindedly stroke its head, all the while
wondering where my sweater was. A noise from outside startles my cat, and he darts
away to investigate. My hand falls to the empty spot, warmed from the cat's body.
     But there is something else. My hand brushes against a swatch of fabric
protruding from the cushions. Something familiar.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                              53

     I pull the missing sweater from the depths of the couch. How did it get there? I
wonder. No matter, it's found!

     I pull it on, relishing in the comfort of the memories. A thread catches my
attention. It seems that a button is missing. Something I can replace later. But as I
examined the fabric more closely, I realized the missing button is the least of my
concerns. Time has left the sweater worn and faded. There were a few small holes and
snags and stains of uncertain origin. The sweater, once fresh and fashionable, seems
to be wasting away.

      I hug myself in the comfort and safety of the sweater, but I realize the sweater is
not really that comfortable anymore. The fabric is rough from washing and wearing. Is
it time to retire my old friend? Yes, it's time to let go.

      I yawn and snuggle deeper into the couch, resolved to pack it up tomorrow. One
last night won't hurt.

     But for now, I'll fall asleep thankful for our story.

         Recently, I wrote about the experience of losing my favorite sweater. In the first
example, I described the steps I took to find it by retracing the sequence of events in an
objective and straightforward style. In the second example, the reader is thrust into my mind,
experiencing what I was thinking and feeling as I looked.

         The two examples illustrate the difference between recounts (example one) and
narratives (example two). Derewianka (1990) refers to the first as a personal recount, but it
could turn into an "imaginative recount" by having the cat describe the series of events of the
human's search or the cat could tell the reader about its search for a fuzzy toy. As is, the
stories are both told from a single human's perspective and the first-person point of view as
shown with the pronoun "I". The first-person point of view is common in both recounts and
narrative, but a story can be told from other points of view. The third-person point of view is
demonstrated later in this text as more information about the genres and instruction is
presented.

                                               Key Traits of Recounts
         A recount is a chronological, objective telling of past events. A recount can also be
referred to as a `retelling, 'because you are recalling a circumstance or experience. While a
Content Area Language and Literacy  54

recount is typically associated with personal experiences, recounts may also include
biographies, historical accounts, and news stories. Recounts allow one to share past
experiences, inform others, and record events for future purposes. They are generally factual,
clear, straightforward, and written so that the reader feels they have personally experienced
the event. Writers can do this by grouping relevant information together and sequencing the
re-telling with time conjunctions, such first, then, finally, etc. It is important to remember, too,
that recounts are written in past tense because they are summarizing and describing events
that have already occurred.

         In the example above, I identify the who, what, when, and where of a sequence of
events. First, I set the time and place (Saturday evening at my house). After I identified a topic
(a lost sweater), I described my search. Familiarizing the reader to time and place at key
stages of the text are especially important in a recount. Besides thinking chronologically, a
skilled recount writer must also be able to observe keenly and orient themselves to relevant
details. Their writing must demonstrate clear, coherent, and logical organization that conveys
a purpose. Developing the skills necessary to write a recount (observation, organization,
chronological thinking, clarity, and detail orientation) supports future, more complex
narrative writing.

         While recounts may include personal reflection and descriptive language, they are
most often superficial. My retelling writing of the missing sweater (the first example), while
specific, lacked embellishment, as well as the traditional elements of story craft, such as the
use of literary devices and dialogue. In the following section, I describe in more detail what
this looks like.

                                               Key Traits of Narratives
         As opposed to the straightforward and sequential nature of the recount, a narrative is
characterized by more fluidity, depth, and complexity. While framed by structural elements
(plot, setting, characters, conflict, and resolution), the narrative is not `tied' to a specific order
or sequence. Thus, the narrative storyteller is "granted creative liberty" to convey experience
(Rafique, 2023, par. 1). The freedom to weave a story, rather than simply tell, adds a richness
and thickness that activate the reader's imagination.
         Indeed, to engage with narrative, one must have access to a great imagination. To
fully appreciate the power of a narrative, writers should be able to not only visualize, but also
Content Area Language and Literacy  55

believe, what could be. A skilled narrative storyteller, then, must speak or write in such a way
that the reader believes it, too. To do this, the narrative storyteller creates well-developed
characters, a vivid setting, a compelling plot, authentic dialogue, and a challenging obstacle.
The elements intertwine and interact in ways that encourage the reader to think about the
world in new ways.

         Beyond the foundational structural elements, there are a range of literary tools that,
when accessed, enrich a story. Symbolism, vivid imagery, and figurative language (i.e.,
metaphors, similes, allusions, juxtaposition) invite participation and add meaning, likely
leaving the reader feeling fulfilled. In the narrative example above, I use imagery to animate
the scene when I describe the cat `lazily curled' on the couch and the `warm spot' left when he
darted away to investigate a noise. Further, I describe a once fashionable sweater as `worn'
and `faded' and `wasting away,' with `snags' and `stains.' The reader can imagine and visualize,
enhancing comprehension and connectivity. Likewise, understanding that the story is an
extended metaphor for a bygone friendship may lead the reader to reflect on their own
friendships. Meaning is a consequence of a relationship between reader and text. Accurately
portraying the emotions of relatable characters is the gateway to empathy, and an
empathetic reader is a satisfied reader.

                                    Strategies and Activities for Teaching
         In middle school, teachers are primarily moving beyond recounts into writing more
complex narratives. As such, the following strategies and activities are relevant to enhancing
narrative teaching.
Teach with Examples: Lots of Them
         As a middle school teacher, I always begin any exploration of genre using examples,
just as I did in this chapter. Often, we read seven or more examples before students are
asked to draft anything themselves. I try to make my selections as diverse as the children in
my classroom. Exposure to good writing is the first step to engender good writers! Other
than excerpts from novels or short stories, these examples could come from previous
students, artificial intelligence generation, or even my own writing. I am a teacher, but I am
also a writer, and this distinction is crucial when motivating young writers. A teacher's
transparent `writer's life' models the process, the patience, and the purpose of writing in the
real world. It creates authenticity, and students are more apt to be vulnerable for a
Content Area Language and Literacy  56

meaningful task. Using published work as an example, while certainly convenient for busy
teachers, can be intimidating to budding writers. Teachers who write with students make
writing approachable. Therefore, I recommend that you begin collecting both published and
amateur excerpts of strong writing (including your own), especially as it relates to the
foundational structural elements and literary tools of narrative.

         Once writers have a broad understanding of narrative, I begin to bring in non-
examples of narrative. Specifically, I show them two versions of the same plot - one presented
as a recount and one presented as a more descriptive narrative, like how I started this
chapter. The juxtaposition of the example passages emphasizes the difference in style. As a
class, we discuss the difference between the two texts. Naturally, students recognize and
appreciate the imagery and embellishment of the narrative.

         I then have students annotate each. First, they annotate the narrative for sensory
details, literary devices, and character development, three chief traits of a narrative. Once
they have identified the relevant author's moves, I ask them to re-read the recount.
Commonly, students will more easily recognize a lack of detail. I have each student choose a
specific sentence in the recount they believe could be enhanced with more description and
depth, and I invite them to rewrite the sentence to give it a more narrative-like quality. More
experienced writers might try this activity with an entire paragraph or the recount as a whole,
rather than a single sentence.

         In addition to the examples above, here are two more texts you might use for this
activity. This time, the topic is a lakeside walk. Feel free to borrow and adjust as necessary!

The following is a recount:
              It had been a difficult day, so she wanted to go for a walk on the lakeside, hoping it

         would make her feel better.
               She was about to leave her house, but she couldn't find her keys. She finally saw

         them - they had fallen off the table behind the cat's food dish. She grabbed them and
         walked out the door to her waiting car.

               She drove to the lake and parked her car in the parking lot. When she got out, she
         looked in the backseat and saw her jacket. There were some clouds, but there was
         also sun. The sun had been out most of the day, so she didn't think it would rain.
Content Area Language and Literacy  57

Crossing her fingers, she decided not to take her jacket. She walked to the path that
would lead her to the lake.

     When she got there, she looked at the water. Slipping off her sandals, she held
them in her hands and headed down to the beach. The sand was hot. She ran across
the hot sand to get to the water quicker. The cool water felt good on her feet.

     At that moment she felt a drop of rain, but she didn't have a jacket, so she started
to get wet. She was annoyed. The rain began to fall faster. Soon, she was soaking wet,
and her feet were caked in wet sand.

     The thunder boomed and it made her jump. Another sudden clap of thunder
reminded her how sad she was. She gave up. She dropped her shoes and sat on a
nearby piece of driftwood. Her wet hair sagged. She sat there sadly until the rain
stopped.

     After the rain stopped, she got up and walked back to the pathway, taking her
shoes with her. She passed a hiker in a raincoat. He smiled and waved.

      When she got home, she was happy to change into dry clothes and cuddle on the
couch with a warm blanket and her cat. It had not been a good day, but she felt better
now that it was over.

And the narrative version:

     She regarded the water. It lapped lazily against the shore. There was nowhere for
this water to be. There was also nowhere for her to be. She slipped off her sandals,
holding them in her hands, and headed down to the beach.

      Her bare feet did not approve. She scurried across the hot sand so as not to
further upset the soles of her feet. The water, then, was a welcome relief.

      Brushing strands of hair out of her eyes, she regarded the water once more. Birds
flew overhead. Through clustered clouds, sunlight glinted. Nearby trees rustled in the
breeze. She smiled. It seemed a perfect day.

      And she needed a perfect day.
     She started walking, letting the water soothe her soul. She didn't make it far
before she felt the first drop. So, the rain that was supposed to miss us, decided to
show up after all, she thought.
Content Area Language and Literacy  58

      It started slowly, giving her time to adjust to the change. Grumbling, she untied
her sweater from her waist and threw it on quickly. Still holding her sandals, she began
to jog back to the pathway. Gritty sand flew up her calves. The rain began to fall
steadier. Soon, she was wetter than she cared to be.

      What happened to her 'perfect day'?
      A crack of thunder was her answer. Its suddenness reverberated through her
body, forcing her to momentarily freeze in place as the tingles made their way from
her ears to the tips of her toes. Which, by the way, were now caked in wet sand.
      Another sudden clap of thunder, and she's gone. Lost to the chaos of the storm.
The storm that wasn't supposed to come but came anyway. She dropped her shoes
and sat wearily on a nearby piece of driftwood, wet tendrils of hair clinging to her
cheeks.
      The rain soaked her soul, pelting every last bit of peace she had.
      Lifting her chin, she opened her eyes to the scene before her. Gone were the
peace waves. Gone was the sun. Gone was the gentle breeze. Gone were the birds.
      She regarded the water. And she felt alone.

Sentence Structure
         Once students have a `big picture' sense of narrative writing, I focus their attention on

the sentence structure of good writing. They now understand what traits make quality
narratives readable and meaningful. The next step is to understand how the words work
together to make it that way. To do this we collect data about writing.

         First, we evaluate sentence beginnings. I provide students with a short narrative and a
highlighter, and I ask them to highlight the first word of each sentence. Once they've
highlighted, they look for patterns.

         Consider the narrative above, there are 40 sentences. Two words are used more often
than others as the first word in the sentence: she and gone. `She' was used to start eight
sentences, and `gone' was used to start four. Being explicitly aware of that kind of data opens
the door to conversations about style. For example, is `she' used too often? If so, what
revisions might you suggest for this writer? Why might the writer have used `gone' four times
in a row? How could you use purposeful repetition in your own writing? What are some
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                            59

grammatically diverse sentence starters this writer uses (other than a traditional noun or
pronoun subject) that could stimulate your own writing?

         Next, we attend to sentence length. I invite students to count the number of words in
each sentence and make observations. Are the sentences varied lengths? Do the sentence
lengths detract or enhance the writing? Why might the author have used a long sentence
here and a short sentence there? Does the author use more short sentences, medium
sentences, or long sentences? How does the length of a sentence affect the flow and
readability of the story? Not only might this activity inspire developing writers, but evaluating
sentence length supports literary analysis as students begin to think about how the length of
the sentence is influenced by its content.

         Collecting data about sentence beginnings and sentences lengths engages the
students with the writing in novel ways, leading them to become more purposeful writers and
active readers.

                                                        Conclusion
         In a way that definition, rules, statements, or scientific explanations cannot, story
"captures in a special fashion the richness and nuances of meaning in human affairs" (Carter,
1993, p. 6). We use story to make sense of life, "to impose order and coherence on the
stream of experience" (Carter, 1993, p. 6). It is how we explain events, solve problems,
construct paradigms, and understand ourselves (Carter, 1993). We shape and are shaped by
the stories we tell.

Questions:

    1. A chronological sequence of events is paramount to a recount, but a narrative may
         have more structural freedom. Make a list of novels that you have enjoyed that were
         not chronological and explain how they deviated from a simple chronological
         retelling.

    2. What are the affordances of first-person point of view in a story? What are the
         limitations?

    3. The author encourages teachers to have students read multiple narratives and then
         compare them to recount. Do you have other ideas about how to have students
         recognize differences between these two genres of writing?
Content Area Language and Literacy  60

    4. How might you rewrite one of the above recounts or narratives from the perspective
         of another being, phenomenon, or object mentioned in the story?

                                                        References
Carter, K. (1993). The place of story in the study of teaching and teacher education.

          Educational researcher, 22(1), 5-18.
Derewianka, B. (1990). Exploring How Texts Work. Victoria, AU: English Teaching Association.
Narrative vs. recount - what's the difference? Ask Difference. (n.d.).

          https://www.askdifference.com/narrative-vs-recount/
Savin-Baden, M., & Niekerk, L. V. (2007). Narrative inquiry: Theory and practice. Journal of

          geography in higher education, 31(3), 459-472.

                                                       Contributor

Rachel Beckwith, University of Northern Colorado, Rachel.beckwith@unco.edu

Rachel is a doctoral candidate who defended her dissertation in December 2023. While
completing her studies, she has taught at the Middle School level.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                         61

                                                     Chapter 4
Integrating a Language-Based Approach to Content Instruction into Civics Lessons

                                     Jia Gui and Luciana C. de Oliveira
                           Virginia Commonwealth University, United States

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

 Define LACI's 6 Cs of Support.
 Understand the connection between the LACI framework

   and Systemic Functional Linguistics.
 Evaluate a social studies lesson and suggest improvements

   that will benefit multilingual learners.
 Identify strategies a teacher could incorporate into their

   instruction to support ML learners with the LACI framework.

                                                       Introduction
         A language-based approach to content instruction (LACI) is a teacher education
model developed over the past 20 years through research in content area classrooms with
teachers of multilingual learners (MLs) (de Oliveira, 2023, 2020). LACI implements a
functional approach to language development, emphasizing meaning-making through
language. Language is viewed as a meaning-making system used to serve social purposes
(de Oliveira & Schleppegrell, 2015). LACI has been implemented in the content areas across
K-12 -English language arts, social studies, science, and math (de Oliveira, Braxton, & Gui,
2021).
         In this chapter, we showcase the integration of LACI's 6 Cs of support into selected
lessons from the grades 9-12 social studies curriculum Civics for All, used in New York City.
We focus specifically on the C of code-breaking, to help teachers implement LACI in civics
lessons and explore how this functional approach can enhance the learning of MLs.

 Editors' note: This chapter was double-blind, peer-reviewed prior to online publication.
Content Area Language and Literacy  62

                                                   Literature Review
         Social studies include a range of scholastic subjects such as civics, history, geography,
economics, anthropology, psychology, and sociology. The primary purpose of teaching social
studies is to foster enlightened, proactive, and involved citizens within a culturally diverse
democracy (Jaffe & Yoder, 2019).
         Civics education concentrates on encouraging people's political involvement within a
democratic society (Newman & Chen, 2022). The curriculum expects students to grasp
political history and principles, the mechanics of government, and the rights and duties of
being a proactive citizen (Newman & Chem, 2022). Civics curriculum is crucial for multilingual
learners as it aids in building their civic competence within their new community (Cruz &
Thornton, 2009). However, civics courses can be challenging for multilingual learners,
particularly those who migrated to the U.S. during their teenage years, due to the content and
instruction being very different from what they have experienced from their homeland or
family upbringing. Therefore, it is imperative for teachers and educators to seek effective
strategies for teaching civics, guarantee quality instruction for all students, and make both
content and language learning more approachable for multilingual students.
          The academic language demands of social studies expect students to use the
complex and abstract vocabulary in the textbooks (Cruz & Thornton, 2009). For example,
subject-specific proper nouns, three-or-more-syllable words, derived words, and culturally
embedded meanings (Bailey, 2007; Cho & Reich, 2008); the complex verb forms, embedded
clauses, and chronological order in social studies materials (Bailey, 2007; Egbert & Simich-
Dudgeon, 2001; Thieman et al., 2018). In addition, multilingual learners are expected to deal
with issues brought by cultural differences. However, in social studies courses, American
culture and social norms are difficult for MLs to understand because they may not have the
relevant background knowledge and culture to comprehend some texts (Cho & Reich, 2008;
Szpara & Ahmad, 2007).
         Approaches that unite the content and language of teaching instruction in social
studies include using a genre-based framework in history classrooms (Schall-Leckrone, 2017),
having students interpret slogans from documents, and adopting perspective-taking skills via
reader's theater (Yoder & van Hover, 2018). Zhang (2017) suggested using noun
deconstruction, sentence matching, and text reconstruction to address language demands
Content Area Language and Literacy  63

like lengthy noun groups, discourse markers, and a variety of embedded clauses in texts.
Noun deconstruction involves activities that assist students in understanding the structure of
noun phrases. In sentence matching, students draw connections between sentences penned
in everyday language and their counterparts in academic language. Text reconstruction
requires students to rearrange sentence cutouts to form a coherent and logically flowing
paragraph. The language-based approach to content-area reading, such as the functional
language analysis (FLA), helped students in history reading (Achugar et al., 2007).

         Research on civics teaching and learning found that employing a visual literacy
framework can enhance the accessibility of the subject for multilingual learners in high school
(Newman & Chen, 2022). For instance, when studying primary written documents, teachers
could use graphic organizers to scaffold students' organization of information and sentence
frames to assist in verbal expression and written ideas. Moreover, teachers can provide
concept maps to direct students' conversations. Additionally, strategies such as political
cartoons, historical documents, and visual dictionaries have proven effective in addressing
the language demands of civics (Cruz & Thornton, 2009).

        No studies introduce ways to integrate a functional approach to language development
into existing civics lessons. This chapter will assist teachers in modifying instruction using the
LACI framework to improve content and language learning for multilingual learners.

                                               Theoretical Framework
LACI 6 Cs of Support

         LACI implements a functional approach to language development, providing a
concurrent emphasis on the creation of meanings (the "content") and the language used to
articulate these meanings. When applied in the classroom, this viewpoint puts an emphasis
on the subject matter and supports teachers in understanding how language is utilized to
create knowledge across disciplines. LACI, therefore, supports three Big Ideas of the WIDA
2020 Standards (WIDA, 2020): A functional approach to language development, content and
language integration, and equity of opportunity and access.

         LACI encompasses six core principles to scaffold MLs during classroom instruction
(see Figure 1). The C of connection involves teachers utilizing strategies to connect various
components of the content and curriculum to students' prior knowledge and experiences.
The C of culture allows teachers to establish connections between new content skills and
Content Area Language and Literacy  64

concepts to cultural and linguistic resources of multilingual learners. The C of code-
breaking involves intentionally introducing ways of doing school, academic language, and
disciplinary, linguistic, and cultural codes associated with learning the content (Fang, 2006;
Schleppegrell, 2001, 2004). The C of challenge refers to setting classroom objectives and
activities that encourage higher-order thinking and reasoning while providing both high
challenge and high support for multilingual learners. The C of community and
collaboration component emphasizes the creation of communities, collaborative work, and
the involvement of students and teachers working together to generate knowledge. The C of
classroom interactions focuses on utilizing interactional scaffolding moves, employing oral
discourse to elicit elaboration, prompt academic literacy, and advance learning.
Figure 1.
LACI's Six Cs of Support for Scaffolding Content Area Instruction for Multilingual
Learners (Adapted from de Oliveira, 2023, used with permission from de Oliveira, 2023)
Content Area Language and Literacy  65

LACI's Teaching and Learning Cycle
         LACI's Teaching and Learning Cycle, also known as LACI's TLC, is an instructional

framework that supports the development of academic language for multilingual learners. It
encompasses various elements such as academic discussions, sustained reading, specific
tasks, and writing. By using the 6 Cs of support, LACI's TLC assists teachers in designing
effective instruction using a genre-based approach grounded in systemic functional
linguistics (SFL) for multilingual learners (de Oliveira, 2023). LACI's TLC provides guidance for
students through six phases:

         In the Building Shared Knowledge of the Topic phase, teachers engage students by
posing relevant questions pertaining to the subject that will be explored in various activities.
The aim is to assess the students' existing knowledge or gaps in understanding regarding the
topic and begin establishing shared understandings. In this phase, the C of connection and
the C of culture are frequently employed, as teachers establish connections with students'
prior experiences and incorporate their cultural backgrounds into the classroom.

         The objective of the Sustained Reading phase is to guide students as they engage in
focused reading of specific texts. This phase is designed to enhance students' understanding
of the topic. During this phase, teachers may incorporate the C of challenge by selecting
reading materials that present a level of difficulty, thereby providing students with an
opportunity to rise to the challenge and expand their knowledge.

         During the Deconstruction phase, teachers employ modeling and analysis techniques
to break down mentor texts of a particular genre. This involves examining the language
functions and features of the texts together with the students. Typically, teachers incorporate
the C of code-breaking and the C of classroom interactions during this phase to effectively
explore and understand the complexity of the texts.

         In the Joint Construction phase, teachers collaborate with students to collectively
construct a text in the same genre as the mentor text. This collaborative process involves the
teacher utilizing the C of challenge, C of connection, and C of code-breaking principles. The
objective is to provide a challenging experience for students with scaffolding, establish
connections between the text being constructed and their prior knowledge, and intentionally
introduce and navigate the language and content associated with the genre.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                    66

         The Collaborative Construction phase presents a great chance for students to
cooperate with peers to create a new text. This stage includes the C of Community and
Collaboration.

         During the Independent Construction stage, students should be ready to work on
their individual texts, demonstrating the C for Challenge.

         LACI's TLC is a valuable framework for lesson design. It allows teachers the flexibility
to choose the phases they require. This adaptable framework supports teachers in designing
strategies that best address the needs of MLs and incorporate further scaffolding approaches.
TLC proves to be useful for examining lesson plans as it directs the teachers to explore
various stages of existing lesson plans. Moreover, this framework is not just confined to
analysis texts but extends to understanding concepts and activities.

Figure 2.
LACI's Teaching and Learning Cycle (Modified from de Oliveira, 2023)
Content Area Language and Literacy  67

                                                          Method
Context

    The lesson plan that we analyzed is developed and used by the New York City
Department of Education (NYCDOE). We got access to some teaching resources on social
studies in NYCDOE attributed to Dr. de Oliveira's collaboration with NYCDOE's Division of
Multilingual Learners. The NYCDOE is the biggest school district in the U.S. In academic year
2021-2022, it was reported that 42% (equating to 349,000) of students in New York City
public schools primarily communicated in a language other than English in their homes (New
York City Department of Education, 2022).

Civics for All
    The lesson plan is from Civics for All, a comprehensive K-12 civics curriculum employed in

New York City. It complements the NYCDOE's Passport to Social Studies curriculum but is
crafted to be flexible across diverse settings to satisfy the needs of all NYCDOE schools.
Passport to Social Studies is the main curriculum utilized in social studies teaching in
NYCDOE. The primary goal of the Civics for All curriculum is to ensure top-tier civics teaching
and civic participation prospects for every student. It provides a broad range of resources,
educational materials, professional development, and student-facing programs to all schools
under the NYCDOE (Civics for All Curriculum Guide, 2023).

Analysis
    Drawing on LACI's 6 Cs of Support and LACI's TLC, we used Figure 3 LACI Planning

Guide for Incorporating the Six Cs of Support, and Figure 2 LACI's Teaching and Learning
Cycle to analyze the lesson plan. The LACI planning guide, grounded on LACI's 6 Cs of
Support, is designed to assist teachers in identifying opportunities within the curriculum and
instruction that can enhance the language development and content learning of MLs.

Figure 3.
LACI Planning Guide for Incorporating the Six Cs of Support (Adapted from de Oliveira, 2023,
p. 201)
Content Area Language and Literacy  68

         In Figure 3 above, the middle rectangles present the questions of each C that can
help teachers have a better understanding of each C and what they should be looking for
while planning the lessons. The big rectangles to the right list examples of each C to aid
teachers in recognizing or planning the Cs in the lesson plan. The figure can assist teachers in
determining which C is absent and needs to be incorporated based on the lesson's
objectives and the given lesson plan. Suggestions can be added if necessary. There might be
instances where the existing lesson plan already incorporates the Cs, but they require
enhancement to make the instructions more efficient and understandable for students. It is
important to note that not every C is mandatory for each lesson plan or various stages of the
lesson plan.

         After determining where in the lesson plan the Cs should be incorporated, we
completed Table 1 (as shown in 1.a.), LACI's 6Cs Integration into Lesson Plans. The middle
Content Area Language and Literacy        69

column of this table showcases the content and sequences derived from the existing lesson
plan. The suggestions for the integration of LACI's 6Cs support are listed in the left column.
The right column is for additional resources that can support the integration of the Cs.

Table 1.
LACI's 6Cs Integration into Lesson Plans

                                                         Findings
         The lesson plan is from Civics for All Grades 9-12, Part I. It teaches students about
birthright citizenship and the endeavors made by individuals and the Supreme Court to
safeguard this right. The teaching resources cover the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, the video of United States v. Wong Kim Ark, and the accompanying Wong Kim
Ark Viewing Guide.

Table 1.a.
LACI's 6Cs Integration into Lesson Plan
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                         70

Suggested           Grade Level: 9-12

Scaffolds           Lesson: 2 Individuals, the Courts, and Birthright Citizenship

                    Lesson Objective: Students learn about birthright citizenship and the

                    efforts of a single individual and the Supreme Court to secure this right.

                    Resources/Materials: Fourteenth Amendment to the United States

                    Constitution; United States v. Wong Kim Ark video; Wong Kim Ark

                    Viewing Guide

LACI 6 Cs           Introduce the Lesson/Motivate Student                    Additional

Integration                                                                  Resources

Code-Breaking Facilitate a discussion using the following questions:

The teacher should -- What is birthright citizenship?                        How to Connect
explain birthright, -- What have you heard about birthright citizenship      ELLs'
citizenship, and in the news?                                                Background

immigration to      · Explain that birthright citizenship is the guarantee   Knowledge to
students, and       of American citizenship to all individuals born          Content
provide real-life   on American soil. Today, it is often tied to issues of
examples to help    immigration and citizenship and is a right that is
students better     often debated.
understand these

concepts and their  · Continue the discussion with the following
relationships.      questions:
                    -- Why do you think this right is often debated?
Connection:

Connect to the      -- What are the implications of this right in defining
previous unit       what it means to be an American?

Rights v.           · Explain that much of the history of this right has to
Responsibilities    do with the efforts of one man who used the power
and connect to      of the courts to secure birthright citizenship for
students' own       himself and others. Today, we will learn about this
experiences with

immigration.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                          71

LACI TLC             right and also about how individuals can use the       LACI Teaching
Deconstruction:      courts to make change.                                 and Learning
                                                                            Cycle figure in
                                               Model/Teach
                     Display the Fourteenth Amendment to the United         Teaching Young
                     States Constitution.                                   Multilingual
                                                                            Learners: Key
The teacher should · Ask the following questions:                           Issues and New
                                                                            Insights. (Oliveira
unpack the 14th -- What does this Amendment say?                            &
                                                                            Jones, 2023, p.1
Amendment with -- What rights does it describe?                             4)

students, help

students to pay · Explain that this Amendment was passed after the

attention to the Civil War and was mainly designed to extend

language features citizenship to the formerly enslaved. As immigration

while                expanded in the United States, this guarantee of

deconstructing the birthright citizenship was called into question. Many

meaning of the people believed that undocumented immigrants or

Amendment.           immigrants from certain countries should never be

                     allowed to become citizens, even if they were born

                     on American soil.

                     --The Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS)

                     is the highest court in the nation and hears a select

Culture:             number of cases each year. SCOTUS has the ability      The Home
                     to interpret Constitutional Amendments. This is        Language: An
Provide translation  called judicial review.                                English
of Fourteenth                                                               Language
Amendment in         -- The Chinese Exclusion Act was the first federal     Learner's Most
students' home       regulation on immigrants in American history. It was   Valuable
language as          written into law in 1882 and severely limited the      Resource
needed.              entry of Chinese immigrants into the country. Most
                     people who managed to enter the US from China

                     were considered having done so in violation of the

Challenge:           law.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                           72

Add higher order · Explain that students will watch a short film on the

thinking questions: Supreme Court case United States v. Wong Kim Ark

"Are there any        and complete a viewing guide for that film.

limitations or        · Distribute and review the Wong Kim Ark Viewing
controversies you     Guide.
can think of related
to the Fourteenth     · Explain that the class will view the short film two
Amendment?"           times. On the first viewing, students should just
                      watch and on the second viewing they should watch
"How do concepts      and take notes to answer the questions in Part 1 of
from the              the viewing guide.
Fourteenth

Amendment

compare to laws

and practices in

your home country

or other countries

you know about?"

Code Breaking:

Model
expectations and
provide sentence
stems for the
viewing guide Part
1 task

                      Group Work/Independent Work
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                        73

Community and        Play the United States v. Wong Kim Ark video and      Interactional
Collaboration:       watch twice.                                          Scaffolding
                                                                           Moves
Ask students to      · Have students complete the questions in Part 1 of
check on each        the Wong Kim Ark Viewing Guide.
other's answers to
Part 1 before        · Bring the group back together and explain that you
having them          are going to show the video one more time. This
discuss Part 2.      time, students should listen for answers to the
Students get a       questions they have not yet addressed and/or listen
good opportunity     for additional information they may have missed
to learn from        during the initial viewing.
each other, ask
specific questions   · After the second viewing, organize students into
and find common      groups.
misunderstand-
ings so that the     · Have student groups discuss and complete Part 2
teacher can          of the Wong Kim Ark Viewing Guide.
resolve the
problems with
the whole class
after the group
activity.

Classroom
Interactions: After
students complete
Part 1, the teacher
should go over the
answers with
students as a class
Content Area Language and Literacy                                             74

as some of the
questions in the
Part 1 handout
could be
challenging. While
checking on
students' answers,
the teacher could
use interactional
scaffolding moves
to elicit or expand
students' answers.

Code Breaking:

As the questions in
Part 2 are getting
challenging, the
teacher should
model
expectations for
the viewing guide
Part 2 task, and
provide sentence
stems if needed.

Classroom                                Assessment/Wrap-Up
Interactions:        Facilitate a discussion of student responses to Part 2
                     of the Wong Kim Ark Viewing Guide.

                     · Explain that birthright citizenship, like many rights,

While facilitating   is constantly being debated. The Supreme Court has
the discussion, use  not changed its stance on birthright citizenship since
                     the Wong Kim Ark case, but that does not mean they
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                              75

interactional         could not provide a different interpretation in the
scaffolding moves     future.
such as
"recapping,"          · Facilitate a debrief by posing the following
"recasting," and      questions:
"cued elicitation"
to build student      -- How does this change or inform their
capacity to           understanding of their individual rights?
complete the
activity in groups.   -- What is good or bad about the Supreme Court's
                      power over the Constitution and related rights?

                      (Civics for All, Grades 9-12, Part I, pp. 90-92)

LACI TLC Joint
Construction:

The teacher should
adopt joint
construction to
facilitate students'
response to the
debrief
(Community and
Collaboration).

         In the Introduce the Lesson/Motivate section, students are introduced to birthright
citizenship and its pivotal role in delineating the definition of being an American. To better
help students understand some unfamiliar concepts and their relationships, the teacher
should explain birthright, citizenship, and immigration to students (Code-Breaking) and
provide real-life examples (Connection). Then, the teacher can ask questions to connect to
the previous lesson Rights v. Responsibilities (Connection). For example, "Can someone
Content Area Language and Literacy  76

explain how the rights we discussed in our last lesson might relate to an individual's birthright
citizenship?", "How might our discussion about rights and responsibilities impact the way
courts decide on issues related to birthright citizenship?", "How can the concepts of "rights"
and "responsibilities" that we learned in the previous lesson influence an individual's
behavior and attitude towards their birthright citizenship?", or "Based on what we learned
about rights and responsibilities, how would you predict the courts handle disputes related to
birthright citizenship?". These questions can help students to draw on their understanding
from the previous lesson and apply it to the new topic, facilitating deeper learning and
comprehension. The teacher can also try asking questions that connect to students' own
experiences with immigration (Connection). For instance, "Does anyone have a personal or
family story about immigration they'd be comfortable sharing? How did your rights and
responsibilities come into play in this experience?", "How has the concept of birthright
citizenship affected you, your family, or someone you know?", or "How have you seen the
rights and responsibilities we discussed in our last lesson applied in your own experiences
with immigration?". However, teachers should pay attention to the fact that these questions
may touch on personal and potentially sensitive topics. It is important to approach this
discussion with respect and empathy, allowing students to share only if they feel comfortable
doing so.

         In the Model/Teach section, students are introduced to the Fourteenth Amendment of
the U.S. Constitution and its aim to grant citizenship to those previously enslaved. The quality
of instruction could be enriched if the teacher applied the Deconstruction phase of the LACI's
TLC. Given that the Fourteenth Amendment is a primary written source, it might pose
challenges for multilingual learners. It would be beneficial if the teacher deconstructs the text
with the students (Code-Breaking and Classroom Interactions) and assists them in focusing
on the language features and functions while interpreting the Amendment. Furthermore, the
teacher should offer translations of the Fourteenth Amendment in the student's native
language as necessary (Culture). There are official translations of the U.S. Constitution in many
languages, and they are easy to access online. The teacher should also create a high-
challenge and high-support classroom by adding some higher-order thinking questions while
learning the 14th Amendment. For example, "Are there any limitations or controversies you
can think of related to the Fourteenth Amendment?" This question helps students to evaluate
and critique the Amendment. Another question could be, "How do concepts from the
Content Area Language and Literacy  77

Fourteenth Amendment compare to laws and practices in your home country or other
countries you know about?" Model expectations and provide sentence stems for the viewing
guide Part 1 task is necessary (Code Breaking) as MLs may miscomprehend some questions
on the task sheet.

         The Group Work/Independent Work section introduces the Supreme Court case of
United States v. Wong Kim Ark, which has ties to the topic of birthright citizenship. Before
having students discuss Part 2, the teacher should ask students to check on each other's
answers to Part 1. Students get a good opportunity to learn from each other, ask specific
questions, and find common misunderstandings so that the teacher can resolve the problems
with the whole class after the group activity (Community and Collaboration). Following the
completion of Part 1, the teacher should go over the responses as a group, since some of the
questions in the Part 1 handout might be difficult. In the process of evaluating students'
answers, the teacher could leverage interactional scaffolding moves to develop students'
responses (Classroom Interaction). Given that the questions in Part 2 of the Wong Kim Ark
Viewing Guide are increasingly demanding, the teacher should exemplify the expectations
for answering the tasks in the viewing guide Part 2 (Code-Breaking) and offer sentence stems
if necessary.

         The Assessment/Wrap-Up segment seeks to involve students in a conversation about
the continuing contention over birthright citizenship, and the Supreme Court's authority to
interpret the Constitution and associated rights. While facilitating the discussion, the teacher
should use interactional scaffolding moves such as "recapping" (teachers provide a concise
recap of the key aspects of the interaction), "recasting" (teachers reframe students' comments
into discourse suitable for an academic context), and "cued elicitation" (teachers provide
clear cues, such as verbal or body language hints, to indicate expected responses) to build
student capacity to complete the activity in groups (Classroom Interactions). Another
enhancement of this section is to employ joint construction to aid students in their responses
to the debrief.

                                      Conclusion and Recommendations
         This chapter showed how teachers could integrate the Cs into the existing civics
lesson plan. Reflecting on the analysis, we have some recommendations for civics teachers
when teaching civics with the LACI framework (see Figure 4). It can be used for teachers who
Content Area Language and Literacy  78

want to implement LACI into existing lesson plans or design the lesson with the LACI
framework.
Concepts
When teaching the lesson with new concepts to students, think about the principles of the
Code-Breaking and Connection. You can explain the new concepts by offering real-life
examples and asking questions that connect to students' life and home culture.
Texts
When you teach civics texts, especially the primary written sources, make sure you use the
LACI's TLC Deconstruction (Code-Breaking) phase to unpack the text and pay attention to the
language features and functions. The Culture should also be considered here. For example,
the teacher can provide translation of the text for MLs in their home languages. Taking the
14th Amendment as an example, the teacher can choose to provide a complete translation of
the text, an annotated version of the text with translations, explanations, and context for
specific phrases or sections, after having students read the English version. They may also
provide translations at different phases of the lesson, for example, when introducing the
historical context and key concepts in students' first languages before reading the text;
identifying and translating crucial sections and legal terms that are central to understanding
the Amendment's meaning and implications while reading the text together; providing
translations as necessary during class discussions and analysis to ensure all students can
participate and contribute. However, the Culture is not limited to translation, and the teacher
should incorporate translanguaging strategies to make good use of students' full linguistic
repertoires (García et al., 2017).
Tasks
When students are expected to complete task sheets, the teacher should always keep the
Code-Breaking in mind. For example, model expectations and provide sentence stems to
students for full support and scaffolding, as the description of the tasks and questions on the
sheets could be challenging to MLs. Colorín Colorado and Everything ESL are two good
online websites that provide sentence starters and stems tailored for various subjects and
language proficiency levels.
Discussion/group work
For discussion and group work, the Classroom Interaction, the Community and Collaboration,
and the Challenge should always be considered. To enhance conversation and support
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                      79

students in completing the group activity, the teacher can employ interactional scaffolding
moves such as "recapping," "recasting," and "cued elicitation." These interactional scaffolding
moves aim to develop students' ability to engage effectively in tasks. Besides, the teacher can
use the joint construction phase (Community and Collaboration) to scaffold students'
responses to the discussions. Lastly, besides encouraging students to practice oral and
written expression, the teacher should add higher-order thinking questions to enhance
multilingual learners' critique and evaluation skills.

Figure 4.
Teaching Civics with LACI Framework

Questions:
    1. How do the Cs of Support align with what you already know about scaffolding for
         multilingual learners?
    2. Summarize LACI's Teaching and Learning Cycle.
    3. How does the LACI framework implement a functional approach to language
         development, one of WIDA 2020's Big Ideas?
Content Area Language and Literacy  80

4. Which C of Support would you be able to incorporate in your own instruction most
    easily? Which C of Support would take you more time to utilize? Why?

5. Find an example of a social studies text that would benefit from deconstruction.
    Describe how you would do LACI with multilingual learners.

6. How might you use audio, such as music or sound, to support the integration of the 6
    Cs?

                                                        References

Achugar, M., Schleppegrell, M., & Oteíza, T. (2007). Engaging teachers in language analysis: A
         functional linguistics approach to reflective literacy. English Teaching: Practice and
         Critique, 6(2), 8-24.

Bailey, A. L. (2007). The language demands of school: putting academic English to the test.
         Yale University Press.

Cho, S., & Reich, G. A. (2008). New immigrants, new challenges: High school social studies
         teachers and English language learner instruction. The Social Studies, 99(6), 235-242.
         https://doi.org/10.3200/TSSS.99.6.235-242

Cruz, B., & Thornton, S. J. (2009). Teaching social studies to English language learners.
         Routledge.

de Oliveira, L. C. (2020). Planning and application using a language-based approach to
         content instruction (LACI) in multilingual classrooms. MinneTESOL Journal, 36(2).
         Retrieved from https://minnetesoljournal. org/journal-archive/mtj-2020-2/planning-
         and-application-using-a-language-based-approach-to-content-instruction-laci-in-
         multilingual-classrooms/

de Oliveira, L. C. (2023). Supporting multilingual learners' academic language development: A
         language-based approach to content instruction. Routledge

de Oliveira, L. C., Braxton, D., & Gui, J. (2021). Planning for Instruction using a language-
         based approach to content instruction for multilingual learners. Journal of English
         Learner Education, 13(1), 2.

de Oliveira, L. C., & Schleppegrell, M. J. (2015). Focus on grammar and meaning. Oxford
         University Press.

Egbert, J., & Simich-Dudgeon, C. (2001). Providing support for non-native learners of English
         in the social studies classroom: Integrating verbal interactive activities and
         technology. The Social Studies, 92(1), 22-25.

Fang, Z. (2006). The language demands of science reading in middle school. International
         Journal of Science Education, 28(5), 491-520.
Content Area Language and Literacy  81

García, O., Johnson, S. I., Seltzer, K., & Valdés, G. (2017). The translanguaging classroom:
         Leveraging student bilingualism for learning. Philadelphia, PA: Caslon.

Jaffee, A. T., & Yoder, P. J. (2019). Teaching social studies to English language learners:
         Current research, theories, and pedagogical practices. In L.C. de Oliveira (Ed.), The
         handbook of TESOL in K-12 (pp. 307-321). Wiley.

New York City Department of Education (2022). 2021-2022 ELL demographics: At-a-glance.
         Retrieved from https://infohub.nyced.org/docs/default-source/default-document-
         library/sy-2021-22-ell-demographics-at-a-glance.pdf

NYC Department of Education. (n.d.). Civics for all curriculum guide 9-12 part 1.
         https://www.weteachnyc.org/resources/resource/civics-all-9-12-part-1/

Newman, M. & Chen, X. (2022). Teaching social studies to multilingual learners in high school:
         Connecting inquiry and visual literacy to promote progressive learning. Rowman &
         Littlefield.

Schall-Leckrone, L. (2017). Genre pedagogy: A framework to prepare history teachers to
         teach language. Tesol Quarterly, 51(2), 358-382.

Schleppegrell, M. J. (2001). Linguistic features of the language of schooling. Linguistics and
         Education, 12(4), 431-459.

Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004). The language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective.
         Erlbaum.

Szpara, M. Y., & Ahmad, I. (2007). Supporting English-language learners in social studies class:
         results from a study of high school teachers. The Social Studies, 98(5), 189-196.
         https://doi.org/10.3200/TSSS.98.5.189-196

Thieman, G. Y., McParker, M. C., Leider, E. M., & Billingham, K. (2018). Preparing secondary
         social studies teachers to help English language learners develop academic language
         and social studies disciplinary literacy. In L. C. De Oliveira & K.M. Obenchain (Eds.)
         Teaching History and Social Studies to English Language Learners: Preparing Pre-
         Service and In-Service Teachers (PP.93-126). Springer

WIDA. (2020). WIDA English language development standards framework, 2020 edition:
         Kindergarten-grade 12. Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.

Yoder, P. J., & van Hover, S. (2018). Teaching history to ELLs in standards-based settings:
         Implications for teacher educators. In L. C. De Oliveira & K.M. Obenchain (Eds.)
         Teaching History and Social Studies to English Language Learners: Preparing Pre-
         Service and In-Service Teachers (PP.39-65). Springer.

Zhang, Y. (2017). Supporting English language learners in social studies: Language-focused
         strategies. The Social Studies, 108(5), 204-209.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/00377996.2017.1354808
Content Area Language and Literacy  82

                                                      Contributors

Jia Gui, Virginia Commonwealth University, guij2@vcu.edu

Dr. Jia Gui (Ph.D.) is an adjunct professor at Clarkson University and affiliated faculty member
in the Department of Teaching and Learning in the School of Education at Virginia
Commonwealth University. She was a TESOL teacher and taught college students and
secondary school students in China. Her current research interests include the Language-
Based Approach to Content Instruction (LACI) and teacher education for multilingual
learners.

Luciana C. de Oliveira, Virginia Commonwealth University, deoliveiral@vcu.edu

Dr. Luciana C. de Oliveira (Ph.D.) is Associate Dean for Academic Affairs and Graduate Studies
in the School of Education and a Professor in the Department of Teaching and Learning at
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA. Her research focuses on issues
related to teaching multilingual learners at the elementary and secondary levels, including
the role of language in learning the content areas and teacher education. She has authored
or edited 28 books and has over 200 publications in various outlets. Dr. de Oliveira served in
the presidential line (2017-2020), served as President in 2018-2019, and was a member of the
Board of Directors (2013-2016) of TESOL International Association, the largest international
organization for English language teachers worldwide with over 17,000 members as of 2022.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                            83

                                        Chapter 5
A Functional Approach to STEAM: Teaching to Argue about Sound

                  Dr. Karen Terrell, Loyola University Maryland
              Tara Willging, Virginia Commonwealth University
      Allessandra Elisabeth dos Santos, Sergipe Federal University
             Dr. Destini Braxton, St. Mary's College of Maryland

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

    · Understand functional language its benefit to the process of learning
         content and language.

    · Relate the genre of argumentation and critical thinking instruction to
         the STEAM movement.

    · Analyze an original lesson about sound waves for its existing language
         supports as suggested by the LACI framework.

    · Revise an existing lesson to incorporate the LACI framework and offer
         explicit language instruction and scaffolding for all students.

                                                       Introduction
         The functional-language approach requires students to develop arguments by
providing evidence for their stances from various sources (Kang, 2022). For multilingual
learners, this can be challenging as the typical design of textbooks and other media tend to
present information once, in one format, and not continue to review the material in
subsequent sections. In addition, teachers may assume that students are equipped to draw
upon prior coursework to offer these arguments, but due to language differences or abilities,
this may not be an easy or equitable task without scaffolding (Harper & de Jong, 2004).
Scaffolding strategies are elements of teaching and learning cycles that guide teachers and
students during their trajectory of learning (MacDonald & Crowther, 2023). Teachers
incorporate these enhancements for a more equitable approach by using various tools such
as graphic organizers, digital media, and artificial intelligence technologies. Such applications

 Editors' note: This chapter was double-blind, peer-reviewed prior to online publication.
Content Area Language and Literacy  84

can provide students with multimodal opportunities to expand their linguistic repertoires in
courses, especially those in the content areas of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and
Mathematics (STEAM).

         STEAM courses are starting to be recognized for possessing useful strategies and
approaches to connect and relate to diverse student populations (Park, 2021). This is
important to draw upon because these subjects often require active student engagement and
participation in order for the content to resonate with all students. As teachers continue to
promote engagement, interaction, and language use in STEAM learning environments, it is
critical that functional language awareness be recognized as a necessary component for
multilingual learners (MLs), in particular, while ensuring that they are able to thrive in these
classrooms (Hansen-Thomas & Langman, 2020). "STEAM education takes a guided-inquiry
approach to creatively investigate scenarios that exist in real and hypothetical situations,
involving cultural, linguistic, and social aspects of the arts" (Park, 2021, p.587-588). As such,
these courses may provide students with the opportunity to become more motivationally and
linguistically engaged in the content through "creative, critical, and constructive means"
(p.590).

         This chapter will analyze a sample high school physics lesson plan that explores the
Next Generation Physics standard (HS-PS4-1), "Use mathematical representations to support a
claim [emphasis added] regarding relationships among the frequency, wavelength, and
speed of waves traveling within various media" (NGSS Lead States, 2013). As the verbiage
"support a claim" inherently points to the macrogenre of argument, understanding
argumentation is key to this standard. Thus, the LACI framework's adaptation of the Teaching
and Learning Cycle (de Oliveira, 2017) will be used to assess and amplify the integration of
language scaffolding for all learners and incorporate literacies that are present across various
STEAM content areas. This chapter also will emphasize various techniques to ensure that
attention to language is not lost in content, while keeping multilingual and dually identified
students in mind. Operating under the premise that "teachers must use language to teach
content, rather than using content to teach language" (p. 44), language cannot be an
afterthought, but instead, an integral and integrated part of STEAM content instruction.
Content Area Language and Literacy  85

                             Current Content Frameworks & Argumentation
         In 2006, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
released a framework document for the international PISA exam that prioritized three
competencies for scientific literacy: identifying scientific issues, explaining phenomena
scientifically, and using scientific evidence. The authority continues that one of the cognitive
exercises embedded in these competencies is "constructing and communicating arguments
and explanations based on data'' (p.29). More recently, OECD released a revised PISA
framework (OECD, 2018) with the slightly revised competencies of "explaining phenomena
scientifically; evaluating and designing scientific enquiry; and interpreting data and evidence
scientifically" (p.99). The latter component requires "Analysing and evaluating data, claims
and arguments in a variety of representations and drawing appropriate scientific conclusions"
(p.101) - a more detailed connection to argumentation. Within the United States, the National
Research Council (NRC; 2012) has outlined within the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) eight science and engineering practices that students are to learn across all grade
bands:
         1. Asking questions (for science) and defining problems (for engineering)
         2. Developing and using models
         3. Planning and carrying out investigations
         4. Analyzing and interpreting data
         5. Using mathematics and computational thinking
         6. Constructing explanations (for science) and designing solutions (for engineering)
         7. Engaging in argument from evidence
         8. Obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information.
As explicitly noted in Practice 7, argumentation is a primary practice that is also supported by
Practice 4 and Practice 8 (Erduran et al., 2015) - the combination nodding to Toulmin's
argumentation model of claim, data, and warrants (1958/2003).
         The premises of these national and international frameworks point to more
sociocultural and constructivist approaches for twenty-first science learning that values
students' meaning-making abilities more so than the recitation of technical facts (Scott &
Mortimer, 2005). Thus, the definition of scientific knowledge has expanded from a more
authoritarian-developed schema to be a more empowering "something which is constructed
Content Area Language and Literacy  86

through a process of justifying beliefs through reasoning, conjecturing, evaluating evidence,
and considering counter-arguments" (Osborne, 2005, p.368). Later Osborne (2006) continues
that argumentation in school science has the capacity to:

         a) improve students' conceptual understanding of science;
         b) enhance their ability to reason and think critically;
         c) develop a deeper understanding of the nature of belief in science; and
         d) to make the quality of the learning environment and learning experience more

              enjoyable. (p.4)
With these possible outcomes, the impetus for creating the NGSS (NRC, 2012) - namely,
ensuring that every American citizen has a basic understanding of science and engineering -
seems more attainable by incorporating explicit instruction of argumentation.

         The focus on language structures within the NGSS (NRC, 2012) can be directly linked
to the Standards for Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Other Technical Subjects,
which is included with the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) for English Language Arts
(NGACBP/CCSSO, 2010a). These six language standards relate to conventions of standard
English, knowledge of language, and vocabulary acquisition and usage within core subjects
in humanities and beyond, emphasizing that students must gain control over standard
English grammar, usage, and mechanics. In addition, it is expected that students become
proficient with ways to convey meaning effectively, determine the meaning of words
encountered from engaging with media, appreciate non-literal meanings, and expand their
vocabulary. Specified in the Mathematics standards (NGACBP/CCSSO, 2010b) are also eight
Standards for Mathematical Practice (SMP):

         1. Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them.
         2. Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
         3. Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others.
         4. Model with mathematics.
         5. Use appropriate tools strategically.
         6. Attend to precision.
         7. Look for and make use of structure.
         8. Look for and express regularity in repeated reasoning (p.6-8)
Note that SMP #3 also target the function of argumentation - both constructing and analyzing
them. The expectation is that students will be able to "understand and use stated
Content Area Language and Literacy  87

assumptions, ... make conjectures and build a logical progression of statements ... analyze
situations by breaking them into cases, ... recognize and use counterexamples... justify their
conclusions, communicate them to others, and respond to the arguments of others" (p.6),
among other associated argument skills. Thus, it is imperative that all STEAM teachers be
aware of the general features of argument, but also the specific attributes of this macrogenre
within their subject areas.

         To assist in the distribution of pedagogical practices for argument, WIDA's English
Language Development Standards Framework (WIDA, 2020) explores this function and
several others as a part of its Big Ideas for all content areas across the K-12 continuum.
According to this latest edition of the Framework, these "Key Language Uses [emphasis
added] describe prominent ways that language is used in school, across all disciplines. When
educators make choices about how to integrate content and language, the Key Language
Uses can help provide focus and coherence" (p.23). WIDA posits that through integrating this
functional approach to language instruction across subject areas, multilingual learners will be
able to expand their linguistic repertoires, becoming increasingly aware and strategic in their
use of language to negotiate meaning and achieve their purposes in various contexts" (p.20).

                                              Scaffolding & Language
         The WIDA Standards have historically been based upon the notion that "Educators
should scaffold learning and resources across all levels of language proficiency" (WIDA, 2020,
p.31). The Consortium continues by offering a working definition for scaffolding:
         a contingent, collaborative process of supporting student development of new skills,
         concepts, practices, and understandings to build student autonomy by providing the
         needed kind of support that will trigger agency. Unlike a fixed, "one size fits all" set of
         routine supports, scaffolding starts with high expectations for all students and
         provides them with high support so they can rise to that challenge and perform tasks
         independently over time. (p.249)
All of this is predicated upon Vygotskian sociocultural theory; more specifically, the zone of
proximal development, wherein someone or something external to a person can be used to
enable them to achieve the next level or stage of learning (Vygoysky, 1978). Thus, in a given
lesson, scaffolding may pull upon the tenets of UDL (CAST, 2018) for multiple means of
engagement, representation, action, and/or expression. It may also appear in the
Content Area Language and Literacy  88

organization and pacing of a lesson, as demonstrated in Echevarria et al.'s SIOP Model (2018).
In addition, scaffolding may be developed as a result of data-informed analysis methods
wherein student performance data is reviewed, but also context is continuously considered
for the improvement of students' teaching and learning experiences and achievement (WIDA,
2020).

         Hammond and Gibbons (2005) expand the definition of scaffolding to not just be
"designed-in" classroom structures as previously noted, but also interactional experiences.
These features tend to be spontaneous and may include more personable occurrences such
as linking to background knowledge based upon home environments, making home/school
connections, summarizing, and appropriating. For the latter, teachers may integrate students'
contribution into the discourse of the class and/or, in turn, students may incorporate teachers'
instruction into their own discourse. The result of student appropriation tends to be that their
communications become more "registrally appropriate" (p.22), allowing for students to be co-
participants in their learning and progress in the desired language acquisition. Thus,
interactional scaffolding can be linked directly to Swain's theory of comprehensible output
(2005), wherein students are able to demonstrate their linguistic knowledge by "attempting to
produce the target language" (p.475). Within this process, pupils begin by noticing the
differences in characteristics of the target language, then hypothesizing about what they
would like to utter and attempting to do so, and finally reflecting upon the accuracy of their
communication based upon the responses of peers or teachers with whom they are engaged.

         In order to be successful in school, we understand that students need to be able to
comprehend and produce language for specific purposes such as "explaining, arguing,
recounting, and describing across a range of subject areas in a variety of media and modes"
(Derewianka & Jones, 2016, p.2). Thus, it is imperative that content teachers have a firm
understanding of how language operates in their subject areas. Regarding content and
language integration, Marks and Mousley (1990) purport, "If teachers are not going to focus
only upon the recount genre but develop and extend students' expertise into those areas of
communication which are vitally important to mathematicians in a wide variety of
occupations, it will be necessary for them to come to grips with the range of genres used in
mathematics." However, this viewpoint easily extends into all subject areas - we must become
fluent in the ways that language operates in each content area in order to teach our students,
especially MLs, to do the same. Systemic functional linguistics (Halliday, 1978) and more
Content Area Language and Literacy  89

specifically, the functional approach, allows for the interrogation of language in each content
area in order to determine structures that can be taught to pupils and enable them to
develop fluency in the particular area of academic language as well. This approach may be
helpful to all students, but it is critical to the educative experiences of MLs (Blankman, 2021).

                                               LACI & Argumentation
         A functional approach to language development offers "a simultaneous focus on the
meanings that are made (the `content') and the language through which the meanings are
expressed" (de Oliveira, 2023, p.4). Whatever content or content area is being studied, MLs
are exposed to challenges which cannot be taken for granted. The challenge in content areas
is largely linguistic, "more than just vocabulary" (p.3), as MLs must comprehend and critically
evaluate texts, and participate in complex discussions. The language that learners have
contact with in schools is the so-called academic language which is considered a "second
language," even for English native speakers. Academic language seen in textbooks includes
content-specific vocabulary, multisemiotic systems and terminology, and dense noun phrases
and sentences, among other characteristics; and it becomes more complex through the
grades (Lemke, 2003; Schleppegrell, 2007). Research has shown that academic language is
constructed differently from everyday language and these differences already appear at
elementary school levels (e.g., de Oliveira, 2023). Therefore, it is vital to identify language
demands early and provide MLs meaningful interaction opportunities with explicit attention
to language.
         Concerning argumentation in science classrooms, challenges are also invariably
present. According to Faize et al. (2018), argumentation should play a central role in science
education, as part of a student-centered approach. Scientific argumentation in science can
enhance conceptual understanding and develop critical skills, it can also lead to
confrontations among students with different beliefs or limited prior knowledge. The nature
and role of argumentation in science education differs significantly from its everyday use. For
instance, instead of being a heated exchange of views, scientific argumentation is a logical
and rational discourse aimed at understanding the relationship between ideas and evidence,
and it involves the development, evaluation, and validation of scientific knowledge. The crux
of this process involves making a claim, refining it, and then supporting it with scientific
evidence. As such, students need specific abilities to effectively participate in scientific
Content Area Language and Literacy  90

argumentation, including understanding and utilizing a conceptual framework, using correct
epistemology for evaluating a claim, and the ability to construct and communicate
knowledge as a social interaction process.

         Involving students in scientific argumentation emphasizes the need for normalized
dialogic interaction and collaborative reasoning in argumentation (Faize et al., 2018).
Methods to achieve these environmental characteristics include providing a suitable and
stimulating learning environment, clear instructions about the structure of an argument, and
encouraging critical thinking and questioning. With the main goal of argumentation being to
support one's position while identifying and exploiting weaknesses in that of an opponent, it
functions in education in both structural and dialogic contexts. In a structural context, there
are particular discourse components that are distinct from explanation; "they [argument texts]
are structured around logical reasoning in support of a point of view or perspective rather
than around time and events and their causes" (Derewianka & Jones, 2016, p.234). In a
dialogic context, argumentation is an interactive process where individuals try to convince
others of a particular stand, leading to critique and counter-arguments. To effectively engage
students in argumentation, new (and/or improved) instructional models are necessary, along
with opportunities for discourse and the use of evidence to support claims.

         The increasing number of MLs in schools reaffirms the need for content area teachers
to reflect upon other approaches to teaching and learning (de Oliveira, L.C., Braxton, D., &
Gui, J., 2021). Acknowledging this need implies the understanding that the learning of
contents in science, mathematics, and social studies is closely interconnected to the
interaction learners have with language. Therefore, when it comes to content instruction, a
teaching approach whose focus is on enhancing this interaction provides more learning
opportunities to MLs. For students, particularly MLs, with limited opportunities to develop this
language outside school, classrooms must facilitate simultaneous language and content
learning. Various strategies are employed to make content accessible to MLs, like
collaborative groups, visuals, and building on students' background knowledge. Some
teachers simplify language of texts, but this can limit MLs, especially at intermediate to
advanced levels, from learning academic language and independently reading content area
texts. Hence, a well-rounded approach without overly simplifying the curriculum is necessary
(de Oliveira, 2023).
Content Area Language and Literacy  91

         The importance of understanding argumentation for a particular content standard
suggests the use of the Teaching and Learning Cycle in the LACI framework to strengthen
language scaffolding for all students and to integrate literacies from various disciplines (de
Oliveira, 2023). LACI does not take for granted the needs of MLs, but rather implements a
functional approach for language development that addresses the meanings made both
through the content and the language. Since language is considered both a social practice
and a meaning-making system, it is implied that when teachers focus on content through
language, the approach leads to knowledge construction within each specific context -
particularly, STEAM content areas.

         LACI "provides a guiding framework of six scaffolding elements teachers can use to
support MLs during classroom instructions" (de Oliveira, 2023, p.14). Although each C of
support can be clearly identified as an element, the author states the importance of bearing
in mind that they are all mutually linked and interrelated. The six Cs (see Figure 1; adapted
from de Oliveira, 2016) incorporate a genre-based pedagogical framework that "breaks down
academic language in texts discovering both the language and content [MLs] are using and
developing" (p.26).

         In addition, LACI's Teaching and Learning Cycle (TLC) comprises different phases:
building shared knowledge about a subject, sustained reading, deconstruction, joint
construction, collaborative construction, and independent construction (see Figure 2;
adapted from de Oliveira, 2023). Rather than focusing on individual sentences or vocabulary
words, the cycle starts with the whole text as the central focus. This teaching and learning
process, which can be started at any phase depending on student requirements and teacher
knowledge, is flexible and adaptable. The cyclical nature of this instructional model allows it
to be recursive and for repeated application as learners become more acquainted with
specific genres. It can be tailored to accommodate both short-term lessons and extended
units of study.

         One of the essential aspects of the TLC is the ongoing setting of context in every
phase (de Oliveira, 2023). This continual contextualization helps students progressively
deepen their understanding of a topic. The phase of building shared knowledge is especially
crucial, as it aids students in developing their comprehension of the content, context, and
particular genre texts, thereby promoting a critical orientation towards language.
Content Area Language and Literacy  92

Figure 1: LACI's Six C's
of Support for
Scaffolding Content
Area Instruction for
Multilingual Learners.
Content Area Language and Literacy            93

Figure 2: LACI's Teaching and Learning Cycle

However, the building phase does end, but rather "continues throughout the other stages of
the teaching-learning cycle so that students' understanding of the field [i.e., content]
accumulates and becomes increasingly sophisticated" (Derewianka & Jones, 2016, p.53).
With the cycle promoting active teacher involvement, guidance, and support throughout all
its phases, students' learning is consistently assessed. Both Brisk (2015) and de Oliveira
(2017) have expanded the original TLC with the collaborative construction phase, aiming to
enrich learning experiences.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                     94

For this phase, the teacher designs pair or group activities for students to work
together to develop a new, single text - a clear example of the C of community and
collaboration. The teacher may elect to just focus on one stage for the collaborative
construction. Students work with other students in pairs or small groups to construct a
text together, brainstorming and negotiating ideas, writing, revising, etc. The teacher
circulates the room and provides further scaffolding as needed, drawing on
understandings developed in previous lessons. Teachers continue to support
collaborative pairs or groups as needed. (de Oliveira, 2023, p.38)

With the addition of this phase, LACI's TLC emerges as an instrumental tool in aiding
students' development and mastery of school genres across various disciplines.

                                                   Planning a Lesson
         The STEAM lesson plan we chose to use (see Appendix A) explores the notion of
sound by having students participate in various interactive stations and whole-class
discussions (Virginia Department of Education, 2012). For our first step, we analyzed this
lesson plan to understand which of the 6 Cs of LACI (de Oliveira, 2016) may have already
been present and how they were represented. Table 1 shows examples from the lesson plan
for each C of support, as identified. From our analysis, it was determined that all 6 C's of
support were present in some form with the exception of the C of Culture. The representation
of students varies from class to class, but the attitude of incorporating students' lived
experiences can be universally practiced and brought into each lesson. For example, the
incorporation of culturally relevant musical instruments (perhaps generated from students'
suggestions) would center the learning on students' experiences and build more
opportunities for connection and collaboration. Language objectives are also missing from
the original lesson, which could have offered differentiation for challenging students at the
appropriate level and specific goals for code-breaking the processes and information as tools
for students to demonstrate their understanding. Additionally, while the C for building
classroom community and collaboration was implied, explicit directions are necessary to
build a supportive classroom for learning.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                95

Table 1: Sample of Lesson Plan Links to LACI (de Oliveira, 2016)

LACI 6 Cs of   Examples from                      How could it be enhanced with a
Support        Original Lesson Plan               functional approach to language?

Connection     Background: "Musical               This is a great example of bringing the
               instruments resonate at various    learning into the lesson, it has the
               frequencies to produce different   potential to make a connection with the
               pitches."                          student's lived experience, they could
                                                  share instruments from their homes.
                                                  Could this connection be more
                                                  meaningful at the beginning?

Culture        (None present)                     Understanding the musical cultures of
                                                  students includes their experiences in
                                                  the lessons. The teacher can discuss
                                                  this with the class prior to the lesson,
                                                  incorporating familiar musical
                                                  instruments and making time for them
                                                  to discuss their ideas about the
                                                  vocabulary in cultural contexts.

Challenge      There are many opportunities for   These challenges should be supported
Code-Breaking  challenging students to apply      with specific language scaffolds. The
               their understanding. Each station  teacher can be open to different
               includes a set of questions: "ask  modes, language choices, and offer
               them to record..., ask them to     appropriate levels of challenge.
               explain..., ask them if..."

               Vocabulary to learn with this      It is not clear how the vocabulary is
               lesson:                            introduced in the appropriate
                                                  moments, defined with the students,
               amplitude, compression,            practiced, and applied. We suggest
               compression wave, frequency,       authentic opportunities to discuss
               pitch, rarefaction, resonance,     vocabulary in context. Using multi-
               sound, speed, vibration,           modal methods during interactions
               wavelength,                        may deepen understanding of the
                                                  terms.

Community and  Might be implied (e.g., "Have the  During the TLC, students will analyze,
collaboration  students...") but not explicit.    discuss, and build on their language
                                                  together.
Content Area Language and Literacy              96

LACI 6 Cs of  Examples from                     How could it be enhanced with a
Support       Original Lesson Plan              functional approach to language?

Classroom     Observations and Conclusions      Planning for common misconceptions,
interactions  states: "Have the students go     leading questions and opportunities
              through each station and discuss  for elaboration should be included.
              the questions. Lead students to   Teachers can accept and discuss
              conclusions rather than merely    student answers and move the learning
              telling them the answers".        forward. Arriving at the answer should
                                                include time for student dialogue using
              While there are examples of       academic literacy.
              interacting with students in the
              stations, it does not give
              examples of dialogue.

Employing the Teaching-Learning Cycle
         For our next step, we used the Teaching and Learning Cycle (see Figure 2 above) to

organize and outline the lesson procedures (de Oliveira, 2023). Derewianka (2020) suggests
the five steps prior to engaging with the TLC. Table 2 (below) maps these steps with our
suggested alterations to the STEAM lesson plan. Note that the "major understandings" tie
directly to the content standards that the plan is endeavoring to achieve. HS-PS4-1 is about
mathematical representations to support a claim specifically regarding frequency,
wavelength, and speed of waves (NGSS Lead States, 2013). The genre of argument was
chosen for the TLC because of wording in the standard, i.e., "Use mathematical
representations to support a claim..." [emphasis added]. Although NGSS suggests the
integration of the Common Core's ELA/Literacy standard - "RST.11-12.7. Integrate and
evaluate multiple sources of information presented in diverse formats and media (e.g.,
quantitative data, video, multimedia) in order to address a question or solve a problem"
(NGACBP/CCSSO, 2010a) - as well as standards 2 and 4 of the Standards for Mathematical
Practices (NGACBP/CCSSO, 2010b), these literacy and practice standards ignore the prowess
involved in supporting a claim. Thus, our alterations include activities that will guide students
through the process of creating arguments and supporting their claims in preparation for the
final task.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                           97

Table 2: Preparing for the STEAM lesson (adapted from Derewianka, 2020)

Derewianka (2020)                      Revised STEAM lesson plan components

1. Identify the major understandings   Content standard: HS-PS4-1. Use
    and abilities.                     mathematical representations to support a
                                       claim regarding relationships among the
                                       frequency, wavelength, and speed of waves
                                       traveling in various media.

2. Decide which genre would be         Argument
    appropriate.
                                       5-paragraph essay responding to: Why does
3. Identify a culminating task.        a guitar or a piano need to have a body or
                                       case to protect its strings?
4. Plan a number of activities to
    familiarize the children with the  Subject matter: lab activities (whole class,
    subject matter and the genre.      small groups, and small-group stations)
                                       Genre: summarizing questions for each lab
5. Locate sample texts in the chosen   that use CER routine (Menon, 2023) for
    genre.                             argument responses

                                       Teacher created response for first whole-
                                       class activity

         Also, the mathematics in the lesson is only implied in the background portion of the
lesson plan and in the differentiation section at the end of the plan. According to the content
standard, mathematical representations should be a key component of the implementation of
HS-PS4-1 (NGSS Lead States, 2013). For the CER routine (Menon, 2023), students will need to
supply evidence to support their claims. Each lab activity requires that students record the
results of the procedures. Therefore, we suggest the addition of tables as mathematical
representations wherein students can record their data and extract evidence for their
responses to each lab's guiding or summarizing question.
One of the essential aspects of the TLC is the ongoing setting of context in every phase (de
Oliveira, 2023). This continual contextualization helps students progressively deepen their
understanding of a topic. The phase of building shared knowledge is especially crucial, as it
Content Area Language and Literacy  98

aids students in developing their comprehension of the content, context, and particular genre
texts, thereby promoting a critical orientation towards language. However, the building phase
does end, but rather "continues throughout the other stages of the teaching-learning cycle so
that students' understanding of the field [i.e., content] accumulates and becomes increasingly
sophisticated" (Derewianka & Jones, 2016, p.53).
Lesson Plan Alterations

         Through this process we found areas to incorporate the enhanced scaffolds generated
in the initial analysis and outlined how they can contribute to a functional approach to
language. The TLC provided a framework for us to supplement the lesson starting with
intentional connections to students' choices and experiences. While the original lesson plan
(Appendix A) was discovered in a search for an existing plan wherein HS-PS4-1 was the
primary standard, no explicit teaching about supporting a claim (i.e., argument) was present.
This absence yielded another opportunity for alterations so that the revised plan would
incorporate arguments more definitively, beginning with the inclusion of a language
objective. From this point, we determined specific examples of classroom activities that
accomplish the language objective and ultimately support the content objectives. As a result,
we developed a TLC-oriented lesson for a 90-minute block class that also implements the
tenets of LACI.

         Language objective. Typically, a language objective relates to a key language
function, task, or skill that will support the learning of the content. According to Baecher et al.
(2014), "Attention to language instruction, especially academic language, within the content
areas is understood to be the desired means to support [MLs], yet is also one of its most
sophisticated pedagogical challenges" (p.120). The goal is to highlight the tools or strategies
that these students may need to make sense of the content and to produce the language of
the content. As such, the researchers suggest the inclusion of "one or more specific language
functions, grammatical structures, micro-skills, learning strategies, or vocabulary that learners
will learn about and be able to use in a period of instruction; [and] specific activities to either
expose, introduce, and/or provide guided or freer practice to develop this understanding or
skill" (p.127).

          For this lesson, we focus on the language support needed for MLs to develop
arguments and support their claims. Therefore, we will pull upon the CER routine in the form
of anchor charts explaining the components of the routine and corresponding sentence
Content Area Language and Literacy  99

frames to aid students' sentence formation. stems. A corresponding graphic organizer will
also be provided to assist in this process. Students will work together in small groups to
create the arguments, resulting in the following language objective:

         In small groups, students will use T-tables to record data from various investigations
         and then use CER graphic organizers with sentence frames to make claims about the
         results and support the claims.
By adding scaffolds and specific language objectives to this lesson, we can provide flexibility
to meet students where they are academically, socially, culturally, etc. while at the same time
maintain high expectations for students working with the grade level standards.

Phase 1: Building Shared Knowledge
         For this phase (approximately 10 minutes), the revised lesson plan begins with a

whole-class brainstorm, wherein students verbally respond to the question, "What do you
think of when you hear/see the word sound?" From this point, we suggest showing a quick
video about sound and/or soundwaves using an online resource, such as YouTube, PASCO,
PBS, or the Science Learning Hub. These websites offer videos that teachers can easily access
to help provide the background knowledge that all students will need for such lessons.
Following the video, the teacher will engage the class in a discussion of the ideas presented
in the introductory video, "finding out what they know about the topic and beginning to
develop shared understandings" (de Oliveira, 2023, p. 32). While this phase focuses on the Cs
of connection and classroom interaction, it may also include culture depending on the video
selection and students' ideas during the brainstorm and discussion.

Phase 2: Sustained Reading
         In Phase 2, the teacher and students engage with the language of the learning

through the written dialogue from the discussion of a related text (de Oliveira, 2023). In this
case, the teacher will present students with a transcript of the video from Phase 1 and allow
them time to identify vocabulary with which they are unfamiliar. Students should be
challenged to appropriate the language at their development levels (WIDA, 2020), and thus,
they may need to read the text with a partner or in a small group rather than independently.

         In addition, the teacher will offer as many visuals as possible, ensuring that the words
sound, pitch, wavelength, and frequency are highlighted. She will simultaneously write the
Content Area Language and Literacy  100

vocabulary and key terms on the board to keep the language accessible visually and
auditorily. Students may then practice using adjectives they already know to describe sound
and clarify pitch in a class dialogue. The teacher will recognize all student answers and make
explicit connections to as many students' experiences as possible. Phase 2 will last
approximately 10 minutes and focuses on the Cs of connection, code-breaking, community
and collaboration, and classroom interaction.

Phase 3: Deconstruction
         This phase involves code-breaking, challenge, community and collaboration, and

classroom interaction, as it is the time for the teacher to model how students are to complete
a station task (de Oliveira, 2023). Each lab station throughout the block lesson will involve an
investigation and a follow-up question that will require students to write a paragraph-long
argument. Thus, it will be necessary to distribute copies of blank two-column T-tables and
provide students access to CER anchor charts (Figure 3) and a graphic organizer (Figure 4).
Note that the sample anchor charts in Figure 3 offer explanations of the CER routine as well as
sentence frames to guide students in constructing their own sentences.
Figure 3: Sample CER Anchor Charts
Content Area Language and Literacy      101

Figure 4: Sample CER Graphic Organizer

         For this phase, the class will be divided into small groups of three or four students,
and then the groups will conduct a hanger/desk investigation in two rounds - with and
without their fingers in their ears. Students will record descriptions of what they hear on a T-
table and then the groups will share their data with the class, with the teacher combining
the data into one class table. She will then present the lab's follow-up question, "Which
sound was louder?", and share a sample paragraph response. The teacher will demonstrate
how she recorded her experiment data in T-table, made a claim, transferred the claim and
supporting evidence to the CER graphic organizer, and generated reasons and a conclusion
for the paragraph. She will also illustrate ways in which to discuss the vibrations and
materials in such a response.

Phase 4: Joint Construction
         From this point, the teacher will guide students through another station lab (Station 3

in the original lesson plan) for teacher and classroom collaborative work. This 10-minute
phase, again, will engage students in code-breaking, challenge, community and
collaboration, and classroom interaction. This investigation, Stringed Instruments, will
demonstrate how materials can be altered in order to produce different pitches. Students will
return to the same small groups as in Phase 3 and label a three-column T-table: Band,
Wavelength, and Description. Groups will measure the length of a thinner rubber band (Band
Content Area Language and Literacy  102

#1) at three different wavelengths, and then record the measurements and corresponding
descriptions in the table. They will follow the same process for a thicker rubber band (Band
#2) and complete three rounds of plucking in the same way as Band #1, recording the
wavelengths and descriptions.

         To answer the new follow-up question, "Which rubber band and wavelength had the
higher pitch?", groups will brainstorm, about a 1-paragraph response using the T-tables and
CER anchor charts and graphic organizer, Then the teacher will bring the groups together to
co-construct a response paragraph as she scribes for the class. Student choice and dialogue
will lead to the shared writing process and provide another opportunity for clarification. The
teacher will be intentional about highlighting the chosen language functions that are part of
the assessment.

Phase 5: Collaborative Construction
         For Phase 5, students will remain in their small groups and rotate every 10 minutes to

the four remaining stations from the original lesson plan:
               Musical Test Tubes (formerly Station #1)
               Sound Vibrations (formerly Station #2)
               Sound Boards (formerly Station #4)
               The Reversing Pitch (formerly Station #5)

During each station, groups will follow the same processes modeled in the Deconstruction
and in the Joint Collaboration phases, recording their data and observations in T-tables and
then utilizing them to complete CER graphic organizers and write argumentative responses
to follow-up questions. The teacher will circulate to the different groups to offer assistance;
however, the mentor texts from the previous phases will remain accessible through students'
notes and board work. These resources will serve as a first line of consultation for the pupils
prior to seeking assistance from the teacher.

Phase 6: Independent Construction
         Once students have completed each station, they will have a collection of writing

that they will then consolidate into a longer and more developed prompt using the
language functions and features that were addressed throughout the class session. For the
last 15 minutes of this lesson, each student will begin writing a five-paragraph essay
Content Area Language and Literacy  103

responding to the overarching follow-up question: "Why does a guitar or a piano need to
have a body or case to protect its strings?" The teacher will review with the class how to
expand the CER routine for a full essay and use their class notes and writing as examples for
scaffolding. As a cultural extension of this assignment, students should describe in the
conclusion paragraph how what they learned in the day's class can be connected to music
in their individual cultures. Students will complete a rough draft for homework, so that peer
reviews and other revision-oriented activities can be conducted in the next class session.

                                                        Conclusion
         The functional language approach recognizes the inherent challenges that
multilingual learners face in deciphering academic language, typically presented in a
complex, distinct way in textbooks, other learning materials, and by teachers. STEAM
subjects, in particular, require an active student engagement that functional language
awareness can enhance. Science education, as an example, requires students to engage in
scientific argumentation. "Starting in elementary school, to learn content, MLs need to be able
to see how language works in texts, read with comprehension, engage in discussion of
complex issues, and critically evaluate the texts they encounter," (de Oliveira, 2023, p.3). This
revised Teaching and Learning Cycle infused with LACI framework advocates the use of
scaffolding strategies to provide MLs with multiple opportunities to revisit and internalize
content promoting a fairer learning environment. This method of teaching functional
language is a dynamic and adaptable pedagogical approach designed to accommodate
MLs' learning needs. By focusing on the whole text and emphasizing continual
contextualization, it fosters a deeper understanding of the content, context, and genre.

Questions:
    1. What is the benefit of argumentation in learning?
    2. What scaffolding strategies are used to teach this lesson plan?
    3. What are other resources used by the teachers to enhance learning the lesson?
    4. The authors quote Baecher et al. (2014): "Attention to language instruction, especially
         academic language, within the content areas is understood to be the desired means
         to support [MLs], yet is also one of its most sophisticated pedagogical challenges."
Content Area Language and Literacy  104

         Why do you think attending to language instruction might be so challenging for
         teachers?
    5. The authors claim, "the phase of building shared knowledge is especially crucial, as it
         aids students in developing their comprehension of the content, context, and
         particular genre texts, thereby promoting a critical orientation towards language" (p.
         13). (a) Reflect on this quote with a small group. Can you provide further explanation?
         (b) Exactly how does building a shared knowledge develop a student's
         comprehension of text and promote critical orientation towards language? (c) What
         are the specific aspects of shared knowledge that benefit students' comprehension?
         Give an example that illustrates this claim.

                                                        References
Baecher, L., Farnsworth, T., & Ediger, A. (2014). The challenges of planning language objectives in

         content-based ESL instruction. Language Teaching Research, 18(1), 118-136.

Blankman, P. (2021, September 10). 7 Strategies for Teaching Math to English Language Learners.
         https://www.hmhco.com/blog/strategies-for-teaching-math-to-english-language-learners-
         ells

Brisk, M. E. (2015). Engaging students in academic literacies: Genre-based pedagogy for K-5
         classrooms. Routledge.

CAST (2018). Universal Design for Learning Guidelines version 2.2. Retrieved from
         http://udlguidelines.cast.org

Cervetti, G.N., & Pearson, P. D. (2018). Reading and Understanding Science Texts. In A.L.
         Bailey, C.A. Maher, and L.C. Wilkinson (Eds.), Language, literacy, and learning in the
         STEM disciplines (1st ed., pp. 79-100). Routledge.
         https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315269610-5

de Oliveira, L.C. (2017). A language-based approach to content instruction (LACI) in science
         for English language learners. In A. Oliveira & M. Weinburgh (Eds.), Science teacher
         preparation in content-based second language acquisition (pp. 41-58). Association of
         Science Teacher Education and Springer.

de Oliveira, L.C. (2023). Supporting multilingual learners' academic language development: A
         language-based approach to content instruction. Routledge.

de Oliveira, L. C., Braxton, D., & Gui, J. (2021). Planning for instruction using a language-
         based approach to content instruction for multilingual learners. Journal of English
         Learner Education, 13(1), 13-29. https://stars.library.ucf.edu/jele/vol13/iss1/2

Derewianka, B. (2020). Exploring How Texts Work: 2nd Edition. Primary English Teaching
         Association Australia.
Content Area Language and Literacy  105

Derewianka, B. & Jones, P. (2016). Teaching language in context. Oxford University Press.

Erduran, S., Ozdem, Y., and Park, J.Y. (2015). Research trends on argumentation in science
         education: a journal content analysis from 1998-2014. International Journal of STEM
         Education, 2(5), p.1-12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-015-0020-1

Echevarria, J., Vogt, M.E., and Short, D.J. (2018). Making content comprehensible for English
         learners: The SIOP Model, 3rd Edition. Pearson.

Faize, F.A., Husain, W., and Nisar, F. (2018, November 17). A critical review of scientific
         argumentation in science education. EURASIA Journal of Mathematics, Science and
         Technology Education, 14(1), 475-483. https://doi.org/10.12973/ejmste/80353

Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic. Edward Arnold.

Hammond, J.M. and Gibbons, P. (2005, April). Putting scaffolding to work: The contribution of
         scaffolding in articulating ESL education. Prospect, 20(1), 6-30.

Harper, C. and de Jong, E. (2004). Misconceptions about teaching English-language learners.
         Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 48(2), 152-162.

Kang, J. (2022). Transfer of knowledge across genres and media: Investigating L2 learners'
         multiple composing practices. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 56, 101096.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101096

MacDonald, R. and Crowther, D.T. (2023). Making science multilingual: Scaffolding for
         equitable engagement in science. In de Oliveira, L. C. & Westerlund, R. (Eds), Science
         teacher preparation in content-based second language acquisition (pp. 63-79).
         Routledge.

Lemke, J. L. (2003). Mathematics in the middle: Measure, picture, gesture, sign, and word. In
         M. Anderson, A. Saenz-Ludlow, S. Zellweger, & V. V. Cifarelli (Eds.), Educational
         perspectives on mathematics as semiosis: From thinking to interpreting to knowing, pp.
         215-234. Legas.

Marks, G. and Mousley, J. (1990). Mathematics education and genre: Dare we make the
         process writing mistake again? Language and Education, 4(2), 117-135.

Menon, P.K. (2023). Supporting Claim-Evidence-Reasoning in linguistically diverse secondary
         science classrooms. In F.S. Allaire and J.E. Killham (Eds.), Teaching and Learning
         Online: Science for Secondary Grade Levels, pp.91-106.: Information Age Publishing.

National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School
         Officers. (2010a). Common Core State Standards for English language arts and literacy
         in history/social studies, science, and technical subjects. Authors.
         https://learning.ccsso.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/ELA_Standards1.pdf

National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School
         Officers. (2010b). Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. Authors.
         https://learning.ccsso.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/ADA-Compliant-Math-
         Standards.pdf
Content Area Language and Literacy  106

National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices,
         crosscutting concepts, and core ideas. The National Academies Press.
         https://doi.org/10.17226/13165

NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. The
         National Academies Press.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2006). PISA 2006. Assessing
         scientific, reading and mathematical literacy: a framework for PISA 2006. Author.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2019). PISA 2018 Assessment
         and Analytical Framework. PISA, OECD Pubs. https://doi.org/10.1787/b25efab8-en

Osborne, J. (2005). The role of argument in science education. In K. Boerma, M. Goedhart, O.
         de Jong, and H. Eijkelhof (Eds.), Research and the quality of science education
         (pp.367-380). Springer.

Osborne, J. (2006). Towards a science education for all: The role of ideas, evidence and
         argument. https://research.acer.edu.au/research_conference_2006/9

Park, J. C. (2021). Cultivating STEAM Literacy: Emphasizing the Implementation of the Arts
         through Reading Practices Supporting the Asian Diaspora. Asia-Pacific Science
         Education, 7(2), 586-614.

Scott, P.F. & Mortimer, E.H. (2005). Meaning making in high school science classrooms: A
         framework for analysing meaning making interactions. In K. Boerma, M. Goedhart, O.
         de Jong, and H. Eijkelhof (Eds.), Research and the quality of science education (pp.
         395-406). Springer.

Schleppegrell, M.J. (2007). The linguistic challenges of mathematics teaching and learning: A
         research review. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 23(2), p.139-159.

Swain, M. (2005). The output hypothesis: Theory and research. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of
         Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning (pp. 495-508). Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates, Inc. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410612700-38

Toulmin, S.E. (1958/2003). The uses of argument. Cambridge University Press.

Virginia Department of Education. (2012). Sound.
         https://www.doe.virginia.gov/testing/sol/standards_docs/science/2010/lesson_plans/
         physical_sci/force_motion/sess_PS-8ab.pdf

Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
         Edited by M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner & E. Souberman. Harvard Press.

WIDA. (2020). WIDA English language development standards framework, 2020 edition:
         Kindergarten-grade 12. Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.
         https://wida.wisc.edu/sites/default/files/resource/WIDA-ELD-Standards-Framework-
         2020.pdf
Content Area Language and Literacy  107

Appendix A.

             Original Lesson Plan
Content Area Language and Literacy  108
Content Area Language and Literacy  109
Content Area Language and Literacy  110
Content Area Language and Literacy  111
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                           112

 Appendix B.

                                             LACI Revised Lesson Plan

Grade Level: 9-12th grade
Subject Area: Physics
Lesson Title: Investigating Sound
Duration of the Lesson: 1 day 90 minute block or 4 days of 30 min blocks

State Content Standard              HS-PS4-1. Use mathematical representations to support a
                                    claim regarding relationships among the frequency,
What standard(s) are most           wavelength, and speed of waves traveling in various media.
relevant to the learning goals?

Content Objectives (related to      Science & Engineering Practice Standards:
the subject matter central focus)
                                    3. Planning and Carrying Out Investigations
Language Objectives (related to
key language function, task, or     5. Using Mathematics and Computational Thinking
skill)
                                    7. Engaging in Argument from Evidence
ELD Standard(s)/WIDA
Standards                           Students will be able to discuss the characteristics of sound
e.g., WIDA or state ELPD            waves (e.g., frequency, wavelength, and speed of waves)
standard[s] that are the target of  and to use and construct investigations that will illustrate the
student learning.                   phenomena of sound.

                                    In small groups, students will use T-tables to record data
                                    from various investigations and then use CER graphic
                                    organizers with sentence frames to make claims about the
                                    results and support the claims.

                                    ELD-SC.9-12.Argue.Expressive
                                    Students will construct scientific explanations that: describe
                                    reliable and valid evidence from multiple sources, establish
                                    neutral or objective stance in how results are communicated,
                                    summarize and refine solutions referencing scientific
                                    knowledge.
                                    ELD-MA.9-12 Explain.Expressive
                                    Students will construct mathematical explanations that:
                                    introduce concept or entity, share solutions with others,
                                    describe data and/or approach used to solve a problem,
                                    state reasoning used to generate own or alternate solutions.

Instructional Strategies and Learning Tasks

Description of what the teacher (you) will be doing and/or what the students will be doing.

Phase 1: Building Shared             Have class brainstorm verbally: "What do you think of

Knowledge of the Topic              when you hear/see the word sound?"

                                     Show introductory video:

10 Minutes                          https://www.pasco.com/products/guides/sound-waves
Content Area Language and Literacy  113

         Connection           Conduct whole-group discussion asking students what
         Culture                  they know about sound
         Code-Breaking
         Challenge            Provide students a transcript of the video from Phase 1
         Community/           Allow students time to identify vocabulary with which they
         Collaboration
         Classroom                are unfamiliar
         Interactions         Present as many pictures as possible for key terms in the

Phase 2: Sustained                text. Be sure to highlight sound, pitch, wavelength, and
Reading                           frequency
                              Simultaneously write the vocabulary and key terms on the
10 Minutes                        board
                              Conduct class dialogue, having students practice using
         Connection               adjectives they already know to describe sound and
         Culture                  clarify pitch.
         Code-Breaking
         Challenge       Do Introduction Lab as a whole class:
         Community/           Distribute copies of 2-column T-tables and CER graphic
         Collaboration            organizer to students.
         Classroom            Have them label the columns of the table for the lab:
         Interactions             Sound #1 and Sound #2.
                              Divide class into small groups of 3-4 students each.
Phase 3: Deconstruction       Have each group take one wire hanger and tie a 15 cm
                                  string to one end of the hanger, and tie another 15 cm
10 Minutes                        string to the other end of the hanger. Tie loops on the
                                  loose ends of the strings just large enough to fit an
         Connection               index finger through. Place the index finger of each
         Culture                  hand through a loop.
         Code-Breaking        One person in each group should knock the hanger into
         Challenge                a desk and have the other group members listen for the
         Community/               sound, paying attention to the vibrations and materials.
         Collaboration        Have each group describe the sound by recording their
         Classroom                responses under Sound #1 column
         Interactions             Most students will answer that the sound is very faint.
                                  Students may be able to feel it through the string on
                                  their fingers because the wire is vibrating.
                              Have the groups place their fingers in their ears and
                                  have the same group members repeat striking the
                                  hanger into a desk.
                              Have each group describe this sound by recording their
Content Area Language and Literacy  114

Phase 4: Joint                   responses under Sound #2 column
Construction                     They should hear a gong-like sound that is much louder
40 Minutes                       than the prior situation.
                             Have groups share their responses as a class and create
         Connection              a combined T-table for the class. Help them focus their
         Culture                 notes to include vibration and materials.
         Code-Breaking       Follow-up question: Which sound was louder?
         Challenge
         Community/                    Present mentor response (1 paragraph - claim, 3
         Collaboration                     reasons using evidence from the T-table,
         Classroom                         conclusion), using CER anchor charts/graphic
         Interactions                      organizer

Phase 5: Collaborative  Have students conduct 2nd Station Lab: Stringed Instruments
Construction                 Have students return to the same small groups
15 Minutes                   Distribute 3-column T-tables and label the columns
                                 Band,
         Connection              Wavelength, and Description.
                             Provide each group with 2 rubber bands (same 2
                                 thicknesses for each group).
                             Have the groups measure the length of their thinner
                                 rubber bands (Band #1) and record the measurement in
                                 the table.
                             Then have the groups pluck the bank and describe their
                                 observations in the table.
                             Ask students to keep the same tightness but create a
                                 shorter wavelength. (They should do this by making the
                                 rubber band shorter by putting their fingers in the
                                 middle of it.)
                             Have the groups measure the wavelength of the band
                                 (finger to finger), pluck it, and note the measurements
                                 and differences.
                             Have students pull the rubber band tighter and pluck,
                                 recording the wavelength and differences.
                             Have students try a thicker rubber band (Band #2) and
                                 complete three rounds of plucking in the same way as
                                 Band #1, recording the wavelengths and descriptions.
                             Follow-up question: Which rubber band and wavelength
                                 had the higher pitch?
                                       Have groups think about a 1-paragraph response
                                           using T-tables and CER anchor charts/graphic
                                           organizer
                                       Have class co-construct a response (teacher
                                           scribes)

                             In small groups, students will complete the remaining 4
                                 stations, rotating every 10 minutes:
                                       Musical Test Tubes (sounds of test tubes &
                                           beakers)
                                       Sound Vibrations (various wavelengths between
                                           tuning fork & table tennis balls)
Content Area Language and Literacy  115

         Culture                       Sound Boards (pitches from music boxes)
         Code-Breaking                 The Reversing Pitch (striking vs. blowing across a
         Challenge
         Community/                        flask of water)
         Collaboration       During each station, have groups use T-tables for
         Classroom
         Interactions            recording their data and observations
                             Groups will work collaboratively to develop 1-paragraph
Phase 6: Independent
Construction                     arguments for each station
                        Note: The mentor texts from deconstruction and joint
         Connection     construction should remain accessible through student notes.
         Culture
         Code-Breaking  Each student will begin writing a 5-paragraph essay responding
         Challenge      to: Why does a guitar or a piano need to have a body or case to
         Community/     protect its strings?
         Collaboration
         Classroom           Review with the class how to expand the CER routine for
         Interactions            a full essay
                                       Specify in the conclusion paragraph how what
                                           they learned in the day's class can be connected
                                           to music in their individual cultures

                             Class notes and writing should be used as exemplars
                             Students should complete a rough draft for homework

                                 (revisions next class session)

                                                      Contributors

Dr. Karen L. Terrell, Loyola University Maryland, klterrell@loyola.edu

Dr. Karen Terrell is the Assistant Professor of Mathematics Education at Loyola University
Maryland. The mission of providing high-quality education for all has guided her teaching
practice, service, and research, as evidenced by the varied experiences throughout her career
since 2000. She has taught high-school mathematics, middle-school mathematics, and both
undergraduate and graduate courses. She also has served as a Turnaround School
Mathematics Coach for Boston Public Schools, and she later consulted for schools in
Massachusetts and Rhode Island as well as the Massachusetts Department of Youth Services.
She received her Doctor of Philosophy degree from Boston College in 2012. Her specialties
include mathematics education, content and language integration, and assessment. Her
research interests include these topics as well as genre pedagogy and technology integration
for diverse learners. Dr. Terrell belongs to the AERA, TESOL, and NCTM professional
organizations, as well as state affiliates, and currently serves as the 2nd Vice President of
GATESOL.

Tara Willging, Virginia Commonwealth University, willgingtm@vcu.edu

Tara M. Willging is a doctoral student at the Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond,
Virginia. She is a member of the Multilingual Learners in Schools research group at VCU,
contributing to book chapters, articles, and presented at VATESOL 2021 and SETESOL 2022.
She is a teaching assistant for the graduate Methods for Teaching MLs course at VCU. She is a
practicing ESOL teacher and has been teaching at the elementary level for the past six years.
Content Area Language and Literacy  116

Her research interests include assets-based pedagogy with multilingual learners and family
engagement with multilingual communities.

Allessandra Elisabeth dos Santos, Virginia Commonwealth University/Federal University of
Sergipe, alle25@academico.ufs.br

Allessandra Elisabeth dos Santos is a visiting scholar at Virginia Commonwealth University
(VCU) and a Ph.D. student from the Federal University of Sergipe (UFS), Brazil. Her research
focuses on artificial intelligence and English language writing. She holds a Master's degree in
Education from UFS and a Post-Baccalaureate Diploma in Education from the University of
Winnipeg, Canada. She has 26 years of experience in TESOL/TEFL as a teacher, teacher
educator, and an academic coordinator. Allessandra holds a CAPES scholarship and is an
affiliate of the Multilingual Learners in Schools (VCU) and TECLA: Technologies, Education
and Linguistics (UFS) research groups.

Destini Braxton, St. Mary's College of Maryland, dnbraxton@smcm.edu

Dr. Destini Braxton is a Visiting Assistant Professor at St. Mary's College of Maryland. She
served five years as a special education mathematics teacher for Richmond Public Schools.
She received her Ph.D. in Educational Psychology at Virginia Commonwealth University.
During her time as a special education teacher, she worked closely with students who were
dually identified as multilingual learners and students with a disability. During her doctoral
journey, she was a member of the Multilingual Learners in Schools lab, led by Dr. Luciana de
Oliveira, and Motivation in Context Lab, led by Dr. Sharon Zumbrunn. Her research examines
how motivational beliefs, student emotions, and trust impact teacher-student relationships
and engagement for underrepresented students in STEM while positively addressing the
overrepresentation of Black and Latinx students with learning disabilities.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                      117

                                                       Chapter 6
Developing Critical Thinking and Language Skills through Project-based Learning and

                                          the Knowledge Framework
                                      Tammy Slater and Gulbahar Beckett
                             Iowa State University of Science and Technology

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

    · Know the basic concepts of critical thinking, project-based
         learning, Appraisal Theory, and the Knowledge Framework.

    · Examine why these concepts are a critical part of WIDA-based
         teaching.

    · Analyze two detailed plans for teaching the language of critical
         thinking through project-based learning.

    · Integrate language and content through thinking skills and
         associated language with the Knowledge Framework.

                                                       Introduction
         Critical thinking (CT) skills are one of five Cs in the Cambridge Life Competencies
Framework (2020) along with Creativity, Collaboration, Communication, and Competencies
for digital literacy. CT skills are honed by asking questions, gathering and evaluating
information, and drawing evidence-based conclusions, all tasks that require the ability to
interpret and use language, and thus we can consider teaching CT as falling within the WIDA
framework in alignment with TESOL (2019) standards. Developing critical thinking skills is a
goal of modern education at all levels, but information about the language of CT--and ideas
that teachers can use to help teach the language of CT within the context of their own subject
areas--is not often available. This chapter aims to address that lack with ideas that can also
promote the development of the other four Cs.
         Teaching language, according to the WIDA Standards Framework (WIDA, 2020), is
best done in the context of age-appropriate subject matter so that academic language and
content can be developed simultaneously (TESOL, 2019). Such subject matter exploration is

 Editors' note: This chapter was double-blind, peer-reviewed prior to online publication.
Content Area Language and Literacy  118

naturally promoted through Project-based Learning (PBL), an approach that provides a
context for learners to learn and produce language in real-life contexts. Research on PBL has
revealed improvements in participants' problem-solving and decision-making skills as they
ask questions and gather, evaluate, and report the information they have explored. In this
way, PBL and CT fit together in that teaching CT best occurs by engaging students in projects
that allow investigations of student-chosen interests within subject content.

         Moreover, projects are educational activities that can be organized through the
Knowledge Framework (KF), a linguistic model based on Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL)
and thus sees language as a resource for making meaning in context. This chapter aims to
promote an understanding of how the KF can help teachers develop their students' language
of CT by doing projects using the SFL concepts of field (what the KF addresses) and tenor, in
particular the notion of Appraisal. This chapter first summarizes each of the key areas
identified above--critical thinking, PBL, Appraisal, and KF--then offers ideas for projects that
can promote the identification, use, and development of the language of CT while building
language skills and content.

                                                    Critical Thinking
         Extensive research in general and second language education research shows that
Critical Thinking (CT) is seen as a 21st-century skill that must be taught to foster deeper
learning, higher-order thinking, and language development (Beckett, in press; 2023; Beckett
& Slater, 2020). Facione (1990) defines CT as an essential tool of inquiry and for deciphering
arguments with evidence, self-correction (Saxton et al. 2012), and `reflective self-criticism'
(Ennis, 1987). Paul and Elder (2006) see CT as "the art of analyzing and evaluating thinking"
(p. 4). For Savery (2006), CT is a "transferable higher order thinking skills necessary for
objectivity; logical, justified, and persuasive reasoning; recognition of and understanding for
bias correction; and inductive theory development" (cited in Beckett, in press, p. 8).
         As pointed out by Saxton et al. (2012), CT is crucial in all levels of education,
workforce, for "responsible citizenry" (Dewey, 1916), and individual well-being in this post-
truth era when there is an increasing need for filtering irrelevant/incorrect information. CT
development must be fostered with systematic and intentional deep learning with
sophisticated educational activities contextualized in subject area contents. It should also
focus on moral and ethical issues (Facione, 1990) through project work. Such activities and
Content Area Language and Literacy  119

well-designed project work can help cultivate CT skills development and improvement
"through a metacognitive process of asking vital questions; gathering, assessing, interpreting
information; and drawing `well-reasoned conclusions and solutions..." (Beckett, in press).

         The Cambridge Life Competencies Framework (2020) defines CT as analyzing,
understanding, evaluating ideas and arguments, solving problems, and making decisions. It
also sees CT skills as having instrumental value for standardized tests (e.g., IELTS), developing
increased linguistic awareness (e.g., noticing), and social awareness (e.g., understanding and
managing different points of view) in the safe space of second language learning
environment. In practice, however, language development is rarely the focus of CT in general
education. Often in second language education, a CT-focus is seen as an opportunity for
practicing language skills and is taught as such with a form-focused language-teaching
mentality (e.g., Opp-Beckman, 2019; Üstünlüog lu, 2004). Even helpful SFL examples which
examine stance and carry out critical discourse analysis on school texts have typically focused
on a language analytic approach (e.g., Derewianka & Jones, 2016; Fang & Schleppegrell,
2008; Schleppegrell, 2004; Schleppegrell & Achugar, 2003; Schleppegrell, Achugar, &
Oteíza, 2004; Unsworth, 1999). SFL has also been used as a theory to help readers critically
view images, showing that there are times when the image placed to support a text may not
in fact be supporting it (see Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996).

         The importance of CT, along with other 21st century skills, cultivated through project-
based learning (PBL), is evident in the national and international funded curriculum reform
and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields) establishment in
general education (see Beckett et al, 2015; 2016; Beckett, Slater, & Mohan, 2020). In second
language education, it shows in the professional organization standards and guidelines (e.g.,
ACTFL, TESOL, WIDA, and The Cambridge Life Competencies Framework) as well as practical
CT training efforts, and emerging research (see Beckett, in press; 2023). The standards and
guidelines for TESOL teacher candidates promote student-centered L2 and foreign language
curricular that focus on both language and subject matter content delivered with digital
resources and projects (TESOL, 2019).

         What we see, especially in L2 education, is a realization of the importance of CT and
the desire to teach it, but there is a need for awareness and training regarding how this can
be done. Such need for training includes awareness-raising of CT, not from a second
language acquisition view that sees it as a task for practicing language proficiency, but from a
Content Area Language and Literacy  120

systemic functional linguistics (SFL) view that sees CT as a language socialization educational
activity carried out through project-based learning (PBL) approach (Beckett, 2023).

                                               Project Based Learning
         Project-Based Learning (PBL) is an educational approach for student-centered
experiential learning in authentic contexts. Currently, it is closely associated with teaching and
learning of 21st century skills--critical thinking, creativity, collaboration, communication, and
competence in digital learning competency, "through planning, researching (empirical
and/or document), analyzing and synthesizing data, and reflecting on the process and
product orally and/or in writing by comparing, contrasting, and justifying alternatives"
(Beckett, 1999, p. 4). As such, the PBL approach is for deep learning and higher order thinking
skills development in authentic subject matter content areas (Beckett, 2023; Kuhn, 1999),
which ties PBL strongly to the goals of the WIDA framework as well as ACTFL and TESOL
standards. A CT project can serve as a "language socialization activity or sociocultural
contexts for teaching and learning curriculum content, school and social cultures" (Beckett, in
press, p. 12). Additionally, project work or projects also serve as contexts in which L2 students
learn project related language functionally by connecting the form contextually as they learn
the content material (Dewey, 1926; Dewey & Dewey, 1915; Mohan, 1986) and 21st century
skills associated language (Beckett, 2023). Through such projects, students gain transferable
skills and knowledge necessary for further schooling and life in society (Beckett, 1999) by also
learning how to learn.
         This language socialization view (Ochs, 1988) is in line with Hallidayan Systemic
Functional Linguistics (SFL) that sees language as a resource for making meaning (Halliday,
2004), not as the decontextualized acquisition of vocabulary and grammar. Mohan, Slater,
Beckett, and Tong's (2015) illustration of adult students' work with action discourse, reporting
discourse, and expounding discourse using theory-practice structure is a good empirical
example of how this works with the conclusion that students improved their understanding of
content and their ability to discuss that understanding. Slater and Beckett's (2019) project unit
called "Applying for graduate school" serves as a practical example that shows how an SFL-
informed content-based technology-mediated project can provide specific language
socialization for L2 students seeking acceptance into English-medium graduate programs.
Content Area Language and Literacy  121

         However, as Beckett (in press) points out, teaching and learning CT in curriculum
contexts from an SFL perspective can be challenging, especially for teachers who are used to
teaching discrete language or content skills. Yet, ideas for and examples of SFL-informed CT
projects from a language socialization perspective, a combination that the WIDA framework
advances, are scarce. The only work we are aware of to date is that of Beckett (2023), who
shows how CT may be taught in a social studies class through a social media project from an
SFL perspective utilizing Appraisal (Martin & White, 2005) to research and articulate CT as
well as social studies content and the language associated with digital technology. To help
teachers and students move beyond turning CT into another language practice task, more CT
project ideas, examples, and strategies are needed.

                                                         Appraisal
         Appraisal Theory is situated within Halliday's main theory of Systemic Functional
Linguistics as part of the Interpersonal Metafunction. Its development beyond Halliday's
earlier work (e.g., Halliday, 2004) was furthered by Jim Martin and Peter White (see Martin &
White, 2005; White, 2015) to provide a theory for examining how attitude, both positive and
negative as well as the strength of those polarities, can be constructed through language.
Appraisal theory, as White (2015) states, "offers the possibility of new insights into how texts
enact individual and collective identities... and into the workings of texts which function to
persuade and influence public opinion" (p. 6). In other words, Appraisal analysis helps to
identify the stances that speakers and writers adopt about the ideas they are presenting. An
understanding by students of this type of language use and how to identify it is an important
skill to evaluate the truthfulness and biases of what they are hearing or reading, which is part
of critical thinking. Although it is not the intention to present the full theory in this chapter, we
describe some of the key terms within the theory and offer sources that provide a fuller
description for interested readers. We also advise that even a basic understanding of the
kinds of resources mentioned in the following two paragraphs is sufficient to bring students'
attention to the types of language that can help them become more critically aware of biases
and deceptions and thus help develop their CT skills. We do not advocate teaching Appraisal
theory as a discrete topic; developing projects that can naturally draw attention to evaluative
language in use as well as having students use this language is the goal. Ideas for such
projects are presented later.
Content Area Language and Literacy  122

         Appraisal language, or the language of evaluation (Martin & White, 2005), works
together with another element of the Interpersonal Metafunction: Mood. Simply put, Mood
provides us with resources to interact in the form of the grammatical constructions we use, or
whether the clause is in the form of a statement, a question, or a command (Halliday, 2004). A
command signifies a strong power relationship by the person giving the command, whereas
a question is much more interactive, inviting dialogue or thought from the interlocutor. A
statement is often understood as an indication of fact, or the speaker's/writer's belief of what
may be reality. As an example, most clauses in information reports are constructed as
statements. But as one of our project ideas suggests, these statements may still require a
great deal of critical thinking! Our goal in this chapter is to heighten teachers' understandings
of the importance of having students think critically about what they hear and read at an age-
appropriate level, which in turn helps students learn connections between language and
content.

         Although important, grammatical forms are not the only resources we need to interact
successfully. We also express feelings and opinions ("Attitude"), and we can make these
attitudes stronger or weaker ("Graduation"). We also have resources for opening possibilities
or closing them ("Engagement"). Attitude can be further defined as describing emotions or
how people feel ("affect"), evaluating things and happenings ("appreciation"), and judging
people's behavior ("judgment"). Graduation can gain further distinction by increasing or
decreasing the "force" of the utterance (using words such as slightly or totally) or the "focus,"
which can be sharpened (e.g., a true story) or softened (e.g., kind of sorry). Finally,
Engagement can be considered monoglossic (a single voice, related most closely to the bare
statement of the abovementioned mood system) or heteroglossic, made up of many voices
and thus open to other possibilities. This latter resource involves attribution to other
possibilities, both vague (e.g., some people say, they say, it's said) and specific (e.g., the King
said, Martin & White (2005) stated). Attribution can be an interesting area of critical thinking
because the choice of verbal process used in texts often reflects the author's stance. Consider
the writer's commitment to the information presented in the original source when s/he uses
the author stated versus the author implied.

         The preceding section has briefly outlined the various aspects of the Appraisal
Network with the aim of showing the types of language that may be important to notice when
thinking about developing students' language of critical thinking. Whereas we emphasize
Content Area Language and Literacy  123

that teachers do not need to be proficient in the functional analysis of Appraisal language to
help their students understand stance in texts, the resources we have included in this section
are excellent reading to hone analytical skills. The next section will describe Mohan's
Knowledge Framework and show how Appraisal fits into the six boxes that make up a social
practice.

                                        The Knowledge Framework (KF)
         Grounded in Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL), the KF is a heuristic that educators
and materials developers can use to ensure and demonstrate how language, content, key
visuals, and thinking skills (including critical thinking) are integrated in ways that can help all
students learn. Created by Bernard Mohan (Mohan, 1986), the KF revolves around the
concept of an educational activity or social practice, such as a project or a unit plan.
Successful participation in these activities involves both action (practice) and understanding
(theory).
         Mohan's KF appears as six boxes, with the top three reflecting the knowledge
structures representing theory (Classification, Principles, and Evaluation) and the bottom the
knowledge structures of practice (Description, Sequence, and Choice). Each theory/practice
pair has a close relationship. Description relates to Classification in that our ability to describe
is based on our knowledge of the appropriate classifications (think that having classifications
of color, size, materials, and birds allows us to describe something we see as a large, pink,
plastic flamingo). Similar relationships hold between Sequence and Principles (we can
observe a sequence of events but understanding it depends on our knowledge of causes
and effects), and Choice and Evaluation (we make choices based on previous or current
evaluations of those choices). For an easy-to-digest description of the KF, see Slater and
Gleason (2011).
         It is this third pair of Choice and Evaluation that lends itself most obviously to the
language of CT and Appraisal, although as our brief presentation of Appraisal language
above suggests, and as we will show in our project ideas which follow, all boxes are involved
to make up a full social practice, of which a project is an educational example. This is most
obvious when we consider the Mood system, the grammatical structure of the clause, which
can be used to construct any of the knowledge structures. But there are interesting questions
that arise particularly with the knowledge structure of description: How we describe
Content Area Language and Literacy  124

something may also provide evidence as to how we feel about what we are describing and
thus blur the distinction between Description and Evaluation. Compare the two following
clauses as an example: The sea cucumber is spikey (Description). The sea cucumber is ugly
(Description? Evaluation?). Whereas both may be a description of the animal and thus fall into
the knowledge structure of Description, the second carries a much stronger speaker's
Evaluation. Bringing students' attention to these types of meanings is an important part of
teaching CT, and from a KF perspective, can help students recognize when Attitude (specially
Appreciation) is being constructed outside of its usual Evaluation box. In the next section, we
describe two projects that aim to raise consciousness of this type of language use.

         The KF is a useful organizational tool for developing unit plans and projects and has
been put into practice, researched, and evaluated at various levels of schooling (see Slater,
2023, for a comprehensive review of the literature). While the KF as an instructional organizer
has recently been combined with project-based language learning (e.g., Slater & Beckett,
2019), and research into teaching PBL has shown that teachers use the language of the KF
despite not drawing attention to it in their instruction (Slater, 2020), little has been done to
present educators with models that merge the two. Moreover, despite a strong connection
between CT and SFL--critical discourse analysis as a field was linked early on to SFL as
Halliday's work because SFL is well able to illustrate "the ways that semantic networks carry
meaning potential in social and cultural contexts" (Flowerdew & Richardson, 2017, p. 8)--there
are few examples of how to blend PBL, CT, Appraisal, and the KF into successful teaching
plans that clearly reflect the values of the WIDA framework and align with ACTFL as well as
TESOL standards. Our next section will present two teaching ideas we hope will address this
need.

                          Blending the Theories into Practice: Two CT Projects
         The following two project ideas utilize the KF in both the planning and integration
stages so that students can hone their own understandings of the various thinking skills and
language of the KF as they explore content and the way this content is presented. The project
ideas will draw attention to CT and the language being used to project a stance and influence
an audience. Note that these projects also serve to address the other four Cs of the
Cambridge Life Competencies: creativity, collaboration, communication, and potentially
digital competencies (based on the teacher's and students' technological knowledge and
Content Area Language and Literacy  125

opportunities). The first project--Truth in Advertising--is more teacher-controlled as students
are directed to watch a short "advertisement" of a make-believe animal and discuss what
makes the ad believable. The second project also relates to advertising, using a KF heuristic
to plan an advertising campaign of the students' choice and to make linguistic choices that
can subtly and/or strongly influence people's decisions. Each of these project ideas will be
described in sufficient detail for teachers to implement age-appropriately. It is our hope that
these two projects will spur our readers on to create further teaching plans using similar
concepts.
Project 1: Truth in Advertising

         The goal for this project is to have students question what they see and hear and to
gain a basic understanding of how information, both oral and visual, can be used to persuade
people to accept the content. By engaging in this project, students can potentially develop
language and content that can be used to think critically beyond the project. Note that what
we consider to be the "pre-project" stage of this idea can be a very good teaching plan on its
own, one that can be used with younger students.

    1. Pre-project 1 (establishing what students bring to the lesson): Engage students in a
         discussion about the kinds of advertisements they see on TV and whether they believe
         what they see. More importantly, ask why they believe certain ideas and not others,
         drawing out whether they notice anything about the language of the ads.

    2. Pre-project 2 (presenting an ad for discussion): Show students an ad that can be
         analyzed easily for believability. One recommendation is to show an advertisement by
         Concerned Children's Advertisers ( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TijcoS8qHIE ).

    3. Pre-project 3 (discussion of the ad): First, ask the students if they believe the
         information presented in the advertisement, "House Hippo Commercial." Ask why or
         why not, eliciting what it might be about the language or the images that cause them
         to respond as they do. Create a KF and elicit the information to put in the boxes (see
         Figure 1.). You may want to treat the pairs together if your students have not
         previously been introduced to the KF so as not to confuse them when the goal of the
         lesson is not affected by the finer distinctions of the KF. The differences can be
         introduced gradually.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                               126

Figure 1. House Hippo               PRINCIPLES      EVALUATION
           CLASSIFICATION

· North American House     · if provoked...         · looked really real
Hippo                      · ...to search for food  · couldn't be true
· favorite foods are                                · it's good to...
· nests made from...       · comes out at night
· are timid                · defends territory      · you knew
· are rarely seen          · builds nests           · think about
· nests are soft           · sleeps 16 hours a day  · ask questions

DESCRIPTION                         SEQUENCE        CHOICE

Also note that according to Appraisal theory, the mode of the text in the ad
(almost all statements) provides a stance of authority, much like science texts
do through information reports, thus leading to an evaluation of truthfulness.
Moreover, the only examples from the right column are from the woman's
commentary on the ad.

4. Pre-project 4 (comparing the ad to what is real): Have students search for
    hippopotamuses and create a KF like the one that was constructed from the ad in
    Figure 1 (the evaluation and choice boxes are not needed). Elicit from the students
    the differences between the ad and real hippos and elicit the types of questions that
    students can ask to ascertain the truthfulness of the ad.

5. Project (creating an ad to bring awareness of false information): Have students work in
    groups (collaborative) to identify something they would like to "twist" in a similar way
    to house hippos and have them create a text for a similar ad (this task requires
    creativity as well as collaboration) using information they can create from searching
    the Internet (digital competence). Depending on the technological and/or artistic
    abilities, student groups can create a multimodal ad to show their peers. Note also
    that in creating the ad, they are practicing the language of information reports (see
    Derewianka, 1990).

6. Post-project (presenting the ads to others): Have students present their ads to their
    peers and get peers to comment on the language that helps them decide if the
    material is believable or not.
Content Area Language and Literacy  127

Project 2: An Advertising Campaign
           The idea for this as a CT project comes from recalling English-as-a-second-language

students creating ad campaigns using an activity from George Rooks' English-as-a-foreign-
language teaching book, The non-stop discussion workbook: Problems for intermediate and
advanced students of English (Rooks, 1981). Rooks' unit (pp. 64-66) provides a template for
students to follow as they attempt to design a new mouthwash and plan its marketing
campaign. As a CT project, the rationale is to develop students' CT skills by offering
opportunities to recognize and use the language of Appraisal while understanding how the
language of the various thinking skills works together to help construct how we interpret the
content. Whereas our previous project idea targeted the recognition of false information and
how it can be presented to convince an audience that a particular view is truthful, this project
more strongly utilizes the language of persuasion and how marketers can influence
consumers. The second project can be introduced later than the first, with the teacher
reminding students of concepts from the earlier project with the goal of eliciting students'
broader understandings from their personal experiences. It can also be offered to older
students on its own.

    1. Pre-project 1 (examining other advertising techniques): Students' attention should first
         be drawn to existing ads. Have them work in groups to find television ads that they
         find enticing and to discuss and decide why they are appealing (this uses critical
         thinking, digital competency, collaboration, and communication). A simple KF for
         each of these ads the groups have targeted can provide a solid foundation to see if
         there are similarities among the ads in how products are presented. Creating a KF
         diagram also draws students' attention to the language that constructs each of these
         thinking skills, connecting this language to the content of the advertisements, a task
         advocated by the WIDA as teaching academic language within age-appropriate
         content. The following questions can be useful to guide students in the creation of
         these KFs:
              a. How are the products classified--what words tell you this?--or are you left to
                   figure out what kinds of products they are? (Classification)
              b. What words are used to describe the products? Are these words evaluative in
                   some way? If so, how? Or are they "neutral"? (Description)
Content Area Language and Literacy  128

              c. Are there any "conditions" on the products, such as "If you have/like X, our
                   product does Y"? Are these explicit (through language) or implicit (through
                   images)? (Principles) Are these conditions effective, do you think? (Evaluative)

              d. What is the general sequence of events regarding the product or the ad?
                   (Sequence) Do you think the sequences that you have identified are effective in
                   presenting the product? How? (Evaluation)

              e. What is it about the ad that makes you want to buy or use this product? Is there
                   anything there that makes you hesitate or question the product? (Choice)

              f. Based on the ad you chose, what do you think about the quality or usefulness
                   of this product? What words or images cause you to think the way you do?
                   (Evaluation)

         The groups of students now have a small database of KF-organized information that
         they can use to make decisions about the product that they want to design and create
         ads for.
    2. Project (Create a product and advertisement): Now that the groups have engaged in
         critical thinking about the various ads they have watched and analyzed, their creative
         project is now to use the information about evaluative language (and potentially
         images) that they have collected through their analysis to create an ad for the product
         they have chosen to design. This project involves creativity, collaboration,
         communication, and digital competence as well as their growing understanding of
         critical thinking to successfully complete. The students' final products for this project
         can be a "magazine ad" as well as a 30- to 60-second "television ad."
    3. Post-project (Presentation of the projects): Students present their products and
         advertising campaigns. Once all presentations have been done, the class together can
         discuss the types of questions identified above to reinforce the concept of thinking
         critically.
Depending on time and interest, you may have students make both a hard-sell and a soft-sell
ad and discuss the differences between the two, or have the class rank the above two types of
ads in terms of which was the most and least compelling and--most importantly--why they
think so based on what they heard.
Content Area Language and Literacy  129

                                                        Conclusion
         Our chapter has defined and blended the concepts of Critical Thinking, Project-based
Learning, SFL's Appraisal Network, and the Knowledge Framework. Using these, we have
offered two ideas for projects that can help students attend to the linguistic resources of
evaluation and learn to question what they see and hear, making critical thinking both the
topic and the goal of the two projects. In other words, we have created our projects to involve
age-appropriate subject matter to develop language and content in a functional way that also
teaches students to think critically about what they hear and see around them, thus adhering
to the WIDA framework and TESOL (2019) standards by offering a way to hone students'
understanding of language. Along with critical thinking, our projects also incorporate
communication, creativity, collaboration, and potential digital competence, thus addressing
the five Cs of the Cambridge Life Competencies Framework (2020). Our two projects are
suitable for a course in social justice, an English class, or a program for pre-service teachers,
but we acknowledge there are many projects that can be developed for any content, given
that all language presents a stance, even that of science and history, as Unsworth (1999)
shows. Below we will present several general classroom activities that we hope can lead to
the creation of further projects for our readers, projects that can incorporate functional
language use and age-appropriate subject matter using the Knowledge Framework in a way
that improves students' ability to think critically.
         Group debates on any topic can be designed as projects with the content organized
through the KF: Persuasion, which is typically at the heart of debates, involves stance, and
teachers can build in a post-debate discussion on the types of arguments and language that
may have convinced the audience to side with one argument or the other. By making the
debate an online debate, digital competence can be targeted as well as critical thinking,
creativity, communication, and collaboration. A mock court is another creative and
collaborative project that can invite critical thinking and the language of evaluation, and it can
be especially useful for learning history from a critical perspective. CT can also be
incorporated into jigsaw projects, where each student or pair or students researches one
aspect of a text or problem and then comes together with other students or pairs to discuss
the text or solve the problem. It can also be made salient through role plays and interviews
in which students "become" a famous person (alive or deceased) and classmate reporters
Content Area Language and Literacy  130

interview them. These types of projects can also promote critical thinking along with content
learning about that person's life.

         Language exists to allow us to interact and construct our understandings of the world,
and language pedagogy should thus reflect a meaning-focused approach that targets
students' real-world linguistic and content needs and hones their ability to question ideas
they do not comprehend or believe. Project-based learning addresses these requirements,
and when combined with Mohan's Knowledge Framework, it adopts an established linguistic
theory designed especially for the acquisition of language, content, and thinking skills.
Adopting project-based learning using the KF, such as the ones we have proposed in this
chapter, provides creative educational opportunities to focus on the development of critical
thinking skills simultaneously with language and content. Such a functional language-based
approach not only fits well within the goals of the WIDA (2020) and TESOL (2019) standards,
but also serves to teach students how to interact with the content they will hear and read
about daily in their futures, both in and out of classrooms.
Further Activities for Varied Age Levels

    1. Show an example of a television advertisement on identity theft. Have students find
         aspects of the language (grammar, tone) and visuals that create the feeling that these
         advertisements are a form of "scare tactics" to buy the product.

    2. Choose an animal. Make a T-chart that depicts "true" descriptions on one side and
         "biased" descriptions on the other. Discuss the differences and what the effect would
         be of having biased descriptions in an information report. (E.g., how do you draw
         "adorable" and "cute"?)

    3. Choose a sport that the students are interested in and enthusiastic about. Find (or
         create) short recounts of a game written from the perspectives of the students' team
         and the rival team. Have the students determine which perspective matches which
         team. What words can help them figure this out?

    4. Have students analyze an information report at their age level using the Knowledge
         Framework. Discuss how choice and evaluation are used (if they are) and why this
         would be the case (information reports are typically very "factual"). Engage in a
         discussion of what the information report would look like if there were too many
         evaluative words. Perhaps have the students alter an information report to write an
         evaluative one (see activity 2 above).
Content Area Language and Literacy  131

5. Choose a few letters to the editor and identify language that shows bias. Engage
    students in a discussion of why it is important to notice this type of language when
    they are passing information to others or voting. Is what they read always correct?

6. Examine social media to see how evaluative language is being used. Which thinking
    skills in the Knowledge Framework are most used? Why might this be the case (i.e.,
    what is the social media text attempting to do?)

7. Have students write a letter of recommendation for themselves. This genre is
    supposedly persuasive (although subtly so), so what language is used to achieve this?
    A good way to illustrate what NOT to do is to have fun going "over the edge" with
    evaluative language. (Younger students can analyze letters that the teacher has written
    about other characters, such as Santa Clause or a Halloween witch or a popular
    cartoon character, and have students match the character with the letter and justify
    how they know.)

Questions:
    1. How would you summarize the KF pairings of classification and description, principles
         and sequence, to students?
    2. Which of the above lesson ideas have you taken part in? What do you remember
         about it and how did it promote Critical Thinking (CT)?
    3. What pairing in the KF is Appraisal Theory most likely to apply to and why?
    4. How have you discussed "truth in advertising" with students in the past? How did you
         have them engage with the language of those texts?

                                                        References

Beckett, G.H. (1999). Project-based instruction in a Canadian secondary school's ESL classes:
         Goals and evaluations [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. University of British
         Columbia. https://circle.ubc.ca/bitstream/id/24487/ubc_ 1999-463176.pdf

Beckett, G.H. (2023). A Project for critical thinking and language development with social
         studies social media. Aligarh Journal of Linguistics, 12, 1-26.
         https://amu.ac.in/miscellaneous/aligarh-journal-of-linguistics

Beckett, G.H. (in press). Project-Based Learning for 21st Century Skills: The Five C's for L2
         Students. PUPIL: International Journal of Teaching, Education and Learning
Content Area Language and Literacy  132

Beckett, G.H., Hemmings, A. Maltbie, C., Wright, K., Sherman, M., Sersion, B., & Jorgenson, S.
         (2015). An evaluation study of the CincySTEM iTEST projects: Experience, peer
         support, professional development, and sustainability. Journal of STEM Teacher
         Education. 50 (1), 3-17.

Beckett, G.H., Hemmings, A. Maltbie, C., Wright, K., Sherman, M., & Sersion, B. (2016). Urban
         high school student engagement through CincySTEM iTEST projects. Journal of
         Science Education and Technology, 25(6), 995-1007-13. DOI 10.1007/s10956-016-
         96406

Beckett, G.H., & Slater, T. (Eds.). (2020). Global perspectives on project-based language
         learning, teaching, and assessment: Key approaches, technology tools, and
         frameworks. Routledge.

Beckett, G.H., Slater, T., & Mohan, B. (2020). Philosophical foundation, theoretical approaches,
         and gaps in the literature. In G.H. Beckett & T. Slater (Eds.). Global perspectives on
         project-based language learning, teaching, and assessment: Key approaches,
         technology tools, and frameworks (pp. 3-22). Routledge.

Cambridge Life Competencies Framework (2020). Critical Thinking.
         https://tinyurl.com/2xcd2m9t

Derewianka, B. (1990). Exploring how texts work. Primary English Teaching Association.

Derewianka, B., & Jones, P. (2016). Teaching language in context (2nd ed.). Oxford University
         Press.

Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education: An introduction to the philosophy of education.
         In J. Boydston (Ed.), The middle works of John Dewey (Vol. 9). Southern Illinois
         University Press.

Dewey, J. (1926). Democracy and education: An introduction to the philosophy of education.
         The Macmillan Company.

Dewey, J., & Dewey, E. (1915). Schools of to-morrow. J.M. Dent & Sons, Ltd.

Ennis, R. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and abilities. In J. Baron & R.
         Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: Theory and practice (pp. 9-26). Freeman.

Facione, P.A. (1990). Critical thinking: A statement of expert consensus for purposes of
         educational assessment and instruction (The Delphi report).
         https://philarchive.org/archive/faccta

Fang, Z., & Schleppegrell, M.J. (2008). Reading in secondary content areas: A language-based
         pedagogy. University of Michigan Press.

Flowerdew, J., & Richardson, J.E. (2017). Introduction. In J. Flowerdew and J.E. Richardson
         (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of critical discourse studies (pp. 1-11). Routledge.
Content Area Language and Literacy  133

Halliday, M.A.K. (2004). An Introduction to Functional Grammar (3rd ed.). Hodder Arnold.

Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design.
         Routledge.

Kuhn, D. (1999). A developmental model of critical thinking. Educational Researcher, 28(2),
         16-25+46.

Mohan, B. (1986). Language and content. Addison Wesley.

Mohan, B., Slater, T., Beckett, G., & Tong, E. (2015). Tasks, experiential learning, and meaning
         making activities. In M. Bygate (Ed.), Domains and directions in the development of
         TBLT: A decade of plenaries from the international conference (pp. 157-192). John
         Benjamins Publishing Company.

Martin, J., & White, P.R.R. (2005). The language of evaluation. Palgrave Macmillan.
         https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230511910

Ochs, E. (1988). Culture and language development: Language acquisition and language
         socialization in a Samoan village. Cambridge University Press.

Opp-Beckman, L. (2019). AE Live 5.1: Practical applications for critical thinking in English
         Language teaching and learning. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KQasuvL6OMw

Paul, R., & Elder, L. (2006). The miniature guide to critical thinking: Concepts and tools.
         https://www.brandonu.ca/student-services/files/2010/08/Miniture-Guide-to-Critical-
         Thinking.pdf

Rooks, G. (1981). The non-stop discussion workbook: Problems for intermediate and advanced
         students of English. Newbury House Publishers, Inc.

Savery, J.R. (2006). Overview of problem-based learning: Definitions and distinctions.
         Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-Based Learning, 1(1), 9-20. doi: 10.7771/1541-
         5015.1002

Saxton, E., Belanger, S., & Becker, W. (2012). The critical thinking analytic rubric (CTAR):
         Investigating intra-rater and inter-rater reliability of a scoring mechanism for critical
         thinking performance assessments. Assessing Writing, 17(4), 251-270. https
         ://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2012.07.002.

Schleppegrell, M.J. (2004). The Language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective.
         Lawrence Erlbaum.

Schleppegrell, M.J., & Achugar, M. (2003). Learning language and learning history: A function
         linguistics approach. TESOL Journal, 12(2), 21-27.
Content Area Language and Literacy  134

Schleppegrell, M.J., Achugar, M., & Oteíza, T. (2004). The grammar of history: Enhancing
         content-based instruction through a functional focus on language. TESOL Quarterly,
         38(1), 67-93.

Slater, T. (2023). A Knowledge Framework approach to linguistic research and teaching. In T.
         Slater (Ed.), Social practices in higher education: A Knowledge Framework approach to
         linguistic research and teaching (pp. 1-35). Equinox.

Slater, T. (2020). The Knowledge Framework: An organizational tool for highlighting the "LL"
         in technology-integrated PBLL. In G.H. Beckett & T. Slater (Eds.), Global perspectives
         on project-based language learning, teaching, and assessment: Key approaches,
         technology tools, and frameworks (pp. 185-203). Routledge.

Slater, T., & Beckett, G. (2019). Integrating language, content, technology, and skills
         development through project-based language learning: Blending frameworks for
         successful unit planning. MexTESOL Journal, 43(1),1-14.

Slater, T., & Gleason, J. (2011). Integrating language and content: The Knowledge Framework.
         In J. Morrison (Ed.), Conference proceedings of MidTESOL: Gateway to global
         citizenship (pp. 5-20). University of Saint Louis.
         www.midtesol.org/docs/MIDTESOLProceedings_2011.pdf

TESOL International Association. (2019). Standards for Initial TESOL Pre-K-12 Teacher
         Preparation Programs. https://tinyurl.com/53k5jyk2

Unsworth, L. (1999). Developing critical understanding of the specialised language of school
         science and history texts: A functional grammatical perspective. Journal of Adolescent
         & Adult Literacy, 42(7), 508-521.

Ustunluog lu, E. (2004). Language teaching through critical thinking and self-awareness.
         English Teaching Forum, 42(3), 1-8. https://tinyurl.com/2sv25nzf

White, P.R.R. (2015). Appraisal theory. The international encyclopedia of language and social
         interaction. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. DOI: 10.1002/9781118611463/wbielsi041

WIDA. (2020). WIDA English language development standards framework, 2020 edition
         kindergarten-grade 12. https://wida.wisc.edu/sites/default/files/resource/WIDA-ELD-
         Standards-Framework-2020.pdf

                                                      Contributors

Tammy Slater, Iowa State University of Science and Technology, tslater@iastate.edu

Tammy Slater, Associate Professor Emerita at Iowa State University, draws upon analytic
methods from Systemic Functional Linguistics, including Mohan's Knowledge Framework, to
explore the development of academic language through content- and project-based
teaching and learning, particularly regarding literacy education for English language learners.
Content Area Language and Literacy  135

She has published in several journals and coauthored chapters in several books. She
coedited Global perspectives on project-based language learning, teaching, and assessment:
Key approaches, technology tools, and frameworks (Routledge) and is anticipating the release
of her edited collection, Social practices in higher education: A Knowledge Framework
approach to linguistic research and teaching (Equinox).

Gulbahar Beckett, Iowa State University of Science and Technology, beckett@iastate.edu

Gulbahar H. Beckett is a Professor of Applied Linguistics and Technology/TESL at Iowa State
University of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on project-based second/foreign
language acquisition and socialization; content based second/foreign language; language
policies; technology integrated teaching and learning; and academic language and literacy.
Dr. Beckett has numerous publications, including her latest coedited book Global
perspectives on project-based language learning, teaching, and assessment: Key approaches,
technology tools, and frameworks (Routledge).
Content Area Language and Literacy                                               136

                                                   Chapter 7
Alternative Frameworks for Incorporation of Generative AI Usage as a Functional

                               Approach to Language Development
                                   Faika Tahir, Virginia Tech University

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

    · Understand what Generative AI platforms do.
    · Examine perspectives for and against use of AI for academic

         writing.
    · Evaluate ideas on increasing student motivation to write so

         that they do not depend upon AI for writing.
    · Determine how they might use AI in the classroom.

                                                       Introduction
         Skills in academic writing form a core foundation of all language classes and aim to
facilitate communication, documentation, and knowledge dissemination. The intrinsic
connection between reading and writing makes their combination an effective route for
achieving specific learning goals. It is important to recognize the intrinsic connection
between reading and writing, based on shared knowledge and cognitive processes, and
utilizing writing as a means to gain insights into reading and to improve comprehension of
texts produced by others (Graham and Hebert, 2010). However, research indicates that
writing motivation decreases as students' progress from one year of school to the next, and
further declines through middle and high school (Bruning and Horn, 2000; Koster et al.,
2015). Gallup surveys show that students' general motivation for schoolwork continuously
drops when progressing from elementary to high school (Gallup 2013), and the percentage
of engaged students diminishes from 74% of the student body in fifth grade to 34% at the
time of high school graduation (Gallup, 2017). With the decreasing motivation to write
English essays throughout their academic journey, students may lose sight of the value of
writing skills or view them as unimportant (James, Jao, and Berninger, 2016). Teachers of K-12

 Editors' note: This chapter was peer-reviewed prior to online publication.
Content Area Language and Literacy  137

classes dealing with issues of student engagement in the classroom are further concerned by
the use of generative Artificial intelligence (GAI) tools in classroom writing.

         Generative AI tools--such as Chat GPT, BARD, T5, BLOOM, GPT3, OPT, BERT, and
Roberta--and their use in education raise questions about their implications for educational
paradigms. The most popular current Large Language Model (LLM) Chat Generative Pre-
trained Transformer, or Chat GPT, following its debut on November 30, 2022, exceeded one
million subscribers within a mere week. Large Language Models or generative AI tools work
on unsupervised learning methods, as they dig into the data that is fed to them by their
developers and users and rearrange it into meaningful sentences without checking for its
veracity or authenticity. Their common aim is to generate, summarize, and translate text based
on user prompts (NVIDIA Corporation, 2023). What these generative AI tools primarily do is
retrieve English syntax based on a prompt by substituting pattern matching from already
existing information and arranging it into an order that makes sense. It is a significant
advancement that can produce articles in response to open-ended questions that are
comparable in quality to grammatically correct high school essays (Tufekci, 2022).

          The debate about using generative AI in the classroom is profoundly polarizing in
academia, where some see it as an educational apocalypse and fear of destruction of the
education system through AI-assisted cheating in assignments (Chatterjee & Dethlefs, 2023;
Stokel-Walker, 2022). Specifically, it may lead to the obsolescence of certain assessment
types, such as essays (Zhai, 2022). Others view it as a renaissance that provides equal
opportunities and accessibility for educators and students alike to access information and
automation by enhancing the footprint and quality of education (e.g., Pavlik, 2023; Zhai,
2022).

         The issue of using generative AI in the classroom is extremely critical for
multilanguage learning. Educators have to navigate issues to ensure students are involved in
writing, while also providing access to information and technology to develop language skills
in the presence of these generative AI models. Teachers are concerned about academic
integrity and cheating with the help of GAI, which further weakens the purpose of education
and devalues college degrees (Greitemeyer and Kastenmüller, 2023). However, excluding
this technology from the classroom is not a solution but further poses a risk of unsupervised
use, hindering access to current technology, and unnecessary surveillance.
Content Area Language and Literacy  138

                                 Impacts of Generative AI Ban in Classroom
         While Generative AI is a cutting-edge technology of its time, it is not free from errors
and biases. It is bounded by the data it is trained upon, which may promote human
intervention that harms marginalized groups by promoting popular culture data (Benjamin
2019; Kolko, Nakamura, and Rodman 2013; Samuel 2021). Another issue is the privacy of the
data, as it collects the data from its user prompts, which raises potential risks of ethical issues
including user data privacy and security, prompt injection, malicious exploitation by attackers,
and data poisoning. The current version of Chat GPT also remains susceptible to its
inaccurate responses or "hallucinations", which poses serious risks for individuals relying on AI
for fact-checking, or other decision-making processes (Wu, Duan, and Ni, 2023). User privacy
concerns related to generative AI use (Tilley and Kruppa, 2023) include confidentiality, breach
of data (Ray, 2023; Sparke, 2023), data biases (Nelson, 2023), the marginalization of
minoritized identities (Ansari, 2023; D'Agostino, 2023).
         Educators who are in favor of integrating Chat GPT technology in the classroom argue
that we have no choice but to embrace these technological changes and explore how to
integrate the tools into existing pedagogical philosophies and ethics. They advocate for
modifying curricular methods and creating assignments that need human voices to ensure
students are reflecting on real-world events (Gordon, 2023). Miller (2023) contends that if we
have not banned calculators in math classrooms, then it is unlikely that generative AI tools
could be eliminated from the classroom. Like math, we have to shift the focus to using
technology as a tool and not a substitute for human capabilities of producing new
knowledge. He suggested that teachers should alter their assignment design to create more
engaging writing assignments (Zalaznick, 2023). Bin-Hady et al (2023) argue that Chat GPT
can be helpful for multi-language learners as it is more interactive and engaging and creates
a customized learning experience based on student's interests by providing lots of
information, giving interactive feedback, offering personalized learning experiences, and
motivating language learners. This helps students reach their language learning goals more
quickly and effectively when used properly while understanding the ethical rules (Bin-Hady et
al., 2023).
         Banning generative AI would be a fruitless arms race against technology to avoid
cheating and plagiarism that may create an inaccessible, discriminatory learning experience
(Trust, 2023). ChatGPT does not signal the end of high school English class but accelerates
Content Area Language and Literacy  139

the long-awaited need to end the pursuit of formulaic, subpar writing as an objective for
students and educators (Greene 2022). Hence, educators have to reframe their writing
assignments to create long-term value in writing practices and make writing closer to
students' experiences and reflections to create motivation for writing as an activity and not as
a chore. As John Warner said, "Chat GPT cannot kill anything worth preserving", and banning
generative AI tools can create a void between the real world and academic practices, which
not only gives the student the impression that they have been surveilled but also insinuates
that that a writing assignment is not worth their efforts (Warner, 2022a).

         Hence, to integrate generative AI technology into classrooms in meaningful ways, it is
essential to educate teachers and learners on the ethical use of this tool. Students should be
informed that these tools keep their data and may produce false results; it is not a tool like the
human brain which operates with little information and uses language to predict, create
knowledge, and reason, but rather a sentence regurgitation and imitation machine (Chomsky,
Roberts, and Watumull, 2023). Educators can leverage Chat GPT as a teaching assistant to
introduce innovative approaches to education and personalized learning experiences (Furze
2023; Mollick and Mollick 2023). Given the limited resources available at educators' disposal,
educators could use generative AI tools to get assistance in designing interactive and
personalized assignments to save time and focus more on facilitating discussions, problem-
solving, and higher-order thinking skills, while Chat GPT handled information retrieval and
basic content delivery. Ethan Mollick and Lilach Mollick (2023) argue that teachers can
leverage AI to incorporate five evidence-based teaching strategies---including providing
multiple examples, offering varied explanations, identifying and addressing misconceptions,
promoting distributed practice, and incorporating low-stakes testing---which can significantly
improve instructors' lesson plans and enhance student learning outcomes. Large language
models can provide valuable assistance to varying extents, and through rigorous evaluation
and supervision, GAI can generate explanations, examples, practice exercises, and diagnostic
questions, offering crucial support to instructors. This, in turn, enables educators to reduce
the time spent on material development and allocate more of their focus toward their
students' needs (Mollick and Mollick 2023).

         It is worth noting that Chat GPT records personal data, hence it would be unethical to
get help from this tool to grade students' assignments containing their data. Similarly, if
students have used this tool to assist in their writing, they should mention which parts of their
Content Area Language and Literacy  140

writing were generated through AI, as the unchecked use of generative AI is detrimental to
learning (The Lancet Digital Health 2023).

         It is important to promote collaboration among stakeholders including teachers,
students, institutions, and the broader society. The incremental integration of these tools
through a collaborative effort of building trust and transparency between students, teachers,
and other stakeholders is needed to promote equity and access to all (Zalaznick, 2023). It is
essential to have a conversation about integrating such technology into the classroom,
informing students about its benefits, and drawbacks, and setting up a generative AI syllabus
policy. As educators, we need to emphasize to our students that relying solely on Chat GPT
or any AI language model is not a substitute for their writing abilities. We must encourage
them to develop their writing skills, engage in meaningful experiences, and use AI tools as
aids rather than as a substitute for writing.

         Generative AI is not going anywhere, and we cannot hide from it. Therefore, it is
important to adopt techniques that aim to enhance students' writing skill development, and
motivation and promote transferable skills while providing access to the technology.
The aim here is to delve into the integration of ChatGPT within existing pedagogical models
of teaching multi-language learners, emphasizing the enhancement of student motivation,
the infusion of the human element into writing, and the implementation of scaffolding
techniques in writing assignments through the lens of the 2020 iteration of the WIDA (World-
Class Instructional Design and Assessment). The WIDA framework underscores principles of
equity, content-language integration, collaboration, and equal access in the utilization of
technology. WIDA places a strong emphasis on language development while embracing
diverse cultures, thereby fostering effective communication skills across academic disciplines.
Central to our discussion is the Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) concept. This
pedagogical approach serves as a cornerstone for nurturing language proficiency and critical
thinking while promoting autonomy, collaborative skills, and inclusivity. WAC boldly asserts
that writing transcends disciplinary boundaries, a perspective further enriched by WIDA's
identification of four key language uses: narrate, inform, explain, and argue. The aim is to
facilitate the development of effective communication skills tailored to specific contexts,
thereby enhancing student engagement and independence. This approach encourages
students to assume greater agency in their learning, fostering a more collaborative and
inclusive educational environment. This recognition motivates students to take ownership of
Content Area Language and Literacy  141

their writing tasks, challenging traditional teaching methods and necessitating innovative
approaches. Hence, this chapter aims to provide the existing approaches to incorporate
generative AI tools in the classroom in a way that promotes the value of writing assignments,
motivation, accessibility, agency, and learning through different technologies while also
cultivating accountability.

                            Writing Assignments as a Social Justice Approach
         Generative AI, if used as a supplemental tool, while focusing on students' reflective
writing, and the teachers' role as a guide fosters student motivation and ownership of their
work, making them less likely to outsource tasks to generative AI tools (Warner, 2023). To
achieve this, educators should design assignments that students inherently value and shift the
focus from grade improvement to attitude transformation. To enhance students' interest in
writing, teachers should design inherently human assignments, like reflection writing where
students can express their personal experiences and ideas rather than following a strict
prompt. It is also important to give students the liberty to choose a topic which they find
interesting and are curious to write about, and/or that is current and has some social
implications such as the local traffic problem, or school cafeteria services. Encouraging
curiosity, openness, diverse perspectives, and ethical writing principles is vital in teaching
students how to write (Warner 2022b).
Creating Motivation to Write to Avoid Reliance on Generative AI Tools Solely
         Many students do not see writing as a worthwhile skill to develop (Herman, 2022).
Therefore, it is an important step for language teachers to create motivation in students to do
the writing assignments. William Glasser's theory outlines five fundamental motivational
needs: survival, belonging, power, freedom, and fun. While survival and belonging align with
two aspects of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, power, freedom, and fun introduce unique
dimensions that are crucial in the context of student and teacher motivation (Benson and
Dundis, 2003). Power signifies a sense of empowerment, self-worth, self-efficacy, and
accomplishment, along with the recognition of one's competence and contribution. Freedom
represents the need for independence, autonomy, and the freedom to make choices, create,
explore, and express oneself. It encompasses both physical and psychological autonomy,
providing students and teachers with the liberty to generate thoughts, explore creativity, and
share their creations within the learning framework, and further, their ability to find pleasure in
Content Area Language and Literacy  142

tasks, maintain a sense of humor, engage in hobbies, and experience excitement in work or
leisure activities. The WIDA framework also emphasizes social-emotional learning, which
aligns well with Glasser's emphasis on power, freedom, and fun, to make the writing
experience a more contextualized learning exercise and maintain a functional approach to
language development.

         It is important to focus on students' motivation to write where the teacher's role is as a
facilitator rather than an instructor in the process of writing. To create student motivation in
writing assignments, it is worth applying the Expectancy value model. The Expectancy-Value
Theory of Motivation, explored by various authors, provides essential insights into students'
motivation in educational settings (Wigfield and Eccles, 2000). It consists of three core
components: expectancy, value, and cost, which play pivotal roles in determining motivated
behavior. Expectancy-value models are not new in the academic realm. Authors like Lewin et
al. (1944), Atkinson (1958), Eccles et al., (1983), and Wigfield & Eccles, (2000) have
championed various versions of Expectancy-Value models to understand better students'
choices, persistence, and performance in education. According to Eccles's (2000) model, the
Expectancy-Value Theory of Motivation posits that a person's motivation is influenced by the
perceived value of a task and the likelihood of succeeding it. If students don't value it,
regardless of how well it is presented, they are unlikely to fully engage with it.

         The Expectancy-Value model is characterized by three key elements. Firstly, it centers
on psychological motivation by examining an individual's subjective beliefs, encompassing
past experiences of success and failure, personal goals, self-concept, and the influence of
various socializing agents like parents, teachers, peers, and schools. The expectancy aspect of
this model addresses the question, "Am I capable of completing the task?" When students
believe in their ability to accomplish something, they are more inclined to engage in that
behavior. Eccles et al. (1983) emphasized the strong correlation between expectancy and
related constructs tied to students' convictions about their task-completion abilities, such as
self-concept of ability, task complexity, locus of control, and attributions. The second element
involves the value motivation associated with the task, emphasizing the transferable value of
the acquired skill to other areas of learning. This aspect explores how the skill obtained can
be applied in diverse contexts (Eccles et al., 1998). Kenneth E. Barron and Chris Hulleman
revised the Expectancy-Value-Cost model and added cost as a distinct component. Their
framework suggests that individuals are more likely to be motivated to engage in a task or
Content Area Language and Literacy  143

behavior when they believe they can succeed (expectancy), see value in it (value), and
perceive minimal barriers (cost) to their engagement. They frame cost as multidimensional
with at least four sub-components: effort related to the task, effort unrelated to the task, loss
of valued alternatives, and negative psychological experiences. In addition, the effort and
resources required for an activity are costly only when they are perceived to be too much by a
student. In the context of writing assignments for multi-language learners, understanding and
optimizing these components can lead to more effective teaching strategies and enhanced
student motivation.

         The expectation of making progress in writing. Students' progress in a task
significantly influences their motivation. When students believe they can succeed in a given
task, they are more likely to be motivated to engage with it. This component of this value-
expectation theory addresses the question, "Can I do the task?" This does not mean that the
task is easy or challenging but that they see a guided path toward improvement. Teachers
providing formative feedback showing that there is a path to progress rather than giving
students a lot of corrections on their work will enhance students' motivation when they see
themselves meet the expectations of progress over time.

         In the 1990s, Pajares and his team conducted research on writing self-efficacy. They
studied how confident students felt about their writing abilities. They found that students who
felt more confident in their writing skills tended to perform better when writing essays. They
created a test called the Writing Self-Efficacy Scale (WSES) to measure this confidence. At first,
they thought it was one big confidence measure, but later, they realized it had two parts: one
for basic skills, like spelling and punctuation, and another for more complex skills like
structuring paragraphs and essays. Providing students with small, achievable writing tasks
builds their confidence when they see themselves progressing from one point to the next.

         Creation of value of writing through engagement in the classroom. The perceived
importance and desirability of a task impact students' motivation, with intrinsic, utility, and
attainment values all playing roles. The intrinsic value is cultivated if students enjoy writing for
its own sake. If the students are given writing assignments where they feel connected, they
are more likely to do the task by themselves. For example, if students are given the task to
find out more about a social issue that they feel strongly about, they would likely write about
it more passionately compared to a topic from their textbook (Warner, 2018).
Content Area Language and Literacy  144

         Students may see the writing task as interesting if they see a utility value associated
with it. If they can see that learning writing skills will help them achieve broader short-term or
long-term goals, they will be more likely to engage in the writing process; for instance, if the
student sees that writing skills not only help them to pass the course but are also helpful to
them in other academic areas. If they see writing as a transferable skill that benefits them in
the real world, they will be more engaged in learning this skill.

         Another value that is identified in this framework is attainment value. This value relates
to a task's ability to affirm a valued aspect of a student's identity and meet their needs. The
value component addresses the question, "Do I want to do the task?" For instance, a student
who values seeing social change in society because they feel it helps them better understand
the world may be more motivated to write about social issues. When a student feels that a
writing assignment is connected to their experiences, that assignment will be a better
facilitator of learning writing than the boring five-paragraph essay (Warner, 2023).

         Assessment of cost to the effort. In Kenneth E. Barron and Chris Hulleman's revised
Expectancy-Value-Cost model (2014), cost represents the perceived barriers or obstacles that
may hinder student motivation to engage in a task. These costs can be multidimensional and
include factors like the effort required, time constraints, the loss of alternative activities, and
negative psychological experiences. They further divide the cost into effort-related cost,
effort-unrelated cost, and psychological cost. According to this framework, effort-related costs
refer to the perceived amount of physical or mental effort needed to complete a task. Effort-
unrelated costs, on the other hand, are costs associated with activities that may not directly
relate to the task but compete for the individual's time and resources. Lastly, the
psychological costs deal with negative emotional experiences or psychological burdens that
may arise from engaging in a task. The cost component addresses the question, "Am I free of
barriers preventing me from investing time, energy, and resources into the activity?" For
example, if a student perceives that studying for an upcoming exam will require a significant
amount of effort and lead to stress, they may consider these as costs that affect their
motivation.
Content Area Language and Literacy  145

                          Importance of Formative Assessment and Feedback
         Formative assessments support ongoing learning, helping both instructors and
students identify areas of improvement, and are generally ungraded or low-stakes. It
enhances student motivation and self-directed learning. Interactive classroom activities are
good examples of developing formative assessment and feedback. Summative feedback, on
the other hand, comes at the end of a module or semester and is often tied to grades. It
assesses what students and the class have learned and can inform course design related to
final essays and research reports (Tufts University, 2023).
         John Warner (2018) argues that it is important to move from summative to formative
assessments in the age of generative AI. Instead of giving a final project assignment, it is
better to move the writing assignment to classroom activities of reflection writing and
breaking the writing task into several initial drafts, where a teacher provides feedback aiming
to focus on developing transferable writing skills and achieve student learning and progress
over time and not for the mere final grade. The formative feedback builds student confidence
and interest in doing work (Warner 2018).
Adoption of Generative AI in the Classroom
         Traditional teaching methods have often relied on static content and established
curricula that may not always keep pace with the rapidly evolving body of knowledge in
various fields. As new information, research, and insights emerge, educators must adapt their
teaching strategies to ensure students are exposed to the most up-to-date and relevant
information. As John Sener argues in "The Seven Futures of American Education," education
must embrace technology incrementally, focusing on knowledge, access, and authority to
enhance learning outcomes. His cyberization of education emphasizes revitalizing the
teaching and learning relationship through learner-generated content, event-anchored
learning, and using technological tools while broadening the institutional enterprise to
accommodate diverse learners and prioritize knowledge creation. First, this can be
accomplished by revitalizing and re-empowering the teaching and learning relationship by
including learner-generated content and knowledge. Some strategies include event-
anchored learning; social and individualized learning with scale and depth; techno hooks
such as augmented reality, virtual worlds, and gaming; formative feedback; and scaffolding
assignments. Second, revitalizing the institutional enterprise by broadening the merit system
Content Area Language and Literacy  146

by incorporating prior learning assessments and portfolio-based credits, accommodating a
diverse range of students through stackable credentials and competency-driven
methodologies, extending the role of education in knowledge creation (with a specific focus
on utilizing student work) and establishing new institutional evaluation systems (Sener, 2012).

         Instead of surveilling student use of generative AI, teachers can allow students to
explore this medium to improve their writing by using it to brainstorm ideas and make an
outline for their writing or for forming or editing the initial draft as a collaborator or reviewer
tool. Teachers can give assignments to critically analyze the flaws in the initial draft produced
by the generative AI tools and how students would have done it differently (Cardamone
2023). For instance, we can consider using AI-based writing tools to assist students with idea
generation, grammar checking, and language suggestions. Additionally, AI-powered research
tools can aid students in gathering relevant information and sources or personalized
assistance with language learning which can be vital to a multilingual learner new to a
language.

                                                         Summary
         The integration of generative AI, such as Chat GPT, in the classroom presents a
complex and polarizing issue. While there are concerns about cheating, privacy, and data
biases, there are also opportunities for enhancing student engagement, motivation, and
learning outcomes. Banning generative AI in the classroom is unlikely to prevent its use and
may lead to a void between the real world and academic practices. Instead, educators should
adapt their teaching strategies to incorporate these tools effectively. The successful
integration of generative AI in the classroom requires a thoughtful, ethical, and student-
centered approach that empowers learners to develop valuable skills and competencies. This
can be achieved by redefining the teaching and learning relationship through learner-
generated content, event-anchored learning, and the literacy of ethical use of technological
tools, training teachers and students on its proper use, and creating a syllabus policy for its
integration. Instead of surveilling students, educators can encourage students to use
generative AI tools as collaborators or reviewers, and even challenge them to critically
analyze the output of these tools.
         The value of writing assignments can be enhanced by making them inherently
interesting and connected to students' experiences, promoting intrinsic, utility, and
Content Area Language and Literacy  147

attainment values. Efforts to motivate students to write should consider elements like self-
efficacy, freedom, power, and fun. The Expectancy-Value Theory of Motivation can help
increase the value in writing assignments and reduce perceived costs for students. Grading
and feedback should focus on formative assessments and feedback, helping students
develop transferable writing skills and build confidence.

Questions:

     1. The author points out some of the shortcomings of AI's writing. What are they?
     2. Do you agree with the Expectancy Value Theory? Has there ever been a time when you

          struggled with Expectancy, Value, or Cost in relation to school tasks?
     3. How does paying attention to motivation for writing promote equity and/or accessibility?
     4. The author suggests reviewing and editing AI generated writing. Have you engaged in such an

          activity and what did you find?
     5. Discuss an experience or lesson in which AI was important to the task.

                                                        References

Ansari, Aimee. 2023. "ChatGPT and the Most Marginalized." LinkedIn. Retrieved October 19,
         2023 (https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/chatgpt-most-marginalized-aimee-ansari/).

Barron, Kenneth E., and Hulleman, Chris. (2014). Expectancy-Value-Cost Model of Motivation.
         In International Encyclopedia of Social & Behavioral Sciences (Vol. 8, pp. 503-509).
          DOI:10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.26099-6

Benjamin, Ruha. 2019. Race after Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code.
         Medford, MA: Polity.

Benson, Suzanne G., and Stephen P. Dundis. 2003. "Understanding and Motivating Health
         Care Employees: Integrating Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, Training and Technology."
         Journal of Nursing Management 11(5):315-20. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
         2834.2003.00409.x.4P

Bin-Hady, Wagdi Rashad Ali, Abdu Al-Kadi, Abduljalil Hazaea, and Jamal Kaid Mohammed Ali.
         2023. "Exploring the Dimensions of ChatGPT in English Language Learning: A Global
         Perspective." Library Hi Tech ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print). doi: 10.1108/LHT-05-
         2023-0200.

Bruning, Roger, and Christy Horn. 2000. "Developing Motivation to Write." Educational
         Psychologist 35(1):25-37. doi: 10.1207/S15326985EP3501_4.
Content Area Language and Literacy  148

Cardamone, Carolin. 2023. "Thinking about Our Assessments in the Age of Artificial
         Intelligence (AI) - Teaching@Tufts." Retrieved October 19, 2023
         (https://sites.tufts.edu/teaching/2023/01/31/thinking-about-our-assessments-in-the-
         age-of-artificial-intelligence-ai/).

Chomsky, Noam, Ian Roberts, and Jeffrey Watumull. 2023. "Opinion | Noam Chomsky: The
         False Promise of ChatGPT." The New York Times, March 8.

D'Agostino, Susan. n.d. "AI Has a Language Diversity Problem. Humans Do, Too." Inside
         Higher Ed. Retrieved October 19, 2023 (https://www.insidehighered.com/news/tech-
         innovation/artificial-intelligence/2023/07/10/ai-has-language-diversity-problem).

Graham, Steve, and Michael Hebert. 2010. Writing to Read: Evidence for How Writing Can
         Improve Reading. A Report from Carnegie Corporation of New York. Vanderbilt
         University.

Greene, Peter. 2022. "No, ChatGPT Is Not The End Of High School English. But Here's The
         Useful Tool It Offers Teachers." Forbes. Retrieved October 13, 2023
         (https://www.forbes.com/sites/petergreene/2022/12/11/no-chatgpt-is-not-the-end-of-
         high-school-english-but-heres-the-useful-tool-it-offers-teachers/).

Greitemeyer, Tobias, and Andreas Kastenmüller. 2023. "HEXACO, the Dark Triad, and Chat
         GPT: Who Is Willing to Commit Academic Cheating?" Heliyon 9(9):e19909. doi:
         10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19909.

Herman, Daniel. 2022. "The End of High-School English." The Atlantic. Retrieved October 15,
         2023 (https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2022/12/openai-chatgpt-
         writing-high-school-english-essay/672412/).

James, Karin H., R. Joanne Jao, and Virginia Berninger. 2016. "The Development of
         Multileveled Writing Systems of the Brain: Brain Lessons for Writing Instruction." Pp.
         116-29 in Handbook of Writing Research, 2nd ed. New York, NY, US: The Guilford
         Press.

Kolko, Beth, Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert B. Rodman. 2013. Race in Cyberspace. New York:
         Routledge.

Koster, Monica, Elena Tribushinina, Peter F. de Jong, and Huub van den Bergh. 2015.
         "Teaching Children to Write: A Meta-Analysis of Writing Intervention Research."
         Journal of Writing Research 7(2):249-74. doi: 10.17239/jowr-2015.07.02.2.

Mollick, Ethan R., and Lilach Mollick. 2023. "Using AI to Implement Effective Teaching
         Strategies in Classrooms: Five Strategies, Including Prompts."

Nelson, Felicity. 2023. "Many Companies Are Banning ChatGPT. This Is Why." ScienceAlert.
         Retrieved October 19, 2023 (https://www.sciencealert.com/many-companies-are-
         banning-chatgpt-this-is-why).
Content Area Language and Literacy  149

NVIDIA Corporation. 2023. "What Are Large Language Models? | NVIDIA Glossary." NVIDIA.
         Retrieved October 14, 2023 (https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/glossary/data-
         science/large-language-models/).

Ray, Siladitya. 2023. "Samsung Bans ChatGPT Among Employees After Sensitive Code Leak."
         Forbes. Retrieved October 19, 2023
         (https://www.forbes.com/sites/siladityaray/2023/05/02/samsung-bans-chatgpt-and-
         other-chatbots-for-employees-after-sensitive-code-leak/).

Samuel, Sigal. 2021. "AI's Islamophobia Problem." Vox. Retrieved October 14, 2023
         (https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/22672414/ai-artificial-intelligence-gpt-3-bias-
         muslim).

Sparke, Carmel. 2023. "Doctors Banned from Using ChatGPT to Write Medical Notes."
         AusDoc. Retrieved October 19, 2023 (https://www.ausdoc.com.au/news/doctors-
         banned-from-using-chatgpt-to-write-medical-notes/).

The Lancet Digital Health. 2023. "ChatGPT: Friend or Foe?" The Lancet Digital Health
         5(3):e102. doi: 10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00023-7.

Tilley, Aaron, and Miles Kruppa. 2023. "WSJ News Exclusive | Apple Restricts Employee Use of
         ChatGPT, Joining Other Companies Wary of Leaks." Wall Street Journal, May 18.

Tufekci, Zeynep. 2022. "Opinion | What Would Plato Say About ChatGPT?" The New York
         Times, December 15.

Tufts University. 2023. "Formative and Summative Feedback - Teaching@Tufts." Retrieved
         October 19, 2023 (https://sites.tufts.edu/teaching/assessment/assessment-
         approaches/formative-and-summative-feedback/).

Warner, John. 2018. Why They Can't Write: Killing the Five-Paragraph Essay and Other
         Necessities. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Warner, John. 2022a. "ChatGPT Can't Kill Anything Worth Preserving." The Biblioracle
         Recommends. Retrieved September 27, 2023
         (https://biblioracle.substack.com/p/chatgpt-cant-kill-anything-worth).

Warner, John. 2022b. "Freaking Out About ChatGPT--Part I." Retrieved October 13, 2023
         (https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/just-visiting/freaking-out-about-
         chatgpt%E2%80%94part-i).

Wigfield, Allan, and Jacquelynne S. Eccles. 2000. "Expectancy-Value Theory of Achievement
         Motivation." Contemporary Educational Psychology 25(1):68-81. doi:
         10.1006/ceps.1999.1015.

Zalaznick, Matt. 2023. "How ChatGPT Can Actually Be a Force for Good Rather than a Boon for
         Cheaters." District Administration. Retrieved October 13, 2023
Content Area Language and Literacy  150

        (https://districtadministration.com/chatgpt-impact-schools-teaching-cheating-
        writing/).

                                                      Contributor

Faika Tahir Jan, Virginia Tech University, faikatahir@vt.edu

Faika Tahir Jan, a Ph.D. candidate in Sociology, specializes in studying intersectional
identities within academic settings. Holding dual master's degrees in education and
Sociology from the University of Sindh, Jamshoro, Pakistan, she brings over a decade of
teaching experience. Her extensive teaching background spans diverse student populations,
from instructing Arabic and English to elementary school students in rural areas of Pakistan
to working as an instructor for undergraduate students at Virginia Tech, developing courses
focused on race, ethnicity, and social problems. Her research informs how intersecting
identities shape experiences within academic environments.
Content Area Language and Literacy                            151

                         Chapter 8
Unleashing the Power of Multilingual Minds:

     Translanguaging for Deeper Learning
                  Saadia Ali, M.A. M.S.

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

Objectives: Educators will be able to...

   · Define translanguaging and explain its purpose.
   · Identify the benefits of translanguaging including

       cognitive, cultural, and interpersonally.
   · Discuss challenges to translanguaging including lack of

       acceptance, need for pedagogical shifts, and
       assessment.
   · Gain ideas for incorporation of translanguaging into
       classrooms.

                                                       Introduction
         As social beings, humans communicate to stay connected with the inner and outer
worlds. To communicate, we need a medium. Language is the medium in which we can
communicate with one another. Each language comprises several features and
characteristics: alphabets, sounds, grammar, and linguistic variations. Dialect is a specific
version of a language used by people in a specific region. According to the Cambridge
Dictionary (n.d.), dialect is a '"form of" language that people speak in a part of a country,
containing some different words and grammar, etc. "The new" to speak with one another is
prevalent in all situations and circumstances irrespective of the dialect and languages people
speak.
          Similarly, when people do not speak the same languages, especially in the bordering
areas of different countries, pidgins are created and used by the inhabitants of such areas.
Cambridge Dictionary defines Pidgin as a language developed from a mixture of two
languages. It is used to communicate with people who do not speak each other's languages.
Content Area Language and Literacy  152

         If we talk about the most common language speakers use globally, English ranks in
the number one position. We all know that the English language is widely used, and most
countries use it as a primary language for a medium of instruction in academia and official
and professional communication. People travel worldwide and migrate to first-world
countries for academic and professional opportunities to live progressive and successful lives.
That is why they intentionally work on their English Language skills to achieve their
educational and career goals. However, the journey to learn English varies from easy to
extremely complicated.

         English Language Learners (ELLs) who have used English from elementary grade to
higher education tend to have higher comprehension and retention levels in English-only
environments than the ELLs who have had limited exposure to English in their homes and
communities. The barriers resulting from limited English proficiency affect the overall
personal, academic, and professional growth. The need to educate more teachers to work
with students who speak a language other than English in the home has led many states to
adopt the WIDA Framework and standards. The 2020 Framework revised the Guiding
Principles to include the concept of "Translanguaging". This idea is situated within the
following principle: "9. Multilingual learners use their full linguistic repertoire, including
translanguaging practices, to enrich their language development and learning" (12). This
chapter will provide a definition of translanguaging, discuss the increase of multilingual
students in classrooms, examine the benefits of translanguaging and multilingualism,
articulate some of the challenges to translanguaging, and advocate for translanguaging to
become part of instructional practices from the earliest years of education to the higher
education institutions. The chapter ends with an appendix of ideas on how teachers can
integrate translanguaging practices into their classrooms.

                                             What is Translanguaging?
         According to Cook (2022), translanguaging means information reception through one
language (e.g., English) and be able to utilize it by the medium of another language (e.g.,
Welsh). The speaker must understand completely the meaning before they can use the
information successfully (Williams, 1996, 64). Similarly, in order to use one's dialect i.e. one's
linguistic repertoire, irrespective of socially and politically defined labels or boundaries
(Otheguy et al, 2015, 297), multilingual language users facilitate complex social and cognitive
Content Area Language and Literacy  153

activities by deliberate application of multiple semiotic resources to act in a dynamic way
(Garcia and Li, 2014).

         Translanguaging can best be used by transnational individuals PK-12 and adults as a
trend as a methodology to be utilized and applied in different teaching and learning
contexts. This is why, translanguaging refers to a process that creates trans-spaces and trans-
subjects in a more technical setting, i.e. the linguistic world. These spaces and subjects have
the potential to transform the broader sociopolitical order including individual subjectivities,
social structures, and cognitive frameworks. Furthermore, translanguaging aims to set free
the shackles of the imposed monolingual and monoglossic ideologies (Garcia & Wei, 2014)
which have restricted and confined language and bilingualism for a long span of time.

         The process which is mentioned above can be simplified by understanding that
subjects who can be language users who can be either one of these e.g., student, teacher,
parent friend or any person, translanguaging offers variety of contexts in different languages.
This is why translanguaging is crucial in enhancing language freedom from society's
pressures. As Ofelia Garcia says, "a monoglossic language ideology sees language as an
autonomous skill that functions independently from the context in which it is used. U.S.
schools ignore how English and Spanish are used" (Garcia 2019). Hence, one should not
underestimate the multidimensional and multifunctional approach of a bilingual or
multilingual brain because it works to absorb and attain new information through context on
variety of language networks and grammatical frameworks (in the form native or different
languages) at the same time.

         Moll et al, (1992) emphasizes on the multilingual phenomenon of translanguaging as
"funds of knowledge" in detail compared to the traditionally understood concept as first
language (L1) of student when speaking in second language (L2) context. Translanguaging
surpasses both home language and school language or L1 and L2 validating translanguaging
that bilingual students' practices are not separated (Moll et al., 1992).
The transformation process of linguistic semiotic repertoire is to improve the phenomenon of
transfer (Cummins, 1979), which is recognized as the natural flow of ideas from one language
to another by using reading, writing, listening or speaking skills. It is referred as
translanguaging so that bilingual speakers leverage (Michaels, 2005) in meaning-making.

         Translanguaging in education enables students to move along the continuum of two
socially constructed languages by reinforcement of bilingual performances in
Content Area Language and Literacy  154

correspondence with the standards of their school, homes, and their communities. So, it is
essential for bilingual students to emphasize the linguistic semiotic resources in meaning-
making and utilizing in their respective contexts whether at the beginning or along the
bilingual continuum. This is how their "critical conscientization involves continual reading of
the word and the world" (Freire, 1974; Garcia & Wei, 2014) are developed.

                            Current Trends and Research on Translanguaging
         In the context of educational environments, translanguaging can be used as a
methodology with students from diverse backgrounds (Garcia & Wei, 2014). Similarly, in
different content areas in the secondary schools e.g., Math, Social Studies, Science and
English Language Arts, translanguaging is used as a pedagogy as well as in English as a
Second Language classrooms. Even though the readiness in using the methodological
practices based on translanguaging, these respective teachers are on numerous points of
bilingual continuum. Furthermore, it is challenging to educate teachers to strategically and
significantly use translanguaging practices. In US, for emergent bilinguals, bilingualism in
education is limited in most cases. Translanguaging is found to be predominant pedagogical
practice in US secondary schools for immigrants with emergent bilinguals. It is less prevalent
in elementary schools except in some bilingual programs. Notably, to develop student's
pluriliteracy practices translanguaging as pedagogy is used.
Growth in Linguistic Diversity in Schools
         Translanguaging in schools is mostly a product cast to be used in one language or the
other if students and teachers utilize and employ translanguaging as a single expanded
linguistic repertoire. In bilingual or multilingual learning environments, the question arises if
there is a difference between the understanding of valuing both (or more) languages as
resources of learning. Even though there is a slight difference between a bilingual and a
translanguaging approach to education is transformational (Garcia & Wei, 2014). Students
should be empowered to alternate between languages for discussion, assignments, and
assessments, promoting deeper learning. Explicit instruction in translanguaging develops
metalinguistic abilities and cross-lingual transfer of skills.
         As student populations in colleges and universities become increasingly multilingual,
translanguaging offers a culturally responsive approach to instruction that values linguistic
diversity as an asset. Translanguaging techniques create inclusive multilingual learning
Content Area Language and Literacy  155

environments where students can fluidly utilize their full language repertoires. Administrators
can adopt policies welcoming translanguaging and recruit multilingual faculty. Multilingual
signage and events on campus help validate diverse languages. Translanguaging pedagogy
coupled with structural changes to affirm linguistic diversity allowing higher education
institutions to serve their evolving student bodies equitably. It transforms language
differences into tools for cognitive growth rather than obstacles to learning. In an
interconnected world, embracing translanguaging is critical to building colleges and
universities where all modes of communication and expression are accepted with open arms.

                            Benefits of Translanguaging for Diverse Learners
         Translanguaging unlocks immense benefits for diverse learners, from English
language students to those with learning disabilities. By leveraging their full linguistic
capabilities, students gain enhanced comprehension of complex material on deeper
cognitive levels.
         Translanguaging creates culturally inclusive spaces where students' identities are
validated not viewed as deficits. Structured scaffolds in courses empower students to grasp
concepts and build academic confidence. Translanguaging fosters the automatic transfer of
skills across languages for English learners to expedite proficiency.
         Students with disabilities can first comprehend the material and express knowledge in
their dominant language, removing linguistic barriers. Childhood literacy is strengthened as
students associate reading and writing skills with familiar home languages. Simply put,
translanguaging allows each learner to thrive on their terms by dismantling the restrictions of
traditional monolingual education. Its student-centered flexibility, inclusivity, and
responsiveness have profound academic, cognitive, and psychological benefits for diverse
populations.
Implementing Translanguaging Strategies
         Translanguaging can be effectively implemented through flexible multilingual learning
environments, scaffolded instruction, collaborative group work, and other responsive
techniques. Teachers should explicitly endorse students leveraging their full linguistic
repertoires by allowing linguistic flexibility during activities. Strategic scaffolding, where
students assist peers with lower language proficiency, promotes meaning-making across
diverse languages. Integrated assignments that enable students to move fluidly between
languages according to their needs and preferences validate their identities. Linguistically
Content Area Language and Literacy  156

responsive teaching strategies like pre-teaching vocabulary in students' languages help build
background knowledge. Translanguaging thrives when teachers create collaborative spaces,
provide tailored support, and welcome students and ways of expression. The result is deeper
learning and engagement with course content, as students can make meaning on their terms.
More ideas for translanguaging and videos to better understand the need for it are provided
in the Appendix.
Executing Translanguaging for Equity and Inclusion

         An asset-based perspective toward linguistic diversity provides explicit instruction to
students on effectively using translanguaging techniques that leverage their full linguistic
capabilities. Universal Design for Learning (U.D.L.) can be used to improve translanguaging
practices in foreign language learning and English as a Second Language classes to co-
construct and negotiate meaning by the language learners to foster belongingness and
engagement. Translanguaging space and identity can be reinforced by allocating funding,
staff, facilities, technology, and other structural resources required to support and sustain
equity programs long-term in educational institutions. Also, it can further be strengthened by
offering training and development for professors to improve inclusive teaching skills and
multilingual classroom management improves learners' motivation.

         A pedagogy that is equally in favor of cultural sustainability can be implemented by
evaluating current educational policies and procedures to remove systemic biases and
barriers negatively impacting underserved student groups. Moreover, teachers should work
directly with students to gather insights about their needs and experiences to inform
diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts in a culturally sustaining pedagogy.

                                            Benefits of Multilingualism
         Prior to the 2020 WIDA Standards Framework, the focus of the Guiding Principles was
bilingualism which refers to the ability to speak two languages fluently. Multilingualism may
include three, four, or even more languages. In today's world, multilingualism is becoming
gradually more valuable. It is estimated that more than half of the world is bilingual or
multilingual ("Beyond Bilingualism"). Since the prefix "multi" means "more than one" and is,
thus, the moniker of "multilingual" is inclusive of a bilingual person. Multilingualism has
several benefits, and these are briefly explained before turning to challenges to
Translanguaging.
Content Area Language and Literacy                                                             157

Multilingualism has cognitive, creative, focus, learning, and interpersonal advantages.

Multilingualism is linked to improved mental flexibility, multitasking, problem-solving skills,

and protection against cognitive decline. Regularly using multiple languages exercises the

brain for cognitive benefits over the lifetime. Multilingual employees give companies

competitive advantages when expanding globally through better communication,

negotiations, partnerships, and innovation that is more likely culturally appropriate because

multilinguals inform the creative process. Bilingual children demonstrate better academic

performance, communication, creativity, cultural awareness, and empathy. Thus, bilingual

adults have increased concentration and learning skills that are developed through the

schooling years. Being multilingual allows people to connect with diverse individuals from

different linguistic and cultural backgrounds. This is especially beneficial in today's world

where such interpersonal skills are needed. Additionally, multilingualism can enrich life

experiences through travel, culture, and broadened perspectives. It also promotes empathy,

understanding, and appreciation of other cultures.

Acquiring New Languages through Practices

The greater a student's language practices, the easier it is, in general, to learn new

language skills. Figure 1 expands on this idea with descriptions of Emergent, Dynamic,

Adaptive, and Complex language practices in multilingual children.

Figure 1.

Emergent                   Dynamic                  Adaptive            Complex

  A child develops              Connectivity     To enhance specific         Students in
additional language        between languages     cultural and identity       multilingual
skills from their initial                                                classrooms utilize
 language practices            is an important         purposes,         their full linguistic
                               phenomenon.            adaptation if         repertoires to
     in their home          Languages are not     adaptive bilingual    construct meaning.
       language.           separated from one      and multilingual        For instance, a
                             another. A shared   speakers adopt the       student from an
   Therefore, for a        pool of resources is    communication.         English Medium
 student, learning a          created when all                           school in Pakistan
                              language skills,      For example, a       who speaks Urdu
    new language                abilities, and       principal in a      and English might
 depends upon the               practices are                                code-switch
 skills developed in          interconnected,           Pakistani         between the two
the home language          which helps students  Government School      languages to better
 because it is easier
to understand if the                               in a countryside
                                                 location, which has
Content Area Language and Literacy                              158

student's language   co-construct and   mostly Urdu medium         understand and
is more developed.  negotiate meaning.  schools, might give a      explain a math
                                        speech at an annual      concept. During a
                                                                  math lesson, this
                                          prize distribution    student could clarify
                                          ceremony in Urdu        the steps of long
                                                                 division for a peer
                                            and Punjabi (a       who is not fluent in
                                          regional dialect of    English and needs
                                                                 help by describing
                                              most of the         them in Urdu and
                                        residents) but write a  then reiterating the
                                         report on the event     process in English.
                                        in Urdu and English
                                                                      That is how
                                         for school records.    Language practices
                                                                 are used to create
                                                                meaning in complex

                                                                          ways.

                                                                 (Most of the text in
                                                                    this column is

                                                                  generated by the
                                                                prompt shared with

                                                                  Claude AI in this
                                                                        column).

Adapted from Institute of Education Sciences (n.d.)

                               Challenges and Considerations for Translanguaging
         The challenges associated with translanguaging included lack of acceptance, need for
paradigm shift, and few assessment methods. Although there is a lack of acceptance for
translanguaging, there have been small strides made in relation to teaching and research.
Assessment ideas are still minimal but also require great attention to an instructional context.
Teaching/Research Shift
         There are some shifts demonstrating a change in teaching/research to develop
metalinguistic awareness to trigger the background knowledge and to recognize the
cultivation of ideas to reinforce deeper understanding through meaning-making practices
with both language and content objectives. According to Cenoz and Gorter the most potent
form of pedagogical translanguaging includes those practices that "aim to develop
metalinguistic awareness by activating prior knowledge and identifying connected growers
Content Area Language and Literacy  159

so that students can make more progress in the development of their multilingual skill" (as
cited in Citation2021, 31). Similarly, Rachel Bloom-Pojar (2018) talks about translingual
variations in her book Translanguaging outside the Academy: Negotiating Rhetoric and
Healthcare in the Spanish Caribbean. Her study discusses fields of writing and rhetoric were
being inundated with discussions of language, diversity, variance, and the translingual and
were in constant revision. She gave special emphasis to the words and experiences of her
participants. She wanted to privilege and forefront their descriptions used in her research
study of how they language even if they did not call it "languaging". Ofelia Garcia and Li Wei's
definition of "languaging is a simultaneous process of continuous becoming of ourselves and
our language practices, as we interact and make meaning in the world" (10-11).
Assessment Methods

         Traditional assessment methods often fail to accurately evaluate multilingual learners
as they cannot demonstrate knowledge in a single language. Translanguaging provides an
authentic alternative that allows students to leverage their full linguistic repertoires during
assessment. Potential techniques include allowing students to respond to test questions by
writing or speaking in their dominant language and translating responses to the target
language. Students could also be encouraged to think aloud in multiple languages when
problem-solving during assessments. Portfolio evaluations that include writing samples or
recordings in multiple languages can provide more comprehensive students' abilities to
evaluate home languages and promote meaning-making. Students' translanguaging
practices are used in assessment to assess students' proper competencies while honoring
their unique identities and ways of knowing. As cla'srooms grow increasingly diverse and
culturally responsive, flexible assessment through translanguaging is essential for equity.
Lack of Acceptance

         Translanguaging is considered as dual or two-way methodological approach. On one
hand, scaffolding methods as a pedagogy for Translanguaging enables children to see and
use all of their languages for learning and it can be used a s the ability of multilinguals to
switch quickly and with ease between languages irrespective of socially and politically
defined boundaries on the other. (García & Kleyn, 2016; García & Wei, 2014; Lewis, Jones, &
Baker, 2012a; but see: MacSwan, 2017). In a short span of time, translanguaging has gained
acceptance as a recent and significantly effective concept in the areas of bilingual and
multilingual education as noted by Cenoz and Gorter (2017, p. 910). Nevertheless, it is
Content Area Language and Literacy  160

difficult to achieve meaningful translanguaging practices in the classroom (García & Kleyn,
2016; Hornberger & Link, 2012) and there are risks which are labelled as simplistic or
romanticized (Canagarajah, 2011a; García & Kleyn, 2016).

         Canagarajah (2011) further elaborates this viewpoint that translanguaging as a social
accomplishment is overlooked in most cases. As a matter of fact, through translanguaging, a
person draws from all the languages in their repertoire to communicate and switch to co-
construct meaning. In fact, it is an innovative improvisation based on the context and local
situation. Additionally, Cangarajah (2011) states that in general, the pedagogical side of
translanguaging is underdeveloped. Furthermore, Lewis, Jones, and Baker (2012b) verify that
there is a dire need to establish intense research to establish systematically and purposefully
translanguaging the multilingual contexts of addressing when, where and how as an
appropriate pedagogical approach (Probyn, 2015).

                Supporting Translanguaging from K-12 through Higher Education
         While translanguaging often occurs naturally for multilingual students, research
indicates it should also be taught explicitly. Simply allowing it to happen spontaneously can
give the false impression that instruction in translanguaging is unnecessary. This view
romanticizes students' translanguaging practices without identifying limitations or errors that
could be improved through teaching excerpts from students' native languages (Canagarajah,
2011).
         Strategies for explicit translanguaging instruction are outlined in the CUNY-NYSIEB
guide (2011). To start, teachers can empower students to use their full linguistic repertoires
through small steps like making diverse languages visible in the classroom or learning
greetings i.e., to say `hello' in different languages (García & Wei, 2014). More meaningful
activities include having students' complete assignments using all their language resources
(Kiramba, 2017) and collaborating in "language pairs" where they choose which language(s)
to use.
         Pairing students with different levels of proficiency in the school's language allows
more capable peers to scaffold instruction (García & Wei, 2014; Rosiers, Willaert, Van
Avermaet, & Slembrouck, 2016). When pairing language is impossible, comparing languages
can build vocabulary, morphology, and reading comprehension (Kieffer and Lesaux, 2007;
Laufer & Girsai, 2008; Nagy, Berninger, and Abbott, 2006). Students can translate specific
Content Area Language and Literacy  161

texts or vocabulary and then paraphrase in other languages. Actively contrasting languages
develop metalinguistic awareness (e.g., Lyster, Quiroga, and Ballinger, 2013; Ticheloven,
Schwenke Lam, and Fürstenau, forthcoming, 2020)., which improves foreign language
learning (Rauch, Naumann, & Jude, 2012). With explicit teaching, translanguaging can be an
effective instructional technique.

                                                        Conclusion
         Overall, Translanguaging is a translinguistic (multilingual) phenomenon, which
reinforces students' native language abilities to be used simultaneously with the target
language throughout the learning process. Students feel motivation and empowerment and
by incorporation of their native language components in the content under consideration
which also meets their social and emotional needs. The diverse students including English
language learners and students with disabilities feel confident, welcomed and validated in
their classes based on their identities in relevance to their native languages.
         Translanguaging not only improves cognitive development, comprehension and
cultural inclusivity within the learning environment, but also enhances conducive learning in
an explicit learning environment through flexible multilingual instruction and collaboration. A
detailed list of strategies can be used by higher education institutions to support
translanguaging through student collaboration, faculty development, policies and structural
resources allocation are outlined in CUNY-NYSIEB guide and guides for educators.
         In Translanguaging, the focus needs to revolve around the development of
assessments in project-based and scenario-based environments and overcome theoretical
shifts and linguistic prejudices. Therefore, it will be inspiring if these multilingual practices are
reinforced among the multilingual audience of learners by applying their linguistic
repertoires and scaffolded learning. It is crucial to offer support and resources to employ
complete linguistic range and enhance communicative competence based on a generalized
understanding of translanguaging strategies which are practiced in a limited way.
         Concludingly, in this era of increased migration and globalization, as the education
system encounters new tasks, empowering and motivational possibilities are needed in this
time based on Translanguaging pedagogy. Yet, there have been unanswered questions in the
ongoing research in multilingualism founded on the ideas of languages as separate entities
tied to specific geopolitical spaces and cultures. There is a requirement of a pedagogy which
Content Area Language and Literacy  162

can create an educational experience and help enhance a conducive learning environment to
be "focused on fluid relationships between different ways of meaning- making" (Kramsch and
Huffmaster, 2015), by our post-modern global communication era.

Questions:
    1. In your own words, define translanguaging.
    2. What are some of the benefits of multilingualism and how are they complementary?
    3. How does translanguaging improve the environment of the classroom?
    4. What are some of the challenges translanguaging must overcome and how could you
         counter one of the challenges if you were faced with it?

Author's Note & Acknowledgments for ChatGPT and Claude AI. I experimented with two
artificial intelligence software to see their applicability to the content of this chapter's
creation. From getting started with the outline, I generated two outlines from Claude AI and
Chat G.P.T. with the exact instructions. The content in Benefits of Bilingualism and
Multilingualism, Translanguaging for Equity and Inclusion, Implementing Translanguaging
Strategies, Summary and Activities & Discussion Ideas were created by the text generated by
detailed and specific prompts for my desired results. I am impressed to see its results and
look forward to more experimentation on content prompt generation through artificial
intelligence and other software in future research projects.

                                                        References
Beyond bilingualism: The advantages of multilingualism. (n.d.). Languages unlimited.

         Retrieved September 25, 2023, from https://www.languagesunlimited.com/beyond-
         bilingualism-the-advantages-of-multilingualism/.

CUNY. (2011). City University of New York-New York State's Initiative for Emergent Bilinguals.
         https://www.cuny-nysieb.org/

Dictionary Cambridge. (n.d.). Dialect. In dictionary.cambridge.org. Retrieved October 1,
         2023, from https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/dialect/

Dictionary Cambridge. (n.d.). Pidgins. In dictionary.cambridge.org. Retrieved October 1,
         2023, from https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/pidgin?q=pidgins

F.R.A.N.C.E. 24 English (2021, November 23). Speaking multiple languages: The benefits of a
         bilingual brain [youtube video].
Content Area Language and Literacy  163

Garcia, O., & Torres-Guevara, R. (2009). Handbook of Latinos and Education: Monoglossic
         Ideologies and Language Policies in the Education of U.S.U.S. Latinas/os. Routledge.
         https://10.4324/9780203866078.CH11

Institution of Education Sciences. (n.d.) Translanguaging to Support Students' Bilingual and
         Multilingual Development. Retrieved October 1, 2023 from
         https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs/infographics/pdf/REL_PA_Translanguaging_to_Suppor
         t_Students.pdf

Kramsch, C. & Huffmaster, M. (2015). Multilingual practices in foreign language study. In J.
         Cenoz., & D. Gorter. (Eds.). Multilingual education: Between language learning and
         translanguaging. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Leonet, O., & Saragueta, E. (2023). The case of a pedagogical translanguaging intervention in
         a trilingual primary school: the
         students'studentsInteIstudents'students'nternationalrnational Journal of
         Multilingualism. https://10.1080/14790718.2023.2224009

Nejarro, I. (2023, July 13). What is translanguaging, and how is it used in the classroom?
         EdWeek.
         https://www.google.com/search?sca_esv=573232648&rlz=1C1GCEJ_enUS1002US10
         02&q=translanguaging&tbm=isch&source=lnms&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwinuZ782vOBA
         xUZL1kFHdTSCeAQ0pQJegQIDBAB&biw=1280&bih=603&dpr=1.5#imgrc=aBATzSZ
         LsF_syM

Seeker+. (2015, August 11). How does language change your brain? [Video]. YouTube.
         https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aGITqiG-Ips

Serious Science. (2015, June 22). Cognitive Advantages of Bilingualism: Maria Polinsky.
         [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-ml2dD4Sik

Silk Road Themes. (n.d.). UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/silkroad/silk-road-
         themes/languages-and-endanger-languages/urdo

Storied. (2022, July 28). Is bilingualism a superpower? | Other words. [Video]. YouTube.
         https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGGFsOPQaAU

TED-Ed. (2015, June 23). Benefits of a bilingual brain [Video]. YouTube.
         https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MMmOLN5zBLY

Ticheloven, A., Blom, E., Leseman, P., & McMonagle, S. (2019). Translanguaging challenges in
         multilingual classrooms: scholar, teacher and student perspectives. International
         Journal of Multilingualism, 18. (3), 491-514.
         https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2019.1686002
Content Area Language and Literacy  164

Translanguaging pedagogy. (n.d.). Google. Retrieved June 25, 2023, from
         https://www.google.com/search?sca_esv=596971449&rlz=1C1GCEJ_enUS1002US10
         02&q=translanguaging+pedagogy&tbm=isch&source=lnms&sa=X&sqi=2&ved=2ah
         UKEwjg45SkgtGDAxVMLVkFHeX9AigQ0pQJegQIDBAB&biw=1280&bih=559&dpr=1
         .5#imgrc=aBATzSZLsF syM

Unbabel. (2019, October 25). What Happens to your brain when you learn a new language.
         [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Xkmqy8vFwk

U.O. Center for Applied Second Language Studies. (2022, December 4). What is
         Multilingualism? (InterCom Live: December 5, 2022) [Video]. YouTube.
         https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cjGipmQVo-g

Open A.I. References:
ClaudeAI. (2023). Chat [Abstract for the chapter text]. https://claude.ai/chat/168b43dc-f828-

         4bf8-99ca-486c96676332

OpenAI. (2023). ChatGPT (March 14 version) [Outline for translanguaging chapter].
         https://chat.openai.com/chat
Content Area Language and Literacy             165

Appendix: Multilingualism and Translanguaging

Activities & Discussion Ideas
Introducing translanguaging practices in any learning environment aims to immerse learners
in the content through interactive, multilingual activities that validate their cultural identities
and give hands-on practice with translanguaging techniques. Below are some activities to
engage learners with the key ideas from the text:

    · Vocabulary Translation Activity: Have students work in pairs or small groups to
         identify key vocabulary words from the text, write them on index cards in English, and
         then translate them into their home languages on the back of the cards. Students can
         use these cards to study the terms and discuss meanings.

    · Multilingual Artifact Share: Ask students to bring in an artifact (photo, object, song
         clip, etc.) from their family/culture that relates to their home language. Have them
         present briefly to the class in the language of their choice. This celebrates linguistic
         diversity.

    · Translanguaging Discussion: Divide into home language groups and have students
         discuss a prompt related to the text using translanguaging techniques. One student
         then summarizes the discussion for the whole class in English.

    · Think-Pair-Share Reflections: Have students reflect individually on a discussion
         question about translanguaging, share ideas with a partner in their preferred
         language, and then summarize the partner's viewpoint to the class in English.

    · Translanguaging Stations: Set up stations for reading, writing, listening, and
         speaking activities focused on the text content. Students rotate through and can utilize
         their full linguistic repertoire at each station.

    · Multilingual Media Creation: Have students create a multilingual glossary,
         newsletter, video, or podcast that summarizes and explains key translanguaging
         concepts from the text.

    · Explicit Translanguaging Instruction Simulation: Roleplay classroom scenarios
         modeling precise translanguaging teaching strategies from the text, like contrastive
         language analysis or scaffolded peer support.

Relevant Videos
Benefits of a Bilingual Brain: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MMmOLN5zBLY
Content Area Language and Literacy  166

What Happens to Your Brain When You Learn a New Language:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7XKmqy8vFwk

How Does Language Change Your Brain? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aGITqiG-Ips

Is Bilingualism a Superpower? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGGFsOPQaAU

Cognitive Advantages of Bilingualism: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-ml2dD4SIk

Speaking Multiple Languages: The Benefits of a Bilingual Brain:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wy2Dq_m67Lc

What is Multilingualism? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cjGipmQVo-g

                                                       Contributor

Saadia Ali, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, saadia@vt.edu

Saadia Ali, a Doctoral Candidate in Instructional Design and Technology in the department of
Curriculum and Instruction at Virginia Tech. She focuses on Open Education Resources,
Translanguaging, Accessibility and Motivation. She holds a Master of Arts degree in English
Linguistics and Literature from National University of Modern Languages (NUML), Islamabad,
Pakistan and a Master of Science in Bilingual, Multicultural Education and TESOL (Teachers of
English to the Speakers of Other Languages) from Southern Connecticut State University,
New Haven, CT. With over 16 years of teaching undergraduate and graduate students and
research experience in Higher Education, she has a passion for multilingualism, diversity,
equity, inclusion, and community engagement. She is an Adjunct faculty member at the
University of Northern Colorado and working as a Graduate Assistant in the Office of Global
Outreach & Online Engagement in Global Engineering, Engagement & Research
(GEER) department in the College of Engineering (COE) at Virginia Tech. Being a native
speaker of Urdu and fluent in English, Punjabi and Hindi languages, she is a also serving as
translator and interpreter for the Montgomery County Public Schools in the New River Valley
(NRV) area.
Content Area Language and Literacy    167

               Thank you to...
the Authors, Reviewers, and Readers.
