                CRITICAL
        EXPRESSIVISM

THEORY AND PRACTICE IN
           THE COMPOSITION
                       CLASSROOM

                                                    Edited by
                                                Tara Roeder
                                     and Roseanne Gatto
      CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM:
    THEORY AND PRACTICE IN
THE COMPOSITION CLASSROOM
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print edi-
tions. The publishers and the Series editor are teachers and researchers of writing,
committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate. We see the
opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing knowledge.
And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means for all to
articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment of literacy.

Recent Books in the Series
Sarah Allen, Beyond Argument: Essaying as a Practice of (Ex)Change (2015)
Steven J. Corbett, Beyond Dichotomy: Synergizing Writing Center and Classroom

    Pedagogies (2015)
Christy I. Wenger, Yoga Minds, Writing Bodies: Contemplative Writing Pedagogy

    (2015)
Terry Myers Zawacki and Michelle Cox, WAC and Second-Language Writers:

    Research Towards Linguistically and Culturally Inclusive Programs and Prac-
    tices, (2014)
Charles Bazerman, A Rhetoric of Literate Action: Literate Action Volume 1 (2013)
Charles Bazerman, A Theory of Literate Action: Literate Action Volume 2 (2013)
Katherine V. Wills and Rich Rice (Eds.), ePortfolio Performance Support Systems:
    Constructing, Presenting, and Assessing Portfolios (2013)
Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri (Eds.), The Centrality of Style (2013)
Chris Thaiss, Gerd Bräuer, Paula Carlino, Lisa Ganobcsik-Williams, and Aparna
    Sinha (Eds.), Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles of Academic Writing in
    Many Places (2012)
Andy Kirkpatrick and Zhichang Xu, Chinese Rhetoric and Writing: An Introduc-
    tion for Language Teachers (2012)
Doreen Starke-Meyerring, Anthony Paré, Natasha Artemeva, Miriam Horne,
    and Larissa Yousoubova (Eds.), Writing in Knowledge Societies (2011)
Martine Courant Rife, Shaun Slattery, and Dànielle Nicole DeVoss (Eds.),
    Copy(write): Intellectual Property in the Writing Classroom (2011)
      CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM:
    THEORY AND PRACTICE IN
THE COMPOSITION CLASSROOM

                    Edited by Tara Roeder and Roseanne Gatto

                               The WAC Clearinghouse
                                   wac.colostate.edu

                                Fort Collins, Colorado
                                       Parlor Press

                                 www.parlorpress.com
                              Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523

Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621

© 2015 by Tara Roeder and Roseanne Gatto. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International license.

ISBN 978-1-64215-057-5 (pdf ) | 978-1-64215-058-2 (epub) | 978-1-60235-651-1 (pbk.

DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575

Produced in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Critical expressivism : theory and practice in the composition classroom / edited by Tara Roeder
 and Roseanne Gatto. pages cm. -- (Perspectives on writing)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-60235-651-1 (pbk. : acid-free paper) -- ISBN 978-1-60235-652-8 (hardcover :
 acid-free paper) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-057-5 (pdf ) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-058-2 (epub)
1. English language--Rhetoric--Study and teaching. 2. English language--Composition and
 exercises--Study and teaching 3. Expressivism (Ethics) 4. Authorship--Study and teaching. I.
 Roeder, Tara, 1980- editor. II. Gatto, Roseanne, 1975- editor.
PE1404.C748 2015
808'.04207--dc23
2015006807

Copyeditor: Don Donahue
Designer: Tara Reeser
Series Editor: Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted by Colo-
rado State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as well as resources
for teachers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in digital format for free
download at wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and multime-
dia formats. This book is available in paperback, cloth, and Adobe eBook formats from Parlor
Press at www.parlorpress.com. For submission information or to find out about Parlor Press
publications, write to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621,
or email editor@parlorpress.com.
In memory of Anthony Petruzzi
                          Acknowledgments

                     Many thanks to Matthew T. Bird.
We are tremendously grateful for your time, knowledge, and patience.
CONTENTS

Preface: Yes, I Know That Expressivism Is Out of Vogue, But .... .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
       Lizbeth Bryant

Re-Imagining Expressivism: An Introduction.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
       Tara Roeder and Roseanne Gatto

Section One: Critical Self-Construction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
"Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problem Terms.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15

       Peter Elbow
Selfhood and the Personal Essay: A Pragmatic Defense .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33

       Thomas Newkirk
Critical Memoir and Identity Formation: Being,
Belonging, Becoming.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 55

       Nancy Mack
Critical Expressivism's Alchemical Challenge .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 69

       Derek Owens
Past-Writing: Negotiating the Complexity of Experience
and Memory.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 79

       Jean Bessette
Essai--A Metaphor: Writing to Show Thinking .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 93

       Lea Povozhaev

Section Two: Personal Writing and Social Change . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 105
Communication as Social Action: Critical Expressivist
Pedagogies in the Writing Classroom .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 107

       Patricia Webb Boyd
From the Personal to the Social.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 123

       Daniel F. Collins
"Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing
Each Other?" Nonviolence, Composition, and
Critical Expressivism .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 131

       Scott Wagar
Contents

The (Un)Knowable Self and Others: Critical Empathy
and Expressivism .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 149

       Eric Leake

Section 3: Histories. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 161
John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to
Expressivism (And Other Analogies You Won't Find on the SAT). .  .  .  .  . 163

       Maja Wilson
Expressive Pedagogies in the University of Pittsburgh's
Alternative Curriculum Program, 1973-1979.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 189

       Chris Warnick
Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism: Revising
"Voice" through Wordsworth's Prefaces. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 201

       Hannah J. Rule
Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience:
Double Consciousness, Cognition, and Human Nature.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 219

       Anthony Petruzzi *

Section Four: Pedagogies . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 247
Place-Based Genre Writing as Critical Expressivist Practice.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 249

       David Seitz
Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based
Classroom: A Motivation for Foregrounding the Personal.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 261

       Kim M. Davis
The Economy of Expressivism and Its Legacy of
Low/No-Stakes Writing .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 281

       Sheri Rysdam
Revisiting Radical Revision.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 289

       Jeff Sommers
Contributors.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 305

viii
      CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM:
    THEORY AND PRACTICE IN
THE COMPOSITION CLASSROOM
PREFACE: YES, I KNOW THAT
EXPRESSIVISM IS OUT OF VOGUE,
BUT ...

Lizbeth Bryant
Purdue University Calumet

    Critical Expressivism: Theory and Practice in the Composition Classroom offers
those of us with "Yes-But" syndrome a solution. I was reminded of this syn-
drome in a webinar in which Richard Johnson-Sheehan claims, "I think Chuck
[Paine] and I are still process people despite some of the theoretical arguments
for post-process. We still believe we are teaching students a writing process, and
in a sense, genres guide us from the beginning of the process to the end." John-
son-Sheehan and Paine explain and justify their decision to teach writing as a
process with a "yes-but" approach: Yes, I know that in our growth as a discipline
we have moved from a focus on writing as a process to the social and cultural
factors that impact language in our electronic worlds, but I still teach writing as
a process and assist my students with developing their processes.

    Johnson-Sheehan, a scholar in rhetoric and composition, admits in 2012
that he knows this approach to writing has been trashed by scholars who have
controlled our meta-narrative, but admits that he sees a need for it. I have faced
the same struggle to justify how I teach writing and what I study. Colleagues
have asked, "Liz, how can you still focus on teaching expressivism and voice
when there are new theories to study?" That's simple--I build new theories and
practices into my meta-narrative of Composition Studies. This either/or episte-
mology doesn't work.

    But, composition scholarship leads us to believe that we "are" one or the oth-
er. In our scholarship one cannot "be" both/and because the significant scholars
in our field have said that a social epistemic view of writing precludes an Expres-
sive and Cognitive view of writing. However, as I work with the myriad of writ-
ers in my classes from first-year writing to graduate thesis writing, I experience
writers thinking and composing in various paradigms. Havier from East Chi-
cago struggles with translating his mixture of black dialect and Spanglish into
Standard American English. When Paul asks me if he should include a piece of
research and a quote in his report, I ask him to see his writing situation from the
cognitive paradigm: "Does your audience need this information to understand
and be convinced of your position?" Charmaine struggles to write the findings

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.1.1  3
Bryant

from her original research into the final drafts of her thesis. She asks, "Can I re-
ally tell philosophy professors how I think they should teach writing?" To assure
her that this is what she is supposed to do, I draw on M. M. Bakhtin's idea of
writing as a conversation that she can join, and how voice has both expressive as
well as social dimensions.

    As a teacher and writer, I use various theoretical paradigms to give me dif-
ferent views of the phenomena of writing. Each of these theories is a slice of the
writing pie--one aspect of this intricate, analytical, emotional practice we use to
bring thought to language. One of these theories does not explain it all, so we
keep studying writers and writing, trying to figure it out in its entirety.

    Can we create a new metanarrative, one based in building on the theories of
others? Certainly. We can view this phenomenon of writing that we teach, study,
and practice as composed of the many theories and practices that have been and
are being developed in our scholarship. This is the mission of Critical Expressiv-
ism: Theory and Practice in the Composition Classroom. Its writers and editors are
building on Sherrie Gradin's Romancing Rhetorics: Social Expressivist Perspectives
on the Teaching of Writing from 1995 that theorizes a relationship between ex-
pressivism and social-constructivism (xviii). The problem with accomplishing
this is that academia has been built on one-upmanship: if my theory is going to
be given any credit, I have to trash the ones before me.

    For example, James Berlin's words in "Rhetoric and Ideology in the Writing
Class" set up his classical "trashing" of expressive rhetoric. In closing his essay
Berlin writes, "it should now be apparent that a way of teaching is never in-
nocent. Every pedagogy is imbricated in ideology, is a set of tacit assumptions
about what is real, what is good, what is possible, and how power ought to be
distributed." He then reiterates the ideology behind cognitive and expressive
rhetoric, and ends with his support of social-epistemic rhetoric in which, "so-
cial-epistemic rhetoric attempts to place the question of ideology at the center
of the teaching of writing. It offers both a detailed analysis of dehumanizing
social experience and a self-critical and overtly historicized alternative based on
democratic practices in the economic social, and political, and cultural spheres.
It is obvious that I find this alternative the most worthy of emulation in the
classroom, all the while admitting that it is the least formulaic and the most
difficult to carry out" (492). In the last sentence Berlin reminds every writing
teacher that "a rhetoric cannot escape the ideological question, and to ignore this
is to fail our responsibilities as teachers and as citizens" (493).

    Here is the subtle yet evident belief that if teachers choose to employ a cogni-
tive or expressive teaching practice, they have failed. Not wanting to be complete
failures, one might employ the "yes-but" strategy: "Yes. I know that Berlin says
this strategy is not good, but it certainly works in this class right here, right now."

4
                                                                                                        Preface

    James J. Sosnoski labels these spaces for trashed theories as theory junkyards.
We reach back into our theoretical junkyards to choose a theory and teaching
practice that works for us in individual teaching situations, going to the "hard-
to-reach basement shelves, boxes in attics, files, that our current word processors
barely recognize" (Sosnoski 25). In my attic, I have blue milk crates of articles on
student conferencing and archetypal criticism. My husband asks me each year if
we can get rid of the crates because he's tired of moving them; my department
chair, the narratologist, tells me that no one does that type of criticism anymore:
"Liz, come on, do you really believe that archetypes are passed down in our
unconsciousness?" And I respond, "You know, I'm not sure about that collective
unconscious, but I do know that I can teach The House on Mango Street from the
perspective of Esparanza's quest myth." Here's another yes-but justification for
using tools that have been discounted and trashed.

    Literary Criticism is also built on this pattern of trashing the current theo-
ry to propose the new. The New Critics burst onto the academic scene in the
1940s with their criticism of the biographical critics. Because the New Critics
forbade the study of the author, they trashed the biographical critics. In "The
Intentional Fallacy" W. K. Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley claim that it is a
fallacy to determine the meaning of a poem by looking to the intentions of the
author. Wimsatt and Beardsley argued that embedded in the poem are meanings
that the well-trained critic can interpret. Through the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s,
the New Critics were in vogue until the Marxists, feminists, and new historians
came along to tell us what was wrong with the New Critics and why they should
be banished to the theory junkyard.

    But if we stay with the theory junkyard, we trash many theories that explain
how, why, when, and where writing happens. Each of the expressive, cognitive,
and social-epistemic rhetorics, as well as Thomas Kent's theory of hermeneutic
guessing that moved us into the post-process movement, explains just one aspect
of producing texts. The theories build to give us more insight into what humans
do as they compose and what teachers do to build writers. Our theories build;
they are not trash. And each time a theory is added, our pie gets larger and larger
with many more slices for everyone when they need it.

    The irony is that in the midst of this supposed trashing there is building.
Richard Fulkerson's study of composition at the turn of the twenty-first century
reports on "the quiet expansion of Expressive approaches to teaching writing"
(654). In 2005 Fulkerson offered his "metatheory" of composition scholarship in
which he discerns that Expressivism is alive and well "despite numerous pound-
ings by the cannons of postmodernism and resulting eulogies" (655).

    Composition's metanarrative is in need of a revision that integrates all that
we have discerned about writing and the teaching of writing: a metavision of

                                                                                                    5
Bryant

our field that encompasses the places we have been and the theories and rheto-
rics that we have practiced. And this is what the editors and authors of Critical
Expressivism: Theory and Practice in the Composition Classroom offer us. Their
classroom stories build a both/and metanarrative of composition as they theorize
how the expressive practices are embedded in the social practices and how the
social practices are imbedded in the expressive practices of writing and learning.

REFERENCES
Berlin, J. A. (1988). Rhetoric and ideology in the writing class. College English,

   50(5), 477-494.
Fulkerson, R. (2005). Composition at the turn of the twenty-first century. Col-

   lege Composition and Communication, 56(4), 654-687.
Gradin, S. L. (1995). Romancing rhetorics: Social expressivist perspectives on the

   teaching of writing. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Johnson-Sheehan, R., & Paine, C. (2010). Teaching with genre: Cure for the

   common writing course. Retrieved from Pearson Online Professional Devel-
   opment Web site: http://www.englishinstructorexchange.com/2012/03/15/
   teaching-with-genre-cure-for-the-common-writing-course-by-richard-john-
   son-sheehan-charles-paine-created-october-2010/
Kent, T. (1989). Paralogic hermeneutics and the possibilities of rhetoric. Rheto-
   ric Review, 8(1), 24-42.
Sosnoski, J. J. (2002). The theory junkyard. In J. J. Williams (Ed.), The Institu-
   tion of Literature (pp. 25-42). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Wimsatt, W. K., Jr., & Beardsley, M. (1946). The intentional fallacy. Sewanee
   Review, 54, 468-488.

6
RE-IMAGINING EXPRESSIVISM:
AN INTRODUCTION

      Tara Roeder and Roseanne Gatto
      St. John's University

    It's no secret that the term "expressivism" has been a divisive one in the field
of composition and rhetoric. In order to avoid simply rehashing old debates, we
began this project with the rejection of an overly simplified "social epistemic"/"-
expressivist" binary. Our goal here is to begin a new conversation, one in which
established and emerging scholars united by a belief that the term expressivism
continues to have a vitally important function in our field can explore the shape
of expressivist theory, research, and pedagogy in the twenty-first century.

    While our project undertakes the question of what it might mean to re-ap-
propriate the term expressivism, an equally important one might be: why both-
er? As Peter Elbow himself writes in his contribution to this volume, "As far as I
can tell, the term `expressivist' was coined and used only by people who wanted
a word for people they disapproved of and wanted to discredit." As Sherrie L.
Gradin points out in her groundbreaking book Romancing Rhetorics: Social Ex-
pressivist Perspectives on the Teaching of Writing (a book to which we are greatly
indebted, and which in many ways began the conversation we are continuing
today), "the expressivist emphasis on imagination, creativity, and process ... has
often resulted in a charge of anti-intellectualism" (1995, p. 7).

    In an email exchange several of us participated in while working on this
project, Peter Elbow raised a concern about the value of the term expressivism
itself, along with the intriguing question: "Could it be an instance of disparaged
people deciding to use the term of disparagement out of pride?" That certainly
resonated with the two of us, who have indeed heard disparaging criticism from
colleagues who view expressivism as outmoded, elitist, or uncritical. The term
"expressivism" seems quaint, somehow; identifying as "expressivist" naïve. So
while it makes sense to challenge the very use of the term, it also began to make
sense that reclaiming it (or, claiming it for the first time, since it was, as Elbow
reminds us, not "ours" to begin with) might be a gently subversive act. (Or a
perversely ironic one?) Or, as Nancy Mack put it, "building on the term by at-
taching the word `critical' is a rebellious action--and not just reactionary. How
terms accrue meaning is Bakhtinian. We can only hope to appropriate the word
momentarily and utter it with our accent."

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.1.3  7
Roeder and Gatto

    So it is with our accent that we offer this exploration of not only how the
term expressivism came to mean, but also how it might come to mean anew. We
believe that the best expressivist practices have always been about complex ne-
gotiations between self and other, and the dismantling of the "public"/"private"
binary that still seems to too often haunt our conversations about writing and
pedagogy. But we also want to push our theory and practice further, conceptu-
alizing the ways in which our expressivist values inform our scholarship and our
teaching in an increasingly corporatized educational system.

    So what exactly do we value? Our contributors have no one, uniform voice or
approach, and we think this is a good thing. We notice that when the two of us
talk about teaching and writing, we spend a lot of time questioning handbooks
and guides for the "novice" writer, where race and gender and class and sexuality
are erased in the name of an increasingly ludicrous concept of "correctness." We
know we don't believe in prescriptions or generalities; we believe in a localized,
context-specific pedagogy where one size never fits all. And we fiercely value our
students and the complex embodied knowledge they bring to our classrooms.
We think that when their experiences are at the forefront of our classrooms,
exciting thoughts, relevant research, and meaningful connections can take place
via a variety of platforms, from handbound books to conversations to YouTube
videos.

    So what makes this "expressivist"? We are indebted to a tradition in which
scholars such as Peter Elbow, Sherrie Gradin, Nancy Mack, Thomas Newkirk,
Thomas O'Donnell, Michelle Payne, Lad Tobin, and Robert Yagelski have
demonstrated the complex ways in which the "social" and "personal" are not
two poles in a binary system. We are also indebted to the feminist maxim, "the
personal is political." We hope that this will be the beginning of a new discus-
sion, one in which the complex interactions between self and other are contex-
tualized in a way that values the individual circumstances of our students' lives
and the ways in which they make meaning of their experiences and interrogate
the culture in which they live.

    Our contributors focus on both how to position expressivism theoretically
within twenty-first century composition studies, and how specific assignments
and pedagogies can facilitate our understanding of what expressivist practices
mean to our students and ourselves. While many of the essays share similar
themes, and there is some overlap between the sections, we identified four major
strands surfacing in our contributors' work.

    Section One, entitled "Critical Self-Construction," complicates the notion
that "personal" writing and "academic" writing occupy separate categories on
some hierarchy of sophistication. It opens with Peter Elbow, who problematizes
the very terms "expressivism" and "personal writing" that have so long been

8
                                                                                 Re-Imagining Expressivism

connected with his work. He questions what the term "personal" means, point-
ing out that when we are truly invested in "academic" topics, our own feelings,
histories, experiences, and languages will inevitably shape our texts: "I may not
be writing here about my sex life or my feelings about a sunset, but it's a per-
sonal story nevertheless." This insight sheds a meaningful light on the collective
project we are undertaking here, one in which each contributor was compelled
to become involved because of her or his own beliefs and experiences as teachers,
writers, and thinkers.

    Thomas Newkirk analyzes the sources of some teachers' "discomfort" in the
face of "personal" writing, exploring the complexity involved in responding to
the traumatic and the moralistic in student texts. He also makes a powerful case
against dismissing the "personal essay" through the words of his student Bri-
anna, who reminds us that "by turning a blind eye to these types of [personal]
essays, we might as well be turning a blind eye to literature itself." Nancy Mack
and Derek Owens also challenge the idea that writing about the self is necessarily
a solipsistic or uncritical act. Mack looks at the critical function of memoir, a
genre that allows writers and readers to question stability and essentialist notions
of identity: "a critical memoir approach asks the writer to continually reconsider
one's own master narratives," raising questions about how such stories "could
be actively re-interpreted and revised to represent a newly constructed, more
ethical truth." Such an insight is exciting in the face of the kind of stereotypical
"progression" Owens sees as characteristic in many composition courses: "One
might picture the progression like some kind of game board--each student en-
tering via their own unique paths and histories, engaging with them along the
way, but ultimately everyone coming closer and closer to a common finish line
where it's not their `expressed' personal histories that matter but, say, the way
they marshal evidence, cite sources, make inferences, assemble claims. Establish
authority." The fact that personally meaningful work is, at its best, also "critical"
work is evidenced by Owens' own experience composing his memoir about his
mother, a process through which he "became interested in the strangeness of
memory and the slipperiness of identity." Jean Bessette also stresses the "dy-
namic slipperiness of memory" in her contribution to this volume, exploring
the ways in which feminist conceptions of memory as "necessarily social and
discursive" can contribute to an enriched understanding of the ways in which
asking students to write themselves is an inherently critical act, one in which we
need to face head on static and limiting notions of what our experiences signify.
Lea Povozhaev also tackles the tidy divides between "creative," "personal," and
"academic" writing, pointing out that the diverse work of "children creating art,
prisoners writing poems, and students writing" evidences the fact that creative
acts can be "pleasurable, therapeutic, and educational." The act of eschewing

                                                                                                    9
Roeder and Gatto

rigid generic distinctions can, our contributors evidence, be both liberatory and
pedagogically useful.

    Section Two, "Personal Writing and Social Change," explores some of the
multiple ways in which expressivist theory and practice are connected to larger
political and social goals. For Patricia Webb Boyd, in a period when "many
may feel unable to control their own lives, much less effect change in larger
society," the question at hand becomes: "How can we imagine creative alterna-
tives where students and teachers can ... see themselves as active participants in
public spheres/discourses who can co-create change rather than be passive con-
sumers?" Boyd sees the role of critical expressivism as one that encourages our
students to feel connected to their own experiences, and thus to larger goals and
communities. Daniel Collins, in his lyric collage, maintains that "expressivist
writing theory ... upholds the idea that to write is to discover oneself amidst an
array of others." It is through our students' writing about their lived experience
that they can forge connections to a larger culture, and begin to enact change.
Scott Wagar and Eric Leake both focus on the relationship between expressivist
practice and empathy. For Wagar, the goals of non-violence and recognition of
interdependence can be facilitated through a pedagogy based on the insights of
theorists such as Mary Rose O'Reilly, who asks "Is it possible to teach English so
that people stop killing each other?" A fraught question, but one that is essential
to the goals of critical expressivist pedagogy--a pedagogy in which we might
"consciously re-frame our work in non-violent terms." This is not to suggest
that we "critical expressivists" have all the answers: as Eric Leake reminds us in
his nuanced examination of the role of empathy in successful expressivist teach-
ing, "a critical empathy continually reminds us that empathy is always at best
a careful and purposeful approximation of another's experience." However, by
working together with our students, we may find the kind of ground in which
our empathy can be at once nourished and examined.

    Section Three, "Histories," provides valuable insight into the ways in which
expressivist pedagogies and ideas have developed contextually. Maja Wilson in-
structively teases out the links between Berlin's "battle with the expressivists and
Watson's battle with the introspectionists." Her playful and salient piece urges us
to locate our theories of composition on solid ethical territory, while providing
insightful, contextualized readings of Berlin in light of John Watson's theories
of behaviorism. Chris Warnick's essay takes up Karen Surnam Paley's call to "re-
search actual `expressionist' classroom practice" by delving into materials from
The University of Pittsburgh's "Alternative Curriculum" of the 1970s, exam-
ining the ways in which the innovative program drew on expressivist philoso-
phies, practices, and assignments. Warnick's essay leaves us with a valuable call
to continue the kind of archival research that will better allow us to understand

10
                                                                                 Re-Imagining Expressivism

the practical results of expressivist pedagogies. Hannah Rule explores the rich
historical relationship between Romanticism and expressivism, arguing that par-
ticular "pedagogies and rhetorics are deemed untenable because they are labeled
romantic or expressivist, or romantic-expressivist." Rule's essay complicates the
neat divides between the various composition "camps" through a careful reading
of both the Romantics and the "expressivists." Anthony Petruzzi similarly looks
to locate expressivist practice within a history of "critical conscience" as defined
by Emerson, offering a nuanced reading of the role of pragmatism in the devel-
opment of expressivist philosophy.

    Our final section, "Pedagogies," explores specific expressivist assignments and
classroom practices in hopes of illuminating what exactly some of us do as critical
expressivists. David Seitz questions the value of having our students "consume
academic texts ... and only reproduce their discourse and generic forms." He
instead offers assignments "supported by principles of place-based education and
theories of genre as textual sites of social action," exploring the ways in which
students can use writing as a way to mediate between the expectations of the
academy and their own sense of the cultures and communities they occupy. Kim
M. Davis urges us to value the "intersection of community-based learning and
critical pedagogy." Davis' ethnographic study of her students in Detroit perfectly
illustrates the ways in which "personal writing became the vehicle to help bridge
the connection between students' lived realities regarding race and place and the
critical pedagogy goal of multiculturalism." Sheri Rysdam turns to the expressiv-
ist legacy of "low/no stakes writing" as she examines the ways in which low-stakes
assignments have a particularly valuable function for emerging student writers.
Jeff Sommers re-visits the concept of radical revision in concrete terms, drawing
on his own students' positive experiences with acts of meaningfully re-entering
their texts and discovering the "rich possibilities open to them through revision."

    There's no doubt that we and our students face new challenges as we move
through the twenty-first century together. We certainly don't have all the answers
to the questions the writers in our courses will grapple with as they continue to
make sense of their experiences, their educations, and the culture of violence
in which they live. But we do hope that we can offer assignments, approaches,
and responses that are worthy of them, and that enable them to make sense of
their experiences and the world around them in meaningful, innovative, and
self-directed ways.

REFERENCE

Gradin, S. (1995). Romancing rhetorics: Social expressivist perspectives on the teach-
   ing of writing. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

                                                                                                  11
             SECTION ONE:
CRITICAL SELF-CONSTRUCTION
"PERSONAL WRITING"
AND "EXPRESSIVISM"
AS PROBLEM TERMS

      Peter Elbow
      University of Massachussetts Amherst

    When dispute about something goes round and round without resolution,
it's often a sign that the key term has too many unexplored meanings. I aim to
show a kind of hidden ambiguity in "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism,"
and show how this leads to confusion and bad thinking. First, I'll explore the
ambiguity in "personal writing." Then I'll explore "expressivism." James Berlin
said that personal writing--writing about the self--is the hallmark of expres-
sivism and named me as a prime expressivist. I'll try to explain why I and other
so-called "expressivists" made a prominent place for personal writing but didn't
consider it better or more important than other kinds of writing.

PART I: DIFFERENT DIMENSIONS OF PERSONAL WRITING

    The term personal writing has caused needless argument and confusion be-
cause in fact there is no such thing as "personal writing" in itself. There are three
different dimensions of the personal and they can be present in various combi-
nations in any piece of writing. The topic can be personal or not; the language
can be personal or not; and the thinking can be personal or not.

    Typical personal topics are the feelings or experiences of the particular writer.
    Typical personal language is everyday spoken, colloquial, vernacular, or
low-register language and syntax.
    Typical personal thinking makes use of metaphors, feelings, associations,
hunches, and other such processes that are not systematic or disciplined.1

The Topic Can Be Personal--or Not

    A personal topic might be "My Experiences with Revising" or "My Experi-
ences in the Peace Corps in Haiti." A striking example is Margaret Bullet-Jonas'
Holy Hunger, a penetrating account of her struggles with an eating disorder.
Personal topics contrast with nonpersonal topics like these: "The Revising Prac-
tices of First-Year Students" or "How the Peace Corps Works" or "Conditions

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.01  15
Elbow

in Haiti after the Hurricane" or "Cultural Causes of Eating Disorders." Essays
on these nonpersonal topics might never treat the writer or her experience at all.

    Obviously there is a continuum or spectrum between completely personal
and nonpersonal topics. One example is common in journalism or magazine
writing and some books: the writing is based on interviews and it almost floods
the reader with the most deeply personal details of someone's life, often using
lots of personal language from the interviewee. Yet the writer remains complete-
ly hidden and uses no personal language in his or her own voice. Here's another
marginal case: a writer takes a seemingly personal topic--say his or her own
alcohol use--and make it nonpersonal by taking a wholly detached, medical, or
phenomenological approach. (Sometimes this is not so much a way of making
the topic impersonal as using highly detached impersonal thinking or language
for a personal topic.)

    There's a kind of hybrid between personal and nonpersonal that has become
a recognizable genre in first-year writing courses: teachers have discovered that
students often do a better job with "academic research"--e.g., eating habits or
college study habits--if the writer also uses the paper to explore his or her own
personal experiences in the area. Of course adults and professionals do the same
thing. Jane Hindman, in "Making Writing Matter," writes of the personal topic
of her own drinking in an essay that's also about the impersonal topic of human
discourse and agency. Nancy Sommers, in "Between the Drafts," writes of the
personal topic of her own revising in an essay that's also about revising in gen-
eral. Keith Gilyard uses alternate chapters to focus on the personal and nonper-
sonal as a topic in Voices of the Self.

    Though we thus see marginal or mixed topics, the main point bears repeat-
ing: the topic can be personal or not regardless of whether the thinking or lan-
guage is personal.

The Language Can Be Personal--or Not

    What is personal language? We usually call language personal if it uses slang
or colloquial forms or an informal register. There's a natural implied metaphor
here of physical closeness and presence (a "metaphor we live by"): when some-
one gets very close it feels personal. What's closest and most personal is a hug or
embrace. Distance and absence feel more impersonal or formal. Colloquial lan-
guage sounds like speech, and speech gives us more sense of the writer's physical
presence sitting next to us--more intimate and therefore more personal.

    A word like "talky" feels more personal than "colloquial;" "figure out" than
"conclude." A certain number of teachers and academic journals ban contrac-
tions: contractions give the sound of speech; non-contractions give a sound less

16
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

heard in speech. The first person "I" calls attention to the presence of the writer
and presumably this explains the ritual prohibition against it in many academic
situations--especially in science (APA guidelines to the contrary notwithstand-
ing). "We" somewhat dilutes the stain of first person. The second person "you"
calls attention to the reader as a person, and even that seems enough to be re-
garded as too personal for some academic writing. Because most of these features
give a greater sense of presence or of contact between writer and reader, Deborah
Tannen and other linguists call them "involvement" strategies.

    The use of a question can make language more personal by implying conver-
sational contact between writer and reader. Compare these two passages:

         There is only a faint and ambiguous correlation between pros-
         tate cancer and a high PSA reading.

         But how about PSA tests for prostate cancer? How much can
         we trust them?

    Again it must be remembered that there's no black/white dividing line be-
tween personal and nonpersonal language, but rather a continuum.

    Personal language can be used for nonpersonal topics. The most obvious site
is in much note-taking, freewriting, rough exploratory writing, and informal
letter writing when the topic is wholly nonpersonal and perhaps scholarly--for
example even some technical scientific topic. Email has increased the amount of
personal language and personal thinking used for nonpersonal topics.

    But do we find personal language in published writing about nonpersonal
topics? If we look back over the last fifty years or so at newspapers, magazines,
and nonfiction for a wide audience, we notice a general drift along the con-
tinuum towards more informal, personal registers in published writing. Such
informality of language was often experienced as a violation of "proper standards
for writing." But popular nonfiction has come to use more and more personal
registers--even about nonpersonal topics. Literary nonfiction in particular (for
example in nature writing) often uses some of the more linguistically personal
resources of fiction.

    In The New Yorker--a magazine that's always been fastidious about lan-
guage--we find a growing use of informal colloquial language. Look at the first
sentence in the second paragraph below:

         There is nothing wrong with cars, TV sets, and running
         shoes. What's wrong is the waste--chemicals, heavy metals,
         CO2--that's produced when we make them, use them, and,
         eventually, throw them away. Eliminate that waste, and you
         eliminate the problem.

                                                                                                  17
Elbow

         Right, and why not cure cancer while you're at it? Last time we
         checked, waste--landfills, smog, river sludge--was the price
         we paid for a healthy economy. (Surowiecki, 2002, p. 56)

    William Safire often took a conservative line about language in his New York
Times columns, so it's striking to see how much personal language he used for
the nonpersonal topic of correct and incorrect language. His writing was often
conversational, casual, first person, sometimes slangy. He celebrated the clash of
registers and liked sudden swerves into the personal, especially in asides: "In the
age of multiculturalism and interdisciplinarianism (there's a new one), most of
the nonscientific uses of the term have been pejorative." In the same column,
he started a section with a one-sentence paragraph: "You pay for good linguistic
lawyering, you get it." And he ends the section with yet a shorter paragraph: "I
spell it tchotchki. Do I need a lawyer?"

    Students often use informal language for impersonal topics even if they have
been directed to avoid it. But teachers should note how often good writers in
the world bring to bear personal language and personal thinking on nonpersonal
topics--and that most of our students will do virtually all of their future writing
outside the academy. Anne Herrington writes: "Failing to recognize the presence
of [linguistic] rendering [of personal experience] in some academic writing--in-
cluding writing within composition studies--contributes to dismissing its value
in undergraduate writing" (2002, p. 233). A number of business genres, howev-
er, are notable for strenuously resisting personal language.

    In published academic writing we also see a gradual slide toward informal
language over the last fifty years. Changes might seem subtle if you are in the
middle of them, but I gather that scholarly writing in, say, Spain and Germany
retains a formality that has been abandoned here. On the other hand, it's in-
teresting to note nontrivial movement in the other direction toward a formal
register in academic writing in our field. Essays from the early days of College
Composition and Communication tended to use a more personal register than
what we've seen since the field has worked harder at professionalism. Think
about some of the essays by, say, Edward Corbett and James Corder--esteemed
scholars who nevertheless pulled their chair up close to readers and talked fair-
ly personally and directly to them. Also, older scholarship in English studies
tended to follow a British tradition of scholarly writing that was slightly talkier
than the more formal nonpersonal Germanic tradition in scholarship adopted
in the academic world some time in the twentieth century. (Essays for a student
audience are more likely to use more personal language, yet oddly enough, it
can work the other way too. When Martha Kolln addresses other teachers in the
instructor's manual of her Rhetorical Grammar (1991, p. 15), she is willing to
write more personally than she does to students: she talks personally about an

18
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

anecdote from her life, but doesn't permit herself this kind of informality in the
book intended for students.)

    When academics publish a talk or speech, they are likely to use more infor-
mal colloquial personal language (though I've often been asked by copy editors
to remove such language when I've had a talk accepted for publication).

    Nonpersonal language can also be used for personal topics. We often don't
notice impersonal language when the topic or content is blatantly self-disclos-
ing. But most people are far more conservative about language than about ideas
or content, and the language habits of writers are often especially strong. Train-
ing in academic discourse goes deep. Copy editors may weed out locutions in a
personal or informal register that remain in the writer's final draft. Consider Jane
Hindman's amazingly personal essay that also uses an experimental form: three
different type faces for three different voices. It's deeply confessional about per-
sonal matters that few are willing to address. Yet not much of the language itself
is particularly personal; most of it is either standard edited English or even quite
academic. I noticed only three exceptions: three short italicized paragraphs of
inner speech dropped in at different points that use distinctly personal writing.
For another example, Mary Louise Buley-Meissner speaks of a writer's personal
essay where "The word I appears twenty-nine times in thirty-four sentences, yet
the self written into her text is voiceless, anonymous" (1990, p. 52).

    The most striking example of nonpersonal language used for personal top-
ics is illustrated when professionals like psychiatrists, psychologists, or doctors
write professionally about very personal issues like sexuality or divorce--albeit
the personal issues of other people. The topic is a very personal story, but the
language will usually be in the rubber-gloved, nonpersonal register of their dis-
cipline.

Thinking Too Can Be Personal--or Not

    What is personal thinking? The notion might seem counterintuitive and
a few people might argue that thinking is only thinking if it follows rules of
deductive logic. But the word "thinking" is not normally used so narrowly in
English. Common parlance applies the term to a broad range of cognitive pro-
cesses: metaphorical thinking, trains of feelings, story telling, illustrative exam-
ples or anecdotes, inferences based on association rather than strict logic, and
perhaps even mere hunches. Andrea Lunsford speaks of how writing can make
a space for intuition, emotion, and the body in writing and in the construction
of knowledge--what Kenneth Burke calls the paralogical, to go along with the
logical that has had a stranglehold on the teaching of writing (1998, p. 24). And
feminists have written about how the term "thinking" has been too narrowly
defined in ways that represent patriarchy (Falmagne).

                                                                                                  19
Elbow

    A particular kind of personal thinking could be called narrative thinking. Je-
rome Bruner made his reputation and pretty much defined the field of cognitive
psychology by defining thinking or cognition as the abstract process of forming
abstract categories. But late in his career he wrote a notable and influential book,
Actual Minds, arguing that narrative thinking is equally central in human thinking
(1986). Anthropologists like Lévi-Strauss showed how myths are examples of vig-
orous thinking about large nonpersonal issues. Mina Shaughnessy praised Richard
Hoggart and James Baldwin for their skill in using autobiography to do intellectu-
al work (Bartholomae, 1980). See also the special issue of Pre/Text devoted to per-
sonal and expressive writing doing the work of academic discourse (Elbow, 1990).

    Again, it's obvious that there is an extended continuum between nonperson-
al and personal thinking.

    In addition, personal thinking is often applied to nonpersonal topics. Mon-
taigne enacted and celebrated what can only be called personal thinking, even
when his topic was nonpersonal (the education of children, for example). Be-
cause he actually invented the essay and named it with a word that means "an
attempt," many have argued that the essay itself is a genre with an inherent link
to informal personal thinking. He associated what is "human" with what is not
"ordered" by a strict (French) "method." Naturally, much poetry too applies
personal, intuitional, associative thinking to nonpersonal topics (for example,
Wallace Stevens' "The Idea of Order at Key West").

    Ken Macrorie made an important contribution to our field with his "I Search
Essay," showing countless students how to get more invested in serious research
by bringing personal intuitive thinking to bear. And there has been an explosion
of interest in creative nonfiction, a genre that often applies personal thinking to
nonpersonal topics. William Safire liked to do policy analysis by pretending to
get inside the feelings of public figures:

         I am John Kerry, falling farther behind in the polls with only
         six weeks to go.

         I've already shaken up my staff again ...

         The "fortunate son" business hasn't hurt Bush--and I wasn't
         exactly born in a log cabin. (2004)

    When Nicholas Baker writes about the impersonal topic of punctuation he
conveys lots of history and technical information, but his actual mode of think-
ing about it is often strikingly personal. And his language slides toward the
colloquial and personal. Peter Medawar, Nobel prize winner in biology, writes
eloquently about the difference between the associational and intuitive think-
ing that scientists use to figure out their hypotheses, and the nonpersonal dis-
ciplined form in which they typically present their findings. Nancy Sommers

20
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

uses her feelings to help her think about the nonpersonal topic of revising. Jane
Hindman thinks with her experience--noticing one feeling and then probing
and waiting to find another feeling underneath it--in order to wrestle with the
abstract nonpersonal issue of the degree to which the self is constructed by dis-
course. Fontaine and Hunter's Writing Ourselves into the Story is one of various
collections of essays that use personal experience for thinking about academic
topics in composition.

Is this Differential Analysis Necessary?

    This is not just an exercise in casuistic categorizing for its own sake (which
might occasionally have been a temptation for Aristotle). I see the same practical
consequences for this analysis as I argued in my discussion of five species of voice
(1994b) and multiple species of academic discourse (1991). When people fail to
notice that a single term is hiding multiple meanings, they often think carelessly
and argue fruitlessly past each other: they are unconsciously assuming different
definitions of personal writing, voice, or academic discourse.

    For example, readers often assume that a text is personal because it is more
or less dominated by, say, strongly personal language (what a reader might call
"flagrantly personal"). They fail to consider the nonpersonal nature of the topic
and even the thinking. This kind of misjudgment is particularly harmful when
a teacher tells the student, "this is too personal." The student is liable to try to
push the thinking and the focus of the topic even further towards the imperson-
al--often making the essay ineffectively general and abstract. How much better
if the teacher could have said, "It's only your language that is too personal for
this context." It might even be that the essay would have been better if the stu-
dent nudged the thinking and topic focus a bit more in the personal direction.
By the same token, an essay might be almost embarrassingly self-disclosing in
topic--but not in language or thinking. (I'd say that Jane Tompkins sometimes
wanders in this direction.)

    When teachers or other readers take enough care to notice, for example, the
differences between personal elements among the three dimensions of writing,
they also have a better chance of attending to their own personal reactions and
engaging in careful thinking: "This paper really irritates me. I wonder why. Has
it touched on a sore spot for me, or is there in fact a feature in the text that asks
readers to experience something challenging or `in your face'?"

    The kind of differential analysis I've been using here has led me to argue
more generally for rubrics in teacher response and assessment (and sometimes
even peer response). Readers who fail to distinguish among the dimensions of a
text (e.g., thinking, organization, clarity of sentences, mechanics) often fall into

                                                                                                  21
Elbow

snap holistic judgments. This kind of unthinking interpretation is particularly
harmful when a paper is full of errors in grammar and spelling--especially gram-
mar that a teacher unconsciously associates with "stupid." Such a teacher fails
to see many genuine strengths in the paper and therefore gives misleading and
actually damaging feedback--or an invalid grade. Here's a sad comment by an
experienced teacher about a piece of writing by speaker of African-American En-
glish: "Only now can I really address the underlying thinking and understanding
problems--because previously the writing was so atrocious that I couldn't see
them." (I took this from a composition listserv.) In a comparable way, an entire
essay can seem to be tainted for some readers because it embodies political or
religious or cultural views that the teacher experiences as toxic.

PART II: MY RELATIONSHIP WITH PERSONAL WRITING
AND EXPRESSIVISM

    I wonder whether you noticed that my own writing throughout Part One
is almost entirely nonpersonal--in topic, thinking, and language. Perhaps the
language might be experienced by some readers as slightly personal because I
avoided a "formal" or "high" register--and occasionally used "I." But does that
make it "personal"? I'd say no. Still, in the next section I want to let my writing
be personal on all three dimensions: personal topic, personal thinking, and (fair-
ly) personal language.

    I'm not using Part Two merely as an illustration of the analysis in Part One.
No; I've written this stylistically schizophrenic essay in order to enact my divided
loyalties to personal writing. For I keep bouncing back and forth in my feelings
about personal writing:

    First bounce. I tried to keep anything personal out of Part One because I
want you to assess it entirely in terms of the logic of its analysis. For example,
when I pointed out how many writers mix the personal and nonpersonal in the
same essay, I hope it was clear that I wasn't expressing approval--just making an
empirical claim in order to bolster my main analytic argument about how the
different dimensions of the personal are separate and can be mixed.

    Second bounce. But I know it's impossible to make a purely rational disinter-
ested argument that works entirely on its own logic. You could even say that it's
intellectually dishonest to pretend to do so. Any attempt to argue in this way will
always be surreptitiously slanted by the writer's position. This principle implies
that we have a duty, as writers, to reveal our personal stake; to acknowledge that
readers can't assess our argument unless they know something about the position
we write from.

    I agree with this view in many situations. I get irritated with argumentative

22
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

writing (especially by academics) where the writer pretends to be making a dis-
interested or objective case, yet that case is permeated by surreptitious personal
feelings: the writer is secretly trying to settle a score with a critic, or trying to
defend a pet theory that he himself has a big stake in, or trying preen his or her
erudition, or salve a wounded ego. When an academic is good at this game,
only readers "in the know" will see these backstage hidden agendas. Why do the
conventions of academic discourse still reflect a pretense of objectivity, when
academics themselves are so busy saying that objectivity is impossible?

    Third bounce. Still, I want to push back against my argument in the second
bounce. I'm deeply committed to the idea no one has an obligation to reveal
themselves more than they want. One of the great glories of writing is that it
permits us to disguise our voices or hide our feelings. An argument can be good
or bad apart from who makes it or what the personal motivation might be. The
anonymity that is possible through the technology of writing has made it pos-
sible for countless people, especially in stigmatized groups, to persuade readers
who would not otherwise have listened to them. Just because perfect objectivity
is not possible, that doesn't mean that we can't strive toward it and make good
headway.

    Fourth bounce. Still, any attempt I might make to hide behind impersonal
writing was probably wasted on many readers, since I have come to be so widely
identified with personal writing. In the early 1980s, Berlin defined me as a prime
expressivist, and this characterization was widely accepted. So it's not really pos-
sible for me to pretend to be disinterested.

    So now I want to tell the story of my relationship to expressivism and per-
sonal writing. I will invite all three personal dimensions into my text. I may not
be writing here about my sex life or my feelings about a sunset, but it's a personal
story nevertheless. The topic is personal: like most of us, I have personal feelings
about certain "academic" topics. The thinking is personal too: it reflects not just
my thinking but my feelings and intuitions and how my personal position in-
fluences my take on personal writing and expressivism. And so too, the language
is fairly personal: it may not be slangy or "colloquial," but it's not far from my
"vernacular"--the language that comes most naturally to my white middle class
academic mouth. (Perhaps the language in Parts One and Two is pretty much
the same: kind of halfway between personal and impersonal.)

                                             *

    When Berlin called me a poster boy for expressivism in the 1980s, he must
have been thinking mostly about my Writing Without Teachers, published in
1973. For his later article in 1988, he also looked at Writing With Power (1985),
but that book is remarkably impersonal compared to the 1973 book. So I will

                                                                                                  23
Elbow

be referring here mostly to Writing Without Teachers in trying to figure out why
I was so identified with personal writing.

    Actually, there are two questions that need exploring: Why did Berlin and so
many readers think that Writing Without Teachers itself was personal? And why
did Berlin and so many readers think my goal in the book was to advocate or
preach personal writing?

    1. I don't think the book was very personal, but I understand now why it was
so often felt that way. Let's look at the three dimensions:

    Language. Not very personal, I'd say. Here's a typical example. You'll see "I"
a number of times, but the word is not really very personal; it's functioning as a
generalized claim about people in general.

         We all tend to believe in word-magic: if I think words, my
         mind will be tricked into believing them; if I speak those
         words, I'll believe them more strongly; and if I actually write
         them down, I am somehow secretly committed to them and
         my behavior is determined by them. It is crucial to learn to
         write words and not believe them or feel hypnotized at all.
         It can even be good practice to write as badly or as foolishly
         as you can. If you can't write anything at all, it is probably
         because you are too squeamish to let yourself write badly.
         (1973/1998, p. 70)

    "I" is a called a "personal" pronoun, but it's pretty clear in this passage that
it refers not to me but to other people who have feelings different from mine.
(I fear I've always had a weakness for overusing "I" and "we" in ways that are
theoretically suspect--betraying a tendency to assume "we're all alike.") But de-
spite all the "I"s in that passage, I'm struck with how seldom I used the word
throughout the book.

    Perhaps in 1973, my language might have struck academic readers as person-
al or speech-like, but I was trying to talk to a popular audience. When I wrote
the book, I didn't foresee that so many academics would read it. I had taught for
almost twenty years, but had never been in an English department nor identified
with the field of composition. It's ironic that this least academic of all my books
would be read more often than any of the others in graduate seminars.

    Thinking. The thinking in Writing Without Teachers was indeed very per-
sonal, and I think that's the biggest reason why so many readers experienced
the book as personal. What interested me most, and still does, is thinking. (I'm
hoping that my tombstone will read, "He loved thinking.") I wanted to show
that our thinking doesn't have to be formal and impersonal or strictly logical
when we work on nonpersonal or academic topics.

24
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

    I was trying to describe the writing process as a personal process--and make
my description informal too. I used lots of homely details from everyday life. At
the conceptual center of the book were two homely metaphors: "cooking" and
"growing"--idiosyncratic and personal. (My Oxford editor advised me to drop
those metaphors.) At one point I used a kooky childish analogy for the mystery
of the writing process: I asked readers to imagine a land where people couldn't
understand how to touch the floor with their fingers because the traditional
belief was that one did it by reaching upwards. Thus their traditional process
for floor-touching never worked. Yet there were a few people who had actually
learned to touch the floor--by instinct or trial and error--but they couldn't ex-
plain how they did it because their whole conceptual system was confused about
up and down (1973/1998, p. 13).

    After this book came out in 1973 I began to get a trickle of letters from
strangers addressing me quite personally, as though they felt they knew me. I
didn't mind; indeed I felt kind of touched, but it's always seemed a little cu-
rious. For I hadn't revealed much about me in Writing Without Teachers. Yes, I
acknowledged--quite briefly--that my interest and relationship to writing grew
out of my own difficulties and struggle and even failure. But I told almost noth-
ing of what actually happened--which was in fact a very personal story. Nor did
I tell virtually anything about my life.

    But though I didn't let my life or my "self " show, I let my mind show. It
was because my thinking was so personal that some readers felt they knew me.
And why not? It turns out that when someone gives an accurate picture of their
thinking processes--with all its idiosyncratic twists and turns rather than the
neatened picture of thinking that writers often publish, especially academic
writers--readers often feel they know the writer. (My wife once quipped that
the book invited the reader into bed with me. But this had to be based only on
my thinking. A fun idea: thinking as sex appeal?)

    Topic. In Writing Without Teachers, I let my mind show, but my mind was
not at all the topic of the book--nor my self nor my feelings. The topic of Writ-
ing Without Teachers was squarely nonpersonal: the process of writing. I used the
book to tell people--obsessively--what they should do to make their writing go
better. I may have started by acknowledging that I was making generalizations
based on a sample of one, but even to the small degree that my experience shows,
it was always a means to a nonpersonal end--generalizations of wider import.
It wasn't till 1998, when I wrote "Illiteracy at Oxford and Harvard" and also the
Preface to 2nd edition of Writing Without Teachers, that I told my personal story
of failing and then gradually figuring out a way of writing. Of course it was easi-
er in 1973 to qualify as a flaming show off than it is now--especially in the light
of the all the recent self-disclosure by academics.

                                                                                                  25
Elbow

    In short it was not at all a "me me me book." (Berlin wrote in 1982 that "ex-
pressionistic rhetoric" involves the "placement of the self at the center of com-
munication" [p. 772.]) It was, however, a kind of "you you you" book. I couldn't
stop talking about what "you" should learn to do to make the writing process
more successful and satisfying. Maybe this gave a kind of personal feeling to the
topic. Of course I didn't know anything at all about my readers, but maybe my
strategy led them to think a lot about themselves. I guess by saying "you you
you," I was using an "involvement strategy."

    So was Writing Without Teachers a piece of personal writing? The question has
no answer. It illustrates why we need the analysis I gave in Part One. The book
was notably personal in thinking, but not personal in language, and mostly not
in topic. The reception of the book as personal by so many readers confirms
my hypothesis at the end of Part One: readers are sometimes tempted to ignore
nonpersonal dimensions when one dimension seems strikingly personal.

    2. Why did so many readers think my goal in the book was to advocate or
preach personal writing? Why did Berlin consider me an archetypal expressiv-
ist--someone committed to writing about me, me, self, self, feelings, feelings--
only what is internal? And why does he name me as the central figure of expres-
sivism (1988)--a school he said is based on this premise: "Truth is conceived as
the result of a private vision" (1982)?

    In his later essay ("Rhetoric and Ideology") he quotes my 1985 Writing With
Power to argue that I "consistently" preach personal writing. But to make his
case, he purposely misquotes me to pretend that my words champion person-
al, expressive, self-oriented writing when they are actually saying the opposite.
Berlin writes:

         This power [that Elbow advocates] is consistently defined
         in personal terms: "power comes from the words somehow
         fitting the writer (not necessarily the reader) ... power comes
         from the words somehow fitting what they are about. [Berlin's
         ellipses] (1988, p. 485)

    Look at the words I actually wrote--by way of introducing two chapters
about power coming from nonself:

         ... I think true power in words is a mystery.... In [the previ-
         ous] Chapters 25 and 26 about voice, I suggest that power
         comes from the words someow fitting the writer (not neces-
         sarily the reader).... In [the following] Chapters 27 and 28
         about breathing experience into writing, I suggest that power
         comes from the words somehow fitting what they are about.
         The words so well embody what they express that when read-

26
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

         ers encounter the words they feel they are encountering the
         objects or ideas themselves.... (280)

    And if he had read the chapters these words were introducing, he would have
found passages like these. First the epigraph by Basho:

         Go to the pine if you want to learn about the pine, or to the
         bamboo if you want to learn about the bamboo. And in doing
         so, you must leave your subjective preoccupation with your-
         self. Otherwise you impose yourself on the object and do not
         learn. Your poetry issues of its own accord when you and the
         object have become one.

And then this passage in a subsection titled "A Warning about Feelings:"

         But strong feelings in themselves, don't help you breathe
         experience into words. In fact some of the worst writing fails
         precisely because it comes too much out of feelings rather
         than out of the event or scene itself--out of the bamboo.
         (1988, p. 334)

    How can someone pretend to be a scholar and use manipulative ellipses to
pretend that a passage fits his ideological thesis when it actually contradicts it?

    I was angry and even hurt to see such an unscholarly distortion of my work.
I've never recognized myself in his picture--nor the stereotypical pictures of the
other main expressivists like Macrorie, Britton, and Murray. Indeed, I'd say that
Berlin's characterization of expressionism was harmful for the field. I considered
trying to write back and argue against his reading, but whenever I've seen people
do that, they always sound like wounded ineffectual whiners. One friend told
me that I looked arrogant not to argue against Berlin in print--as though I
didn't deign to enter the fray--but I ended up feeling that it would have been
futile; that the only constructive thing I could do was to carry on with my own
work and not be deflected or thrown off course.

    It's intriguing that his picture of me and the field persuaded so many people
in composition studies. His division of the field into one right school and three
wrong ones somehow took deep root and finally became an almost universally
unexamined assumption. (See, for example, Victor Villanueva's "The Personal,"
(2001, p. 52), and Greg Myers (1986, p. 64).)

    But as I put away my anger at his wrong-headed picture of my work--and
his rhetorical brilliance in making everyone accept his picture of the field--per-
haps I can see how it happened.

    In truth I was preaching personal writing--in a sense. That is, I was preach-
ing freewriting (among other things), and that seems like mostly personal writ-

                                                                                                  27
Elbow

ing. Freewriting gives you no time to plan, and in its default exercise form there
is no specified topic. In those conditions, people tend to freewrite personally.
I guess he was hypnotized by what seems like the inherently personal nature
of freewriting (it seemed much more controversial and dangerous than it does
now).

    But in preaching freewriting, I was preaching a process--a process designed
to lead to any kind of product, not personal writing. Freewriting is a means to an
end--to help you learn to write more fluently and easily and to find more words
and thoughts. The process has no bias at all toward personal writing. In fact,
freewriting as a process is not inherently personal. Many people use freewriting
to explore completely nonpersonal topics. I'd guess that most of the freewrit-
ing I've done in my life (excluding journal writing) is nonpersonal in content
(though using personal language).

    Berlin quotes words from the opening of Writing Without Teachers about my
goal in the book: "to help students become `less helpless both personally and po-
litically' by enabling them to get `control over words'"(1973/1998, p. 485). He
pretends this means that the goal is personal writing and can't see how that goal
(as with freewriting) pertains to all kinds of writing, not just personal writing.

    In fact, as I look back at Writing Without Teachers, I'm amused to notice how
narrow and bookish were the examples of writing tasks that I tended to use. I
think I spoke about an essay on the causes of the French Revolution. My editor
at the time joked that even though the book pretended to be about writing
without teachers, really I hadn't yet learned to escape the classroom. I remember
inserting, late, some examples of fiction, poetry, and memoir, but they were
token examples. I knew nothing about that kind of writing; school writing was
all I knew.

    Of course freewriting often does lead to personal writing. But I'd say that my
main goal in making lots of space for personal writing was to help inexperienced
or timid writers take more authority over their writing: not to feel so intimidat-
ed by it and not to write so much tangled or uninvested prose or mechanical
or empty thinking. The various dimensions of personal writing seemed to me
then, and still seem, the most powerful tools for getting authority over writing
and thinking in general. When we invite personal topics, we invite people to
write about events or experiences that they know better than any reader--even
the teacher reader. Thus they have more authority about the topic.2 And when
we invite personal thinking, we invite people to develop ideas by following their
own personal and idiosyncratic thought processes--using hunches, metaphors,
associations, and emotional thinking. Most people can produce richer and more
interesting ideas this way than by trying to conform to disciplined thinking
untainted by personal biases and emotions. Of course disciplined thinking is

28
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

also necessary, but as I argued, it needs to come afterwards in a writing process
that consciously separates noncritical generating from detached critical judging.

                                             *

    When we invite personal language, we invite people to write by using what-
ever words come most comfortably to tongue--instead of always pausing, eras-
ing, changing and worrying that they've probably used the wrong word. Of
course I made it clear that one eventually had to turn around and criticize and
edit many of one's freely written words ("taking a razor to one's own flesh" was
one way I put it in another metaphor of personal thinking), but that critical
process didn't need to interfere with a happy and self-confident process of gen-
erating words and ideas.

    I was also preaching the teacherless writing class. Like freewriting, it was
designed to help people do all kinds of writing and it carried no bias toward per-
sonal writing. But like freewriting, the process itself must have seemed flagrantly
personal: no teacher; no one with sanctioned expertise; people (often personal
friends) sit around talking about the feelings and thoughts that come into their
minds as they hear or read each others' texts. Joe Harris complained that "the
students in [a teacherless class] ... do not seem to be held answerable to each
other as intellectuals" (1997, p. 31). In this age of the internet and Wikipedia
we can forget how unusual it was to propose a teacherless writing class in 1973.
Perhaps it was asking too much of Berlin even in the 1980s to read carefully
enough to see the that the teacherless peer process I laid out was quite disci-
plined and methodical--and not especially personal. For example, if a responder
in a teacherless class talks about her feelings that occur as she reads a writer's text,
her topic is not her feelings; her topic is the writer's text and what those feelings
reveal about it.

                                             *

    In this second half of the essay, then, my point is that "expressivism" is a
seriously misleading word. It has led countless people to skewed and oversimpli-
fied assumptions about a period and a group of people--for I think that what
I'm saying here goes for Macrorie, Britton, and Murray too. I'd say that all of us
defended and even celebrated personal writing in a school context where it had
been neglected or even banned. But we didn't call personal writing any better
than nonpersonal writing. Unfortunately, the term expressivism has been sold
and widely bought as a label for the essence of my work--and that of a whole
school of others--allegedly preaching that students should always use personal
language and thinking and take the self as the topic of their writing--and not
consult any standard of truth but what they find inside.

                                                                                                  29
Elbow

    I can't remember that I (or Macrorie, Britton, or Murray) ever used the word
"expressive" for our goal or approach in teaching writing. Of course Britton
pointed out that "expressive language" shouldn't be neglected in school over
"transactional" and "poetic" language; Kinneavey spoke of "expressive discourse"
as one of four kinds. But neither of them or any of the others, as far as I know,
ever used the term as a label for people. They wouldn't have spoken of a teacher
or method as "expressive" or "expressivist." As far as I can tell, the term "expres-
sivist" was coined and used only by people who wanted a word for people they
disapproved of and wanted to discredit.

    Summing up the two parts of this essay, I see the two terms, "personal writ-
ing" and "expressivism," suffering from different problems. "Personal writing,"
as a single term, tempts one to assume that there's a single kind of writing that
can be so described--instead of recognizing how the personal and the nonper-
sonal are often mixed across three dimensions.

    I'm afraid that "expressivism" is hopelessly infected by narrow and usually
pejorative connotations. I don't see any way to use the term validly. Historians
of composition need to find more accurate ways of describing the views of the
people it was pinned on. I'm not a historian, but I don't see what's wrong with
the term "process." We were all newly preoccupied with exploring the complex
things that go on when people write and eager to help people become more
consciously strategic in managing their writing process. I think we all had a new
and heightened interest in invention, particularly in helping people take more
authority over themselves as writers by writing more from the self--but not
necessarily about the self.3

NOTES

1. My analysis could be called Aristotelian. Aristotle loved to increase clarity and
precision by dividing entities into sorts or parts or species. In past essays, I've found
this strategy helpful for clarifying controversies about voice and academic discourse.
I tried to reduce confusion and dispute about the concept of voice in writing by
showing that there are actually five kinds of voice that can exist in a text: audible
voice or intonation--the sounds in a text; dramatic voice or the sense of a person or
character or implied author; recognizable or distinctive voice--a voice characteristic
of a particular writer; voice with authority--"having a voice"; and resonant voice
or presence. I applied the same strategy to academic discourse, arguing that we can
reduce confusion and needless dispute if we notice differences between different
species of academic discourse and always specify which kind we are talking about.
For example, different disciplines use significantly different conventions and kinds
of language (i.e., kinds of organization, reasoning, and what counts as evidence).
Look even at the single discipline of English where there are significant differences

30
                                          "Personal Writing" and "Expressivism" as Problematic Terms

among the conventions used in textual criticism, biographical criticism, psycho-
analytic criticism, reader response criticism, phenomenological, and postmodern
criticism. (Here's an amusing but nontrivial difference: most literature teachers will
consider a student hopelessly naive about academic discourse if he or she refers to
Hemingway as "Ernest." Yet if it's a paper in biographical criticism, the usage can be
perfectly appropriate.)

2. Bartholomae is interested in the dilemma of student authority over writing: the
"central problem of academic writing, where students must assume the right of
speaking to someone who knows more about baseball or `To His Coy Mistress' than
the student does" (1985, p. 140). He can't seem to imagine that a student could
know more about baseball than he--or if not baseball, then perhaps her father's
experience in Vietnam or her brother's way of negotiating Asperger's. He can't seem
to accept the possibility of inviting students to enter a rhetorical space where they
have more authority than he.

3. But Tom Newkirk has hope for the word: "The term `expressionist' may eventual-
ly serve us well. Maybe it has the same fate as "impressionism"--which was coined
as a satiric term by the journalist Louis Leroy in reference to a painting by Monet"
(personal communication, 2012).

REFERENCES

Bartholomae, D. (1985). Inventing the university. In M. Rose (Ed.). When a
   writer can't write (pp. 134-165). New York: Guilford Press.

Bartholomae, D. (1980). The study of error. College Composition and Commu-
   nication, 31, 253-269.

Berlin, J. (1982). Contemporary composition: The major pedagogical theories.
   College English, 44, 765-777.

Berlin, J. (1988). Rhetoric and ideology in the writing class. College English,
   50(5), 477-494.

Booth, W. (1974). Modern dogma and the rhetoric of assent. Chicago: University
   of Chicago Press.

Bruner, J. S. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University Press.

Buley-Meissner, M. L. (1990). Rhetorics of the self. Journal of Education, 172,
   47-64.

Elbow, P. (1994a). Introduction. In Landmark essays on voice and writing (pp.
   xi-xlvii). Mahwah, NJ: Hermagoras Press/Erlbaum.

Elbow, P. (1994b). Introduction: Voice and writing. Voice and writing (pp. xi-xl-
   vii). Mahway, NJ: Hermagoras Press.

Elbow, P. (1990). Foreword: About personal expressive academic writing. Pre/

                                                                                                  31
Elbow

   Text: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Rhetoric, 11(1-2, 7-20).
Elbow, P. (Ed.). (1990). Pre/Text: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Rhetoric, 11(1-2).
Elbow, P. (1991). Reflections on academic discourse: How it relates to freshmen

   and colleagues. College English, 53(2), 135-55.
Falmagne, R. J., Iselin, M-G., Todorova, I. G., & Jen Arner, J. Reasoning and

   personal epistemology: A critical reconstruction. Unpublished manuscript.
Harris, J. (1997). A teaching subject: Composition since 1966. Upper Saddle Riv-

   er, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Herrington, A. (2002). Gone fishin': Rendering and the uses of personal expe-

   rience in writing. In P. Belanoff, M. Dickson, S. I. Fontaine, & C. Moran
   (Eds.), Writing with Elbow (pp. 223-238). Utah State University Press.
Hindman, J. (2001). Making writing matter: Using "the personal" to recover[y]
   an essential[ist] tension in academic discourse. College English, 64(1), 88-108.
Kinneavey, J. L. (1971). A theory of discourse. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
   Hall.
Kolln, M. (1991). Rhetorical grammar: Grammatical choices, rhetorical effects. In-
   structor's manual. New York: Macmillan.
Lunsford, A. A. (1998). Toward a mestiza rhetoric: Gloria Anzaldua on com-
   position and postcoloniality. Journal of Advanced Composition, 18(1), 1-27.
Medawar, P. (1982). Pluto's republic. New York: Oxford University Press.
Myers, G. (1986). Reality, consensus, and reform in the rhetoric of composition
   teaching. College English, 48(2), 154-171.
Safire, W. (1999, February 21). On language: Need not to know. New York
   Times Magazine, pp. 18-19.
Safire, W. (2004, September 21). Inside Kerry's battle plans. Fairbanks Daily
   News-Miner, 7.
Said, E. W. (1999). Out of lace: A Memoir. New York: Knopf: Distributed by
   Random House.
Sommers, N. (1992). Between the drafts. College Composition and Communica-
   tion, 43, 23-31.
Surowiecki, J. (2002, May 6). Waste away. The New Yorker, p. 56.
Tannen, D. (1982). Oral and literate strategies in spoken and written narratives.
   Language, 58, 1-21.
Tobin, L. (1993). Writing relationships: What really happens in the composition
   class. Portsmouth NH, Boynton/Cook Heinemann.
Villanueva, V. (1993). Bootstraps: From an American academic of color. Urbana,
   IL: NCTE.
Villanueva, V. (2001). The personal. College English, 64(1), 41-62.

32
SELFHOOD AND THE PERSONAL
ESSAY: A PRAGMATIC DEFENSE

Thomas Newkirk
University of New Hampshire

    There are many plausible reasons to dislike the personal autobiographical es-
say--and to refuse to teach it in a writing course. There is the sameness of the
topics: eating disorders, deaths and traumas, challenges and successes. There is the
predictable moralizing, what David Bartholomae has termed "sentimental real-
ism," with culturally accepted commonplaces employed as learning lessons. There
is the mismatch between the personal essay and the kinds of writing expected in
the university, where there is a limited tolerance for autobiographical narratives.
Any program that stresses this genre risks the disdain of colleagues in more estab-
lished disciplines. With composition already perceived as a feminized "soft" disci-
pline, it can become doubly feminized (and intellectually vulnerable) by any taint
of sentimentality, a term with a long historical association with women's writing
and reading. There is the understandable reluctance of teachers to take on any
role that resembles psychotherapy and draws them into relationships that they
feel unqualified to sustain. As Richard Miller has argued, there is a physiological
unease involved in responding to writing (or speaking) that deals with trauma:

         The bodily discomfort arises, I believe, because it is unclear,
         exactly what is being asked of those who are within reach of
         the speaker's words: beyond saying, "I can hear you. I can see
         you," beyond authorizing the speaker's version of events, what
         can listeners do? What role can they play? (1996, p. 277)

    And even Montaigne himself had doubts about the value of his essays for
readers--what, after all, did the reflections of an unknown, retired lawyer mat-
ter? These reservations are shared by a wide swath of composition teachers, and
I respect these concerns and would never endorse a program that imposed this
genre upon them.

    My focus in this essay is on a more profound philosophical challenge to
the personal essay that was part of the "social turn" in composition studies in
the 1990s, particularly the critiques of Lester Faigley, James Berlin, and David
Bartholomae. I will focus on the detailed attention that Faigley gives to the per-
sonal essay in his book, Fragments of Rationality: Postmodernity and the Subject
of Composition. Faigley examines a set of exemplary student essays (with teacher

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.02  33
Newkirk

commentary) published in William Coles and James Vopat's What Makes Writ-
ing Good. A majority of these essays seemed to embody values of an ideology
that Berlin would call expressionism (often later altered to expressivism). The
writers of these personal essays seem to be free agents, operating outside of cul-
ture, or systems of power, or genres; writing originates from a "self," a uniform
consciousness. The measure of "authenticity" was how honestly the writing rep-
resented or portrayed that self. And as Emerson claimed, the more truthful the
writer is in representing this inner thought and experience, the more the expres-
sion speaks for others, the more universal it is.

    The term "authentic," according to Faigley, is fraught with problems. How,
after all does a teacher determine if a piece of writing is "authentic;" how does
the process of authentication work--are we speaking of accuracy of memory
(which, as psychologists have shown, is altered with retellings)? Is it the expres-
sion of emotion? Is it a personal voice? Is it a stylistic preference of teachers?
What is the touchstone, the stable pre-discursive self, that is the measure of
authenticity? The term itself (like the term "natural") disguises its own ideolog-
ical and historical roots, the "unstated assumptions about subjectivity," which
Faigley tried to make explicit:

         Modern American notions of the individual self derive in
         part from nineteenth-century liberalism and utilitarianism,
         which in turn drew on Thomas Hobbes' theory of the atomic,
         self-interested self. The blend of economics and psychology in
         these notions of self remains evident in writing pedagogy ....
         two notions of the individual are often conflated--the self-
         aware Cartesian subject possessing a unified consciousness
         and the "freely" choosing competitive individual of capitalism.
         (1992, p. 128)

    Faigley suggests a criticism that James Berlin makes far more bluntly: that the
expressivist pedagogies which promote the "free choices" involved in personal
essay are complicit with capitalism which also promotes the free choices of the
consumer.

    From a practical standpoint, the personal essay presents students with a com-
plex task--to speak about their experiences without the critical tools that would
help them examine the discourse they are using. Consequently Faigley and Bar-
tholomae claim that they ventriloquise, and echo the moral language of parents
and coaches:

         To ask students to write authentically about the self assumes
         that a unified consciousness can be laid out on the page. That

34
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

         the self is constructed in socially and historically specific dis-
         cursive practices is denied. It is no wonder, then, that the selves
         many students try to appropriate in their writing are voices of
         moral authority, and when they exhaust their resources of anal-
         ysis, they revert to moral lesson-adopting, as Bartholomae has
         noted, a parental voice making clichéd pronouncements where
         we expect ideas to be extended. (1992, pp. 127-128)

    To critics like Faigley and Bartholomae, nothing could be more inauthentic
(and one senses, irritating) than the moralisms that close down thinking and end
many personal essays.

    Finally, drawing on the work of Foucault, there is the question of intru-
sive institutional power--the ways in which practitioners of the personal essay,
while claiming to grant freedom to the writer, are imposing a set of values and
expecting students to reveal insecurities, traumas, family difficulties, health is-
sues, and personal details of their lives. No trauma, no good grade. The personal
essay becomes a form of confession, with the archetypal confession being the
omnipresent "Shooting an Elephant." In effect, Faigley wants to call the bluff of
expressivist teachers: they claim to give "ownership" to the student, to give up
authority to the student, yet by passing judgment on the authenticity of these
personal accounts, they assume a power of surveillance that can be more invasive
than the traditional pedagogies they originally opposed.

    Faigley's challenge, then, is a profound one. Proponents of the personal essay
are revealed as naïve, as blind to the situated, social, ideological nature of lan-
guage use. There is the troubled quest for an essential, pre-social "self," for a lan-
guage that is "free," for a "voice" that is unique--even for writing in the absence
of any sense of audience. This free space just doesn't exist. Faigley and others
argue that the "self " of expressivist pedagogy is a social construction, constituted
by language and culture, located in history--and as Anis Bawarshi has argued
in his brilliant book, Genre and the Invention of the Writer, even our desires are
shaped by social genres (which also fulfill those desires).

    The persistence of expressivist key terms like "voice" and "authenticity" rep-
resent, in Faigley's views, a disciplinary problem in the field of composition
studies--the failure to engage with the more satisfactory, generative, and de-
fensible descriptions of writing as informed by postmodern theory. Hence the
tendency to write the narrative of composition studies as a progress narrative,
and to treat the "social turn" as a paradigm shift, a rejection of deeply flawed
views of composing that could now be treated as a kind of historical artifact. The
term "post-process" is emblematic of this view--a rhetorical move that casts ex-
pressivism as a discredited tradition, that must give way to a fuller, richer, more

                                                                                                  35
Newkirk

defensible view of writing instruction. In fact, the critique is profoundly ethical:
the charge is that those who teach the personal essay engage in inappropriate and
intrusive relationships with their students--and they promote an individualistic
view of authorship that is naïve and ultimately disempowering.

    In this essay I will attempt a defense of the personal autobiographical essay,
drawing on a powerful line of psychological research, led by Martin Seligman
and Stephen Maier, and more recently extended by Carol Dweck. This body of
work examines the explanatory styles and attitudes of resilient, "healthy" indi-
viduals--and, I will argue, helps explain the enduring appeal (and psychological
utility) of the type of essay writing that Faigley and others criticize--that which
stresses individual agency.

    We can begin with what I consider one of the weaker parts of this challenge
to expressivism and the personal essay: the charge that it is easily appropriated by
the powers of consumerism, since both associate identity with personal choice.
This is, in the end, an argument from similarity, since it would be difficult to
establish any solid cause-effect relationship. One might just as easily argue that
the sophisticated awareness of the social construction of needs could also be
co-opted by advertisers and marketers (the similarity is there too). In fact, it is
very hard to predict how ideas will be taken up and used in other situations. To
my knowledge there is no empirical evidence of a connection between expres-
sivism and capitalism--it is sheer speculation. The only major study I know of
that even attempts to trace the ways in which literacy practices contributes to
career development is Jonathan Rose's The Intellectual Life of the British Working
Class, which among other things traces the reading histories of many militant
leaders of the labor movement. These leaders were radicalized not by the in-
doctrination of Marxists (whom many found rigid and uninteresting) but from
reading classic authors, particularly Charles Dickens, whose belief in personal
altruism would seem at odds with the collective movement they would help
build. George Orwell, in his magnificent essay on Dickens, describes a similarly
complex act of appropriation and influence. There is no neat, clean, determinist,
ideological line that can be drawn.

    The claim of "surveillance" is similarly weak, and rests primarily on the rhe-
torical power of the term itself, evoking Foucault and Bentham's panopticon.
The problem has to do with the virtually unbounded way in which the term
can--and has been--used. Is there any act of teaching or assessment that is not,
in some form, an act of surveillance? Were my conferences with my children's
teachers not an act of surveillance? Monitoring is occurring no matter the genre
of writing we assign: as teachers we ask for accounts of the writing process, we
read drafts, we monitor the thought processes of our students. It is impossible
to imagine the work of education (or participation in any social unit) without

36
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

these forms of attention and assessment. So the fact of surveillance is a given
(which I think is Foucault's point). It is inescapable. The ethical question is the
manner and purpose of the surveillance, and here the case needs to be made that
a student writing about significant events in an essay, read and evaluated by the
teacher, is likely to be personally harmful. I won't deny that this is a possibility,
though I would add that teachers can be insensitive working in any genre. Ob-
viously, any teacher who feels uncomfortable responding to papers like the ones
in the Vopat and Coles collection should not be assigning that kind of writing. I
am not at all arguing that it should be a universal requirement. But on the other
hand I have seen generations of teachers at my own university handle such writ-
ing with tact and sensitivity. I have read thousands of evaluations and the issue
of surveillance is virtually non-existent in student accounts. It is raised almost
exclusively by academicians criticizing the genre.

    It is also tempting to respond to Faigley by challenging his linking of the
personal essay and the "unified consciousness." One could easily argue the re-
verse: associate the essay instead with the "fragmentation," the deconstructive
impulse of postmodernism. The essay is a perfectly fine vehicle for exploring
the multiplicity, fragmentation, and constructedness of the "self." The essay, as
Montaigne deployed it, celebrated the instability and inherent irrationality of
the self; human claims to be rational, were, in his view, a form of presumption
and vanity. Human beings are too temperamentally volatile and self-interest-
ed, and language too imprecise, to claim steady rationality. In his long essay
"An Apology for Raymond Seybond," he has long satiric passages where he re-
buts claims about human reason by citing evidence (much of it fabricated by
Plutarch) about identical abilities in animals. Men praise their analytic ability
to distinguish plant types; well, goats can do that too. And despite his claim in
the famous address to his readers, that he would prefer to portray himself na-
ked--as if self-presentation was a matter of disrobing--his project was clearly a
complex act of discursive construction, one that he commented on frequently in
his many additions to the original essays. In one addition he commented on his
tendency to make additions:

         My first edition dates from fifteen hundred and eighty: I
         have long since grown old but not one inch wiser. "I" now
         and "I" then are certainly twain, but which I was better?
         I know nothing about that. If we were always progressing
         toward improvement, to be old would be a beautiful thing.
         But it is a drunkard's progress, formless, staggering, like reeds
         which the wind shakes as it fancies, haphazardly. (Montaigne,
         1595/1987, p. 1091)

                                                                                                  37
Newkirk

    Montaigne resembles Laurence Stern in that he seems to push to the lim-
its, even undermine the genre he is in the process of creating. There has been
no more strenuous critic of "unified consciousness" than Montaigne, and the
personal essay, with its openings for amendments and cycling back, became the
vehicle for making this challenge.

    Such a defense, though, would sidestep the objection many compositionists
have concerning the personal essay. Simply put, the deep, and often amusing,
skepticism of Montaigne's essays bears little resemblance to the efforts of stu-
dents. In the introduction to his collection, The Art of the Personal Essay, Phillip
Lopate argues that the most successful essayists are either older, or like Joan Did-
ion and James Baldwin, they assume, early on, an older persona--they have out-
grown or abandoned beliefs in human perfectibility and distanced themselves
from the assurances of true believers, heroes, and reformers. Yet in student essays
it is precisely this belief in perfectibility, personal agency--this optimism--that
regularly animates their essays (and often embarrasses their teachers). Every dif-
ficulty is a learning experience; every death a reminder of the preciousness of life.
The "self " that is portrayed is not exactly a "unified self " but a progressive one,
part of a constructed coherent narrative of self-development (the very kind of
narrative Montaigne refused to write). Any defense of the personal essay needs
to address this sensibility, this propensity for belief and affirmation that animates
their writing. To defend the personal essay--as young students write them--en-
tails defending this bias toward affirmation.

FAITH, OPTIMISM, AND "SENTIMENTAL REALISM"

        Normal human thought is distinguished by a robust positive bias.
                                                                                  --Shelley Taylor

    In 1896 William James published his great essay, "The Will to Believe" (which
he later regretted titling, preferring "The Right to Believe.") In it he debunks a
view prevalent in his time: that beliefs should be the product of an objective and
dispassionate review of the facts. To accept unsupported opinion is to be duped
and we are to "guard ourselves from such beliefs as from a pestilence which
may shortly master our body then spread to the rest of the town" (James, 1997,
p. 74). Intelligence, according to this viewpoint, was strongly associated with
skepticism, doubt, coolness, withholding affiliation. James turns the argument
on its head claiming that even this position represented a form of belief--and
that passion, commitment, and belief are essential in making the pragmatic tests
of truth. The scientist's passionate belief in an ordered, explainable universe is a
crucial tool in helping him or her to extend that explanation. And if beliefs lead

38
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

to mistakes, then "our errors are surely not such awfully solemn things"(1997,
p. 19 ).

    One of the glories of James' career was his openness to the psychological utility
of a vast range of religious beliefs, from mesmerism to Buddhism to evangelism--
all of which he treated with elaborate respect. In the early 1970s, Peter Elbow
reactivated this argument in his essay on the believing game, arguing that the
academic culture held a bias against the functionality of belief, and a bias in favor
of skepticism and critique which are often seen as the mark of perceptive thought
and real academic work. By contrast, assertions of belief, whether based on a re-
ligious faith or a personal code, are often viewed within the academic culture as
dogmatic, unsophisticated, simplistic; they are evidence that the student is "writ-
ten" by his or her culture and helpless to push back against it. Students are victims
of what James would call "dupery." David Bartholomae, in particular, would claim
that these assertions are usually nothing more than moral commonplaces that are
passively absorbed by students, and handy for "wrapping up" their personal essays.

    The capacity to self-monitor in matters of taste--to identify and resist the
appeals of sentimentality--is part of the identity equipment of academics, par-
ticularly in the humanities (Newkirk, 2002). It is a form of cultural capital,
an ingrained preference for the ironic, distanced, critical, and complex that, as
Bourdieu demonstrated, serves to establish class distinctions. Even the poorly
paid adjunct, teaching a literature survey, has the satisfaction that she can avoid
dupery, that she is alert to the intellectual softness of sentimental appeals with
the attendant clichés and commonplaces. As Suzanne Clark writes, few criti-
cisms are as damaging as the use of the epithet "sentimental":

         The author's rationality is in question, and so is the credibil-
         ity of the argument. If you are the victim of a "sentimental"
         epithet, you have been excluded from the magic circle. It is as
         if your readers are too tough for you, and you are too much of
         a sissy for them .... (1994, p. 101)

    Richard Miller has argued that these judgments and preferences are not
purely intellectual; they are experienced bodily as forms of discomfort, even
revulsion. There are a range of terms (including "taste" itself ) which register
this physical reaction, many dealing with oversweetness ("syrupy," "sappy," "sac-
charine"). A more dated term, "schmaltzy," has the root meaning of rendered
chicken fat, what one might imagine at the base of the stomach. Miller's point
is that our reactions to emotional autobiographical writing is often instant and
visceral, experienced in the gut; our sense of taste is embodied, instinctive, and
employed without disengaging from our own perspective (as our own theories
of social construction would require of us).

                                                                                                  39
Newkirk

    The issue may not be whether a writer uses commonplaces, for all discourse
communities rely on claims and commonly agreed upon warrants; this essay is
littered with them. The issue is that personal essays of young students often em-
ploy a type of commonplace that jars or irritates (or nauseates) a type of reader.
They run against an aesthetic; in their wholehearted affirmation, they position
the writer in (and ask the reader to endorse) a discourse community of moti-
vation and self-help, a place of coaches and graduation speeches that represents
everything the academic reader habitually defines himself or herself against. It is
not genuine thought but ventriloquism--the student being written by culture.
This discourse of self-efficacy and optimism simply has no cultural capital for
these readers.

    Yet paradoxically, there is now abundant evidence of the psychological util-
ity, even necessity, of the very narrative patterns--of uplift, and overcoming
obstacles--that many writing teachers find so annoying and unthinking. In her
book Positive Illusions: Creative Self-Deception and the Healthy Mind, psycholo-
gist Shelley Taylor summarizes a range of studies to argue that an "unrealistic,"
even "self-aggrandizing" view of the self has major positive benefits for personal
happiness. This exaggerated sense of personal agency emerges so powerfully and
quickly in early childhood that it is very likely "natural [and] intrinsic to the
cognitive system" (Taylor, 1989, p. 44). Like the evolution of organs or immune
systems, it may be hardwired to support the perpetuation of the species--as
anthropologist Lionel Tiger has argued, "optimism is a biological phenomenon"
(Taylor, 1989, p. 40). The key beneficial illusion is a heightened sense of being
able to master one's environment:

         The illusion of control, a vital part of people's beliefs about
         their attributes, is a personal statement about how positive
         outcomes will be achieved, not merely by wishing and hoping
         that they will happen, but by making them happen through
         one's own capabilities. (Taylor, 1989, p. 41)

    Of course, events are not in our control, and humans face trauma and trag-
edy. But even victims of terrible illness and loss are often able to derive meaning
and benefit from their situation, perhaps working to inform or help others in
their same situation. Or to find that their tragedy brings an existential clarity to
their lives. Taylor quotes a 61-year-old cancer patient:

         You can take a picture of what someone has done, but when
         you frame it, it becomes significant. I feel as if I were, for
         the first time, really conscious. My life is framed in a certain
         amount of time. I always knew it, but I can see it, and it's
         made better by the knowledge. (1989, p. 195)

40
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

         A commonplace, perhaps, but a profoundly functional one.

    Taylor's argument is supported by a line of research on "explanatory style"
conducted by Martin Seligman and his colleagues. Explanatory style refers to
the ways in which individuals account for the difficulties they face; for example
whether they see themselves as victims or agents, whether they posit the cause as
a pervasive personality flaw, and what kind of flaw. In effect, Seligman is looking
at narrative patterns which have relevance for the ways students write about
trauma and difficulty. He identifies three crucial dimensions of explanatory style:

         Stability. Causes can be accounted for as stable in time (and
         thus likely to reoccur indefinitely) or they may be temporary
         and remediable.

         Range. Causes may be perceived as a global trait of the in-
         dividual ("I'm stupid," "I'm not a people person."). Or they
         may relate to a specific, local, and limited kind of problem or
         situation.

         Locus. Causes can be seen as internal or external--as aris-
         ing from purely individual failures or flaws in judgment or
         personal weakness, or as arising, at least partially, from outside
         circumstances.

    According to Seligman a great deal rides on the kind of explanatory style an
individual comes to adopt. The condition he has called "learned helplessness" is
characterized by a particular pattern where people "explain bad events by inter-
nal, stable, and global causes and explain good events as external, instable, and
local" (Seligman, 1988, p. 92). Success is the unstable result of luck; failure is
the product of character. Marvin Minsky captured the spirit of this argument
as follows:

         Thinking is a process, and if your thinking does something
         you don't want it to you should be able to say something
         microscopic and analytic about it, and not something envel-
         oping and evaluating about yourself as a learner. The import-
         ant thing in refining your thought is to try to depersonalize
         your interior; it may be all right to deal with other people in
         a vague global way, but it is devastating if this is the way you
         deal with yourself. (as quoted in Bernstein, 1981, p. 122)

    Seligman's research identifies the devastation Minsky refers to, the profound
consequences--for physical and mental health--of the explanatory style asso-
ciated with learned helplessness. In addition to a longstanding association with

                                                                                                  41
Newkirk

depression, researchers now believe that this explanatory style is an ineffec-
tive way of dealing with stress that compromises the immune system, leaving
the individual susceptible to a range of infectious diseases. Not surprisingly, a
"healthy" explanatory style is associated with increased motivation, persistence,
and educational achievement.

    All of which suggests a fundamental dilemma for academic readers. It is
hardly surprising that young writers employ commonplaces of effort, overcom-
ing obstacles, learning from difficulties, naming heroes and saints in their lives--
that they construct their narratives as a form of heroic progression. There is
now a huge body of research to document the benefits--even the evolutionary
necessity--of such formulations. And as William James and Peter Elbow argue,
this positive bias can be self-verifying. If a student believes that an obstacle like a
failing a test is a learning opportunity (clichéd as that view is), she is likely to be
more successful in gaining a benefit from it than someone who treats that failure
as one more sign she is not good at the subject (a global reaction). Yet aesthetical-
ly these formulations in personal essays, as I have noted, frequently fail to satisfy,
and even repulse, the academic reader who is gratified by an entirely different,
more nuanced, ambivalent, ironic sensibility.

STUDENT AS CO-THEORIST

    To illustrate this dilemma I will quote extensively from a paper of one of
my own students written early in a first-year course. The assignment which I
call the "Right to Speak" paper requires them to pick a public issue on which
they have personal experience that has caused them to have some viewpoint; the
goal of the paper is to show how this viewpoint arises out of the experience. In
preparation we read Sallie Tisdale's "A Weight Women Carry" and "Grade A:
The Market for a Yale Woman's Eggs," an award-winning essay by Jessica Cohen.
I also read aloud an essay on euthanasia in which I recount the last days of my
mother's life when she refused food and water for twelve days. I suggested addi-
tional topics, reminding them that they are all experts on their own education,
and have a right to comment on it. One student, Brianna, chose to write about
the cruelty and shunning she endured in middle school. The paper begins with
a description of the bodily experience of depression she felt each day as she got
ready for school:

         The pain I went through those four years is nearly indescrib-
         able. Every morning I would wake up with a heavy chest. It
         literally weighed me down. My heart in particular would feel
         heavy and burdened. I could feel it struggle with every pulse.

42
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

         It was like my heart was forced to beat against its will. I could
         feel the disdain in its pounding, its unwillingness to keep
         going. In response to this weight my shoulders would slump
         forward, pulling the rest of my upper body down with it. My
         head hung low. My eyes drooped. It never ceased to astonish
         me how my emotional pain managed to manifest itself into
         physical mannerisms.

The main body of the paper is a description of a set of humiliating encounters
in school.

         I seemed to be the bearer of silence. I would go over to a
         group of kids who were laughing and giggling in order to play
         with them, and the giggling would immediately stop. I would
         ask some people to play something with me, and they would
         always have something to do. Recess time was the worst. I
         always seemed to try to join a game of four-square just a little
         too late, as there was never any room for another person ....
         And I especially was never able to penetrate the wall of backs
         and shoulders of the kids standing around in a circle talking
         to one another. This left me standing alone against the
         school's wall observing all the other kids at play, desperately
         wishing I could be them.

    One particularly painful scene, so vivid in her mind that she had to interrupt
her writing and cry when she was composing it, involved her not being chosen
to help in a cooking project:

         I remember one day during home base, a time during the
         day where each specific section gets together to talk about
         random nonsense, a girl named Susanna from another home
         base came in to announce she was baking cookies. Her home
         base teacher had told her that she could pick one friend to
         bake cookies with her. She asked all of us who wanted to be
         that lucky person. Of course, everyone raised their hands and
         eagerly began pleading to pick them. She ended up pick-
         ing a girl named Megan, who immediately hopped out of
         her seat and ran to Susanna's side. I sadly lowered my hand
         and gave Susanna a look of grief. She smiled at me and said
         "Hmmm, well maybe you can bake with me too, Brianna".
         Before I could allow any sort of happiness ease my hurt body,
         Megan immediately straightened up, flung her eyes open,

                                                                                                  43
Newkirk

         and involuntarily hushed "No! No!" in Susanna's ear. She
         caught herself and slowly turned to look at me and gave me a
         nervous giggle.

         My stomach sank so low it might as well have fallen to my
         feet. I had to try so hard to not cry in that moment. An in-
         tense, sharp pain stabbed into my heart and stomach. It hurt
         so much that I felt like puking for a split second. That was the
         first moment I realized how alone and unwanted I truly was.
         It had manifested before my eyes. I had never actually seen or
         heard anyone display their disapproval of me before. To this
         day, I still cannot look Megan in the eyes without thinking
         about the cookie incident. To this day, I feel the same stab in
         my heart and stomach when I think about it.

         The rest of sixth grade and seventh grade continued on very
         much the same way. There were endless displays of "No! No!"
         detonating in my face every day. Whether it was a hushed gig-
         gle accompanied by a finger pointing in my direction amongst
         a couple of girls, the rumors about how I was a compulsive
         liar and ate lard for breakfast, or even the obese, ugly cartoon
         drawings of me that were left in my locker, it was made clear
         to me that my loneliness and pain would last for a long time.

    She completely closed herself off from the rest of the world. "I was a bottle of
thoroughly shaken soda pop just waiting to explode." And in fact, near the end
of the paper she describes cutting herself:

         I took my razor from the shower and slashed my wrist with
         it three times. It felt good. The release of pain was extraordi-
         nary. I wanted to cut more. I wanted to go all up and down
         my arm, but I knew I would get caught cutting myself if I
         did that, so I stopped after three cuts. I carefully put my razor
         back in the shower, turned the water on, and washed away all
         the blood, snot, and tears, cleansing myself once more.

    At this point her paper shifts abruptly to the insight or understanding she
wants the narrative to convey:

         While I never acquired scars from my razor-incident, I've
         never fully recovered from those four years. My body is still
         an open wound that I don't think will ever be healed. And
         as much as I wish I had a happy and normal adolescence, I

44
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

         wouldn't change the past even if I had the power to. While I
         will never fully recover from my trauma, I have taken away
         something so positive that it far outweighs all the negatives of
         my middle school experience: kindness and compassion. My
         agony has molded me into a far better person than I could
         have ever been had I not been so scorned and neglected.

         During my four years of misery, I would think to myself if
         only they knew. If only they knew how I feel right now. If
         only they knew what happened behind closed doors, maybe
         they wouldn't be so mean and cruel. I think about this every
         time I interact with a person. I don't know their back-story.
         I don't know the emotional baggage they carry around with
         them. All I know is that I need to be sensitive towards their
         feelings.

         I think about the how complicated and intense my pain and
         emotional grief was, and all because people weren't nice to
         me. It's such a simple thing, really. Just be a good, kind per-
         son. Something as simple as a smile or a "hello" can brighten
         up someone's day. And who knows, maybe that person really
         needs it. Because of my past, I am now able to possibly better
         someone's future--a fair trade-off for my pain, I think.

    In this final section we can see Brianna's attempt to take agency and assert
that she has made constructive use of this experience, while acknowledging that
she still lives with the trauma of those years. One of her fears in writing the
paper was that it would elicit "pity," that it would receive an undeserved high
grade "out of pity or awkwardness." By claiming a positive outcome she finally
becomes an agent in her own story; it is the pattern of explanation that Seligman
and Taylor associate with a healthy resilient reaction to difficulty.

    When, with her permission, I shared the paper with a group of teachers,
one reaction was doubt about her claim that she wouldn't "change the past" if
she could because of what she had gained. I had kept touch with Brianna in the
year since she was in my class, and knowing her interest in introspection and
psychology, I invited her to respond to this concern about her paper. She wrote:

         I suppose I would have preferred to avoid all that pain. Who
         wouldn't? But I truly believe I would not be the person I am
         today had I not endured what I did. I firmly believe that every
         evil is accompanied with a good, and vice-versa. With all that
         pain came an incredible sense of sympathy and caring towards

                                                                                                  45
Newkirk

         others. Yes, I am still hurting and not fully recovered (and
         may never be) be from my experience. I have been greatly
         impacted psychologically and it's going to take a lot of hard
         work to be able to function as I would like to be able to. But
         this is balanced with a gift of compassion that I think more
         people in this world need. If that pain was what I needed to
         go through in order to attain this gift, then so be it, because
         that makes me one more person who will treat others the way
         they deserve to be treated and hopefully I can spare them
         some of the pain I endured.

    In her commentary on this paper, she said that the process of writing was
an "emotional rollercoaster," and not one that brought her the sense of catharsis
that she had hoped for. So I wanted to get her reaction to the question of wheth-
er this kind of writing should have a place in a writing course:

         I completely understand where these concerns come from, and
         I can certainly appreciate them. But I think the purpose of
         (good) literature is to bring up these sorts of issues and topics;
         topics which are uncomfortable, topics that are important and
         relevant to many people, and topics which evoke strong emo-
         tions so that we may recognize and discuss them. The great
         thing about personal essays is that if some topic is true for
         one person, there is more than likely at least one other person
         out there who can relate and identify with that person, and
         therefore the topic is worth sharing and discussing. By turning
         a blind eye to these types of essays, we might as well be turning
         a blind eye to literature itself. Now obviously if a student or
         teacher is truly uncomfortable with this sort of thing, then
         guidelines or alternate assignments can be made. But I don't
         think the personal essay should be dismissed from classrooms.

    As a final question, I asked her if she saw any relationship between personal
essay writing and the other writing that she had done in academic courses.

         I absolutely believe there is a connection between this type of
         writing and the writings in other courses. This kind of writing
         is very personal and therefore may evoke strong feelings and
         emotions. One of the hardest things to do in writing, which
         is one of the challenges a personal essay presents, is write a
         well-written paper about a topic you are passionate about.
         In most cases when someone is passionate about a certain

46
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

         subject, they have so much to say that it's difficult to disci-
         pline themselves into writing a paper that is coherent. This is
         a very critical skill to be able to achieve: to be able to release
         your emotions and take a step back to look at a subject from
         a disciplined and impartial point of view. This is a skill that
         is required in many, if not most, types of writing, such as
         persuasive essays or debates, or even analytical and critical pa-
         pers. I would argue that this skill is one of the most basic and
         important skills to have in writing. The personal essay without
         a doubt exercises this skill, and therefore is very relevant to
         other types of writing.

    This response situates Brianna in the complex debate concerning "transfer"
from a first-year writing course. Her position seems to align with those who
argue for the possibility of "far transfer" (Wardle, 2007): the capacity of learners
to develop a meta-awareness of writing processes--in this case her sense of man-
aging complex emotional material--that can be of use in writing assignments
which do not closely resemble the personal essay.

TOWARD A HERMENEUTICS OF RESPECT

    But to return to "the nervous system." This student paper can create a dis-
comfort for writing teachers, and it is important to speculate about the source
of that discomfort. I would argue that it does not arise from the personal mate-
rial--which for the most part is handled with narrative skill, particularly as she
describes the bodily sensation of her depression and exclusion. Her occasional
use of metaphor is also compelling ("I seemed to be the bearer of silence;" "I was
a bottle of thoroughly shaken soda pop just waiting to explode"). The reader's
discomfort does not arise from a concern about acting the therapist--the paper
is clearly not asking for this. No, the discomfort most likely comes from state-
ments like this:

         If there's one positive thing I took from middle school, it's
         that you should be a kind person.

Or this:

         While I will never fully recover from my trauma, I have taken
         away something so positive that it far outweighs all the nega-
         tives of my middle school experience: kindness and compas-
         sion. My agony has molded me into a far better person than
         I could have ever been had not been so scorned and neglected.

                                                                                                  47
Newkirk

    At moments like these, the writer locates the paper within a form of mor-
al, even moralizing discourse that academic readers are often deeply suspicious
of--and embarrassed by ("what would the comp director think of this?) This
is the language of self-help, or therapy, or guidance counselors, or graduation
speeches. Brianna clearly locates herself in this discourse at the end of the paper,
where she quotes what she wrote in her senior yearbook four years after these
events took place:

         My life's philosophy is a simple one, but extremely import-
         ant. In my high school senior yearbook I leave with one very
         important message to all. I like to think of it as a summary of
         my entire grade school experience. Under my picture you will
         see the quote "Be nice to people--they outnumber you 6.6
         billion to one." True, no?

    The academic reader is deflated by words like "simple," "nice," and "very
important message." Our mission, after all, is to disrupt the view that any life
philosophy can be simple, or that morality can be reduced to such truisms. One
reader of Brianna's paper suggested that with more time and reading in a writ-
ing course, she would develop more "distance" on the topic. Yet she is writing
from the perspective of five years, and in her comments a year after the paper
was written, the moral core of her essay is consistent. It may be that it is the
readers of this essay that want "distance"--because the essay puts them in too
close proximity to a form of moral assertion that makes them uncomfortable,
as if they have wandered into a meeting where they had hoped to listen to Joan
Didion and they get Dr. Phil.

    One way to respond to an essay like this one is to employ a hermeneutics of
distrust, to treat the moral assertions of the paper as mere clichés and copouts;
this is what David Bartholomae seems to do when he calls them "commonplac-
es." In some of the earlier versions of a critical studies approach, as these com-
monplaces were viewed a form of "false consciousness," a passive acceptance of
cultural truisms that served dominant interests--a manifestation of James' "dup-
ery." The task of instruction was to help students play the "doubting game"--to
deconstruct or problematize these beliefs, to show their arbitrary constructed
nature, and expose the political interests they serve. As should be clear by now,
I am arguing that this approach would be counterproductive in the case of this
essay; it would be to challenge its core, its very reason for being--and to dismiss
the profound functionality of this "simple" belief system for the writer. It would
be a form of violence and disrespect, a failure of imagination and empathy, an
ethnographic tin ear. It would also be a failure to use the self-critical tools of
cultural criticism that would ask readers to interrogate their own discomfort.

48
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

    But this greater openness to these moral commonplaces does not mean that
all the reader can do is say, "I can see you, I can hear you." Like any discourse,
"sentimental realism" can be performed well, and it can be performed poorly.
Not all writers can write "in your face" scenes as Brianna has, or be as attuned
to bodily response. The effect of her paper rests on this ability, as she says near
the end, to reveal to readers the depth of distress that these too-typical middle
school behaviors can create. At the same time there are perspectives missing in
the paper: one teacher who read the paper asked why parents and teachers didn't
intervene (think of the clumsy move of Susannah publicly choosing a peer to
do the cooking). Surely they bear some responsibility. I wished I had posed this
question to her during our conference on the paper, so I asked her this question
a year later in our email exchange. She acknowledged that her parents could have
stepped in earlier, but she understood why her teachers didn't:

         I put on a really terrific front at school ... they were
         SHOCKED when my mom told them that I was miserable in
         middle school. Even to this day, when I talk to them about it
         they are completely dumb-founded. They say things like "You
         were always so happy and bubbly all the time. I just can't be-
         lieve that you hated middle school so much." So to be fair, my
         teachers didn't have anything to pick up on and intervene in.
         But the bottom line is that people are responsible for their own
         actions. Besides, anyone who has experienced the public school
         system understands that it's almost like its own separate society.
         You're expected to deal with things on your own. Allowing for
         an adult to step in is like cheating or breaking the rules, and
         you are immediately coined as a target for bullying. While I
         would agree that adults should have stepped up, I would also
         argue that there shouldn't have been the need to do so.

    I regret that we didn't explore this "front" in our conference because her
descriptions of it might have heightened the pathos of her situation. In addition
to enduring the shunning, she had to maintain a front that would keep the
adults around her from guessing her distress. But she rejects as a digression the
suggestion that she explore the responsibility of adults in this situation because
it was the behavior of the girls, her peers, that is criticized. There should have
been no need for adults to intervene. The more "mature" or sociological move
to view the situation in a systematic way, spreading the blame to adults, would
blunt her moral criticism.

    I realize that papers of this kind raise anxieties among teachers, particular-
ly those new to the profession, about crossing the line into being a therapist

                                                                                                  49
Newkirk

(although as Lad Tobin has written, we fool ourselves if we think this is a clear
line). I don't want to minimize this concern, but in my experience it need not
be an obstacle. To begin with, students who choose write about traumatic issues
are, almost without exception, not asking us to be therapists. They want us to be
sensitive and curious readers who help them elaborate and explore topics they
have chosen to write about. I will often begin my questions about their papers
by saying that I respect them for taking on a difficult and emotional topic and
that if any of my questions make them uncomfortable not to answer them--but
almost invariably students welcome the questions. Michelle Payne comments in
her study, Bodily Discourses, that allowing this kind of writing to be done in a
course has the effect of normalizing the subject matter--it is not shameful, un-
speakable. It can be the subject of a paper; writing is therapeutic by not being
therapy, but normal school work. She writes: "It is especially important, I think,
for women who have suffered bodily violence to believe a `unified, normal' self is
possible through writing in an academic context" (Payne, 1997, p. 206).

    It is also important to remember that this essay is part of a sequence that led,
as it does in many first year classes, to assignments that dealt with responding
to reading and to research. An essay like this one can help a teacher in directing
students to topics that can combine the personal and academic, building on what
Michael Smith and Jeffrey Wilhelm call "identity markers." In Brianna's case, this
paper clued me in to her interest in the psychology of distress, her fascination with
the ways in which social stress is experienced bodily. In another paper she describes
playing the role of Nurse Ratched in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and finding
the way of walking to convey her emotional stiffness. When she chose later in the
semester to research panic attacks, which she also has experienced, I knew from
her previous writing that this was a good topic for her (and it was a very successful
paper). As Marcia Curtis and Anne Herrington argue in Persons in Process, the
most engaged and committed undergraduate writers are those who have a person-
al stake in their academic subject; they are the ones who dismantle the personal/
academic binary. And for me this essay was a key to helping Brianna do that.

                                             *

    Finally to the issue of power. One charge against the personal essay is that it
can become solipsistic, so self-preoccupied and individualistic that the writer is
powerless to appreciate or challenge systematic social evils. One thing academic
language provides is a more powerful capacity to critique and challenge injustice.
I would not deny this is sometimes the case (virtually every "travel" paper I have
received fails in this way). But this argument can be turned on its head--that
much of the writing in the "academy" insulates practitioners from the way rhe-
torical power actually operates in the wider culture. There would not be a need

50
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

to argue for "public intellectuals" if most of us were good at public discourse. A
dismissal of "sentimental realism" can alienate academics from the way writing
(and narrative) functions in the wider culture--to commemorate, provide so-
lace, entertain, persuade, inform. One can easily imagine a public function for
Brianna's essay--to help teachers be alert to the excluded child, or to make mid-
dle school girls aware of the pain that the ostracized girl can feel. While essays
like Brianna's may be therapeutic, they are also forms of public moral writing, as
witnessed by the considerable popularity of "This I Believe" series on National
Public Radio. To the extent that composition studies has embraced the public,
non-academic uses of language, it should pay serious attention to the power of
moral discourse like hers.

    I personally experienced this removal from public discourse several years ago
at an annual NCTE conference. Somehow I was on the "research strand," which
as anyone familiar with the conference knows is the kiss of death, a kind of con-
sumer warning. A group of us were scheduled to present in a huge ballroom, and
as the scheduled time approached it became clear that the panel outnumbered
the audience--so we pulled together a few chairs in a pathetic huddle to make
the session feel more intimate. In the session I was criticized by a prominent re-
searcher for promoting narrative and descriptive writing, and not the more pow-
erful "language of the academy." I was, in effect, disempowering my students.

    I remember thinking at the time, "If we and our language is so powerful,
why isn't anyone here?" For I knew in some other ballroom, my colleague Don-
ald Graves would be speaking to an audience of over a thousand, which would
respond enthusiastically to his humor, his stories of children in his study, his
descriptions of their writing, and his ability to mimic conversations with these
children. At times these stories had the weight of parables, exemplary stories. He
would alternate from humor to pathos to indignation without any notes, and
never losing his audience. And he changed the face of elementary education.

    Who, I was thinking, really has a handle on the "language of power"?

REFERENCES

Bartholomae, D. (1985). Inventing the university. In M. Rose (Ed.), When a
   writer can't write (pp. 134-165). New York: Guilford.

Bawarshi, A. (2003). Genre and the invention of the writer. Logan, UT: Utah
   State Press.

Berlin, J. (1988). Rhetoric and ideology in the writing class. College English,
   15(5), 477-494.

Bernstein, J. (1981, December 14). Profiles: Marvin Minsky. The New Yorker,
   pp. 50-128.

                                                                                                  51
Newkirk

Bourdieu, P. (1987). Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste. Cam-
   bridge: Harvard University Press.

Britton, J. (1982). Shaping at the point of utterance. In G. M. Pradl (Ed.),
   Prospect and retrospect: Selected essays of James Britton (pp. 139-145). Mont-
   clair, NJ: Boynton/Co. (Reprinted from A Freedman and I. Pringle (Eds.),
   Reinventing the rhetorical tradition, 1980, Conway, AR., L & S Books., for the
   Canadian Council of Teachers of English).

Burke, K. (1969). A grammar of motives. Berkeley, CA: University of California
   Press.

Burke, K. (1968). Language as symbolic action: Essays on life, literature, and meth-
   od. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Clark, S. (1994). Rhetoric, social construction, and gender: Is it bad to be sen-
   timental. In J. Clifford & J.Schlib (Eds.), Writing Theory and Critical Theory
   (pp. 96-108). New York: Modern Language Association.

Cohen, J. (2002, December). Grade a: The market for a woman's eggs. Atlantic
   Monthly, pp. 76-78.

Coles, W. E. & Vopat, J. (1985). What makes writing good: A multiperspective.
   New York: D. C. Heath.

Dweck, C. (2000). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and develop-
   ment. London: Psychology Press.

Elbow, P. (1973/1998). Writing without teachers. New York: Oxford University
   Press.

Emerson, R. W. (1982). Nature and selected Essays. New York: Penguin Books.
Faigley, L. (1992). Fragments of rationality: Postmodernity and the subject of com-

   position. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Foucault, M. (1995). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. New York:

   Vintage.
Herrington, A., & Curtis, M. (2000). Persons in process: Four stories of writing

   and personal development. Urbana, Illinois: NCTE.
James, W. (1892/1985). Psychology: The briefer course. Notre Dame, Indiana:

   Notre Dame University Press.
James, W. (1997). The will to believe. In L. Menand (Ed.), Pragmatism: A reader

   (pp. 69-92). New York: Vintage.
Lopate, P. (1994). The art of the personal essay. New York: Doubleday.
Miller, R. (1996). The nervous system. College English, 58(3), 265-286.
Montaigne, M. de. (1595/1987). The complete essays. (M. A. Screech, Trans.).

   New York: Penguin.
Newkirk, T. (2002). Sentimental journeys: Anti-romanticism and academic

   identity. In P. Belanoff (Ed.), Writing with Elbow (pp. 21-33). Logan, Utah:
   Utah State University Press.

52
                                                                           Selfhood and the Personal Essay

Orwell, G. (1940/2002). Charles Dickens. In J. Carey (Ed.), Essays (pp. 135-
   184). New York: Knopf (Everyman's Library).

Payne, M. (1997). Bodily discourses: When students write about sexual abuse, phys-
   ical abuse, and eating disorders in the composition classroom. (Doctoral disserta-
   tion, University of New Hampshire).

Rose, J. (2002). The intellectual life of the British working class. New Haven: Yale
   University Press.

Seligman, M. E. P., Kamen, L. P., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1988). Explanatory
   style across the lifespan: Achievement and health. In E. M. Heatherington, R.
   M. Lerner, & M. Perlmutter (Eds.), Child development in lifespan perspective
   (pp. 91-114). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Smith, M. & Wilhelm, J. (2002). Reading don't fix no Chevys: Literacy in the lives
   of young men. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Taylor, S. (1989). Positive illusions: Creative self-deception and the healthy mind.
   New York: Basic Books.

Tiger, L. (1979). Optimism: The biology of hope. New York: Kodansha.
Tisdale, S. (1998). We do abortions here. In D. Cavitch (Ed.), Life Studies: An

   Analytic Reader (pp. 471-478). Boston: Bedford.
Tobin, L. (1993). Writing relationships: What really happens in a composition class.

   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton Cook/Heinemann.
Wardle, E. (2007). Understanding "transfer" from FYW: Preliminary results of a

   longitudinal study. Writing Program Administration, 31, 65-85.

                                                                                                  53
CRITICAL MEMOIR AND IDENTITY
FORMATION: BEING, BELONGING,
BECOMING

      Nancy Mack
      Wright State University

    Critique can function as more than a scholarly pursuit; it can become a
valued skill for surviving as an outsider within an academic context. Because
universities are complex, largely reproductive systems, being a hard worker and
following the rules does not necessarily lead to reward or even much notice.
Increasing demands and multiple layers of political machinations foster disillu-
sionment and alienation. Participating in programs, grants, and other initiatives
only increases the perils, not to mention running the gauntlet of publishing
and tenure. As egotistical as I may be, it is best to remember that the academic
universe is not the only place fraught with crushing hegemonic pressures. Be-
ing a parent, teenager, or restaurant server all necessitate the ability to analyze
the forces that impose limitations and subvert one's agency to author ethical,
answerable acts. Fortunately, critique has long been expressed through many
productive means such as music, cartoons, jokes, parodies, postings on social
media, clothes, hair styles, body art, gestures, and of course, various types of
composing and writing.

    This chapter forwards memoir as a writing assignment that can be informed
by a critical notion of subject formation. The heuristic activities that I describe
were developed for courses on different levels: first year composition, English
education writing pedagogy, and several graduate seminars. Recently, I incorpo-
rated a few of these generative strategies into an online graduate course about
critical memoir. After commenting on the constraints of theoretical taxonomies,
a series of heuristic strategies are outlined to increase awareness of identity as a
conflicted representation that is always open to revision through writing.

TROUBLING TAXONOMIES

    Regretfully, labels reinforce power relations behind reified categories. Never-
theless, taxonomies may come in handy when trying to wrap one's head around
a huge amount of information during an introductory course about composition
theory (Mack, 2009). A disclaimer always needs to be fronted when using such

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.0  55
Mack

devices that taxonomies are cultural generalizations that in most cases rewrite his-
tory to benefit the reigning group. Fulkerson's (1979, 1990, 2005) serial glosses
relate an overly dramatic, progress-narrative of the field. A people's oral histo-
ry always varies from the official, printed versions, with some of the old timers
choosing silence rather than the futility of constructing an alternative narrative.
I merely wish to trouble the master narrative for the field by pointing out that
the names commonly representing the theory camps in what is called Rhetoric
and Composition should be contested. Bruce Horner and Min-Zhan Lu (2010)
astutely argue that these two words that represent the field itself deserve critique.
We might question which term should come first and whether the "and" im-
plies equality or mere addition. The names for individual theory groups did not
precede the development of a particular perspective, nor did these labels emerge
from individual scholars meeting as a group, voting on an identifier, and donning
T-shirts with slogans to represent their mutual ideology. At the time that some
of these camps supposedly came into being, I would have bet on totally differ-
ent names as gaining popularity. For example, I would have suggested "transfor-
mative pedagogies" rather than the cumbersome "social epistemic rhetoric," but
James Berlin never requested my advice.

    History is far more complex than any taxonomy can represent. Most schol-
ars have careers that span decades with their positions developing if not taking
twists and turns related to forces that may not be fully revealed. Proffering a new
position will always come with great political risk and may indeed necessitate the
Foucauldian moment of labeling others to create a somewhat undeserved dis-
tinction. Maybe the academic desire to coin a new concept leads to the emphasis
on difference so we can offer a new and improved concept. Yet such stress on dif-
ference also may lead to categories that imply binaries and warring factions, even
when they may not exist. Raul Sanchez comments on the need for a progressive
cause and effect claim when forwarding a new theory:

         We might even say that process theory was invented by
         postprocess theory in the same way that, according to Susan
         Miller, current-traditional theory was invented by process
         theory .... In a sense then, to participate in a discussion about
         the relative merits of process and postprocess theories is to
         use the apparatus, to perform the same act of piety. More
         importantly, it is also to forego the opportunity to redefine
         the historical and theoretical terms by which writing will be
         studied. (2011, p. 187)

    Even claims of members' alienation or affiliation may be political projec-
tions. These fossilized monikers are hardly accepted team names that rally

56
                                                                 Critical Memoir and Identity Formation

scholars under their banners to battle the opposition in disciplinary skirmishes.
Taxonomies of theory groups are misrepresentations at best and divisive pro-
paganda at worst. Our critiques should historicize such labels to make these
groups more dynamic and even revisable.

    Richard Weaver (1953) warns against an over-emphasis on theory god-
terms. These potent terms are vague and therefore discount the complexities of
the daily classroom experience. Patricia Harkin (1991) has forwarded a more
grounded notion of teacher lore as employing multiple theoretical approaches
in service of the teacher's many responsibilities. Thus, a theoretically informed
teacher might devise a writing course that draws from multiple approaches: tra-
ditional skills, process procedures, expressive needs, cognitive development, ac-
ademic initiation, critical concerns, rhetorical demands, logical argumentation,
genre practices, civic responsibilities, disciplinary knowledge, local imperatives,
postmodern alienation, and real-world communicative activities. To make such
determinations in curriculum design is not eclectic but rather dynamic in which
multiple theories must interplay in a changing, local context. As someone who
might be labeled as a practitioner, I am advocating for more theory to compli-
cate our practices, rather than pitting one mythologized theory group against
the other.

CRITICAL MEMOIR AND IDENTITY FORMATION

    I am somewhat surprised that the personal narrative survives as a writing
assignment. Although students favor it, the personal narrative has been critiqued
for promoting a naive notion of a singular, static, authentic self. Abandoning the
personal narrative in favor of the combative, polarizing argument assignment
seems to be in fashion in first-year college writing courses and has trickled down
into high school assignment initiatives and the Common Core standards. Some
teachers will even say that the personal narrative is too easy for students to write
because it is organized chronologically while others would counter that using a
familiar structure makes it possible to focus on other more important skills. The
personal narrative has been condemned as everything from too emotive to too
culturally scripted. While examining her teaching in a personal essay course,
Amy Robillard reveals her disciplinary guilt:

         Personal essay assignments become subject to the same by now
         well-honed critiques of personal narrative assignments. The
         personal narrative is too easy, uncritical. We shouldn't assign
         personal narratives because we're only inviting students to
         confess their most embarrassing experiences to us. We're not
         therapists, after all. (Sharp-Hoskins & Robillard, 2012, p. 324)

                                                                                                  57
Mack

    I respect Robillard's distinction between the personal narrative and the per-
sonal essay as a revision that comes from a more critical understanding of subject
formation, including her own narrative of herself as the "good" teacher. From
this article, both Sharp-Hoskins and Robillard model their critical reflection
process: "We argue, then, that it is only by recognizing our own implication, our
own attachments, in the economies of emotion that circumscribe us that we can
begin to challenge the master narratives of the `good teacher"' (2012, p. 333).
Disciplinary critiques should motivate teacher scholars to interrogate and revise
their assignments in an ongoing dialectic between theory and practice.

    My revision of the personal narrative assignment derives from an eclectic
mix of Russian cognitive psychology and critical theory. As a first generation
college student, I cannot avoid thinking about students' motives for enrolling in
college courses. Most enroll in degree programs to make a change in identity, be
it from local high school student to a more cosmopolitan college student, from
one career to another, or more hopefully from one economic stratum to another.
In his textbook about educational psychology for teachers, Vygotsky's last sub-
heading in the last chapter is entitled "Life as Creation"(1997). Vygotsky argues
for a type of subject formation that is a social process throughout one's lifetime
that requires active participation it its creation. Thus, it is no surprise that for
Vygotsky, self-regulation is about the development of metacognitive thinking
versus controlling discrete behaviors. Self-regulation is about self-formation and
becoming the person one wants to be within a given social milieu. Certainly,
enrolling in college can be an act of agency to change one's circumstances that
implicates identity formation as a context for inquiry, reflection, and revision
through writing.

    To create what might be an artificial difference from the personal narrative, I
have chosen to label this type of writing assignment a critical memoir. I started
with Lucy Calkins' (1986) delineation of narrative as what happened, autobi-
ography as when it happened, and memoir as who it happened to and how that
experience represents an important theme in that person's life. As I became more
versed in postmodern subjectivity, I started to think of memoir as constructed
from multiple subject positions:

      · The naive self who was present at the time of the experience.
      · The subjective self who interprets the experience as the culture would

         suggest.
      · The future self who imagines the person that the author wishes to

         become.
      · The author self who negotiates among the other selves and constructs

         meaning (Mack, 2007).

58
                                                                 Critical Memoir and Identity Formation

    Memoir encourages selectivity of experience, multiple interpretations, future
orientation, and agency in representation. To push the memoir genre to become
more critical, identity formation should be complicated further. Thus, writing
activities should promote reflection about identity as being (Mack 2006)

      · multiple in various cultural roles,
      · conflicted by acts of accommodation, resistance, and opposition,
      · temporal within larger historical and economic forces,
      · materially situated in a local, dynamic space,
      · embodied in emotionally-laden, lived experience,
      · interpreted and co-created by society,
      · mediated through language that is culturally ideological,
      · developmental through continual maturation and education,
      · revised by intentional and willful agency, and
      · connected to literacies that are larger than the classroom.

    This is indeed a tall order. In some regards a critical memoir approach asks
the writer to continually reconsider one's own master narratives, questioning
the who, what, when, where, and why of the potential ways that the stories
could be told. More than questioning whether the story is true are the ques-
tions about how the story functions and how it could be actively re-interpreted
and revised to represent a newly constructed, more ethical truth. The emphasis
on reflection in composition studies informs my desire to include critical inter-
pretation in all aspects of memoir writing. Kathleen Yancey (1998) and Donna
Qualley (1997) are both scholars who have emphasized reflection as primary to
the composing process.

CRITICAL HEURISTICS IN PRACTICE

    The ten-week graduate course in critical memoir was structured around read-
ing, writing, and reflection in three units: being, belonging, and becoming. The
name for the being section of the course was influenced by Mikhail Bakhtin's
concept of "being-as-event" that describes the individual's existence as an activi-
ty. In one of my favorite quotes about subjectivity Bakhtin makes the analogy to
a rough draft in need of an ethically answerable deed to escape endless drafts in
order to "rewrite one's life once and for all in the form of a fair copy" (Bakhtin,
1993, p. 44). Writing critical memoir has the potential to be part of a Bakhtin-
ian answerable deed as the writer decides what the memory means by selecting,
examining, reflecting, and finally assigning meaning to it.

    To return to Vygotsky's notion of ontological development of life as a cre-
ation, adults often have moments when they dredge up the past in order to make

                                                                                                  59
Mack

sense of it. Perhaps the very moments when we do this are moments of identity
crisis when we feel the need to revise our selves. Some may do this with a ther-
apist who generally provides the interpretation while others will merely have an
uncritical moment of nostalgia. For a memoir writing course, assigning meaning
to memory can engage students in critical reflection. Although the teacher plays
a powerful role in this reflection, we should not assume the therapist's role of
primary interpreter. Consequently, I did not micromanage students' insights
by commenting extensively on drafts or in lengthy individual conferences or
emails. These strategies, although potentially effective, were not realistic for my
intent or workload. My influence was primarily through the selection of the
readings and the creation of a series of heuristics. These careful curricular deci-
sions were my means for fostering the students' reflections. My role as a reader
was more one of praising their insights rather than forwarding my reflections on
their experiences.

    The critical reflection required for a re-interpretation of experience bene-
fits from a stance of inquiry similar to ethnographic research in which patterns
emerge from a process that is rich in phenomenological details and data. This
ongoing hermeneutic inquiry should ideally happen before, during, and after
each memoir writing experience. One student explained the inquiry into mem-
oir this way:

         As a writer, memoirs feel deeply personal, almost as if some-
         thing that could exist without a reader. My understanding of
         the memoir has been challenged and expanded. Not only do I
         further appreciate the genre, but the process that must occur
         in the writing process. Unlike the academic writing process,
         the memoir writing process is much more an inner experi-
         ence, requiring the writer to travel through remembrances,
         trying to find that which real memory is. Victor Villanueva
         first made me aware of the distinction between memory
         and remembrances. Memory requires more of a person,
         and is a process driven activity. It is not until more details
         and dialogue have surfaced from musing on a remembrance
         that a memory really begins to shape. Memories are the
         remembrances that we actually relive, nearly re-creating the
         experience. True memoir writing comes when that memory
         is recreated for the reader. I am still working to develop my
         memoir writing into reader-based prose. It can be emotionally
         exhausting to relive remembrances enough to actually meet
         real memory.

60
                                                                 Critical Memoir and Identity Formation

    Activities not included here also focused on writing crafts such as details,
characters, dialogue, and inner thoughts.

    The "being" unit encompassed a wider notion of literacy. Students initially
journaled in response to literacy memoirs with a working class focus by Laurel
Johnson Black (1995) and Linda Brodkey (1994). Any selection of readings
comes with a political agenda. I chose several readings that had a social class
theme because class is a major issue for my students; however, I made it clear
that students were not required to write about class issues. Also, I wanted read-
ings that did not present tidy, simplistic literacy narratives like those that Jane
Greer refers to as "conversion narratives" (2012) or Ishmael Reed critiques as
"redemption" narratives (2012). In particular, Black presents a complex under-
standing of literacy through her value of working class language and the discon-
nect that her education has caused with her sister. As Patrick Berry proposes, the
use of literacy narratives should "move beyond a singular focus on either hope or
critique in order to identify the transformative potential of literacy in particular
circumstances" (2012, iii). So, the question for the writer becomes how should
the literacy narrative function within the individual's unique identity formation.

    I assigned a series of brainstorming prompts that first required students to
itemize a wide range of literacy experiences throughout their lives both inside
and outside of school. The prompts continued with questions about more com-
plex functions of literacy for purposes of escape, friendship, entertainment,
peace-making, status, curiosity, and rebellion against authority. Students were
to note themes in their development as well as how literacy functioned for their
families, friends, and multiple identity groups. Finally, students considered con-
flicts related to their literacy, including occasions when they were intentionally
silent, refused to communicate, or chose not to become literate about something
for a strong reason. Students also responded to other working-class academic
memoirs from Dews and Law's This Fine Place So Far From Home (1995). From
the prompts and journaling students developed two ideas, drafted, and revised
a literacy memoir about experiences that varied from childhood through adult-
hood. One student's powerful memoir related the experience of being betrayed
by a hate-filled, adolescent diary entry when it was discovered by an abusive
stepfather.

    The "belonging" unit was named from an article by psychologist Barbara
Jensen (2012) in which she characterizes the difference between working and
middle classes as "belonging" versus "becoming." Jensen characterizes the work-
ing class sense of self as developing from childhood in close relation to others, as
including or affiliating others whereas the middle class self emerges as separation
from others, as negotiating or competing with others. Although I wanted stu-
dents to consider class conflicts, I opened the heuristics to other types of identity

                                                                                                  61
Mack

groups.
    This unit took longer to implement and involved many more heuristics than the

previous unit. Multiple definitions of memoir, culled from several scholars, were
presented. In addition to more readings from This Fine Place So Far From Home
(Dews & Law, 1995), students read selections from Zandy's Liberating Memory
(1995) and from Rick Bragg (1997) and Paule Marshall (1983). After modeling
my own overlapping identity circles related to gender, class, family, relationships,
education, location, generation, health, interests, responsibilities, and career, stu-
dents made their own webs. Another series of prompts invited students to record
experiences with language and identity, such as feeling like an insider or outsider,
taking a stand or making peace, being offended or offensive, and defending or in-
spiring others. Students answered a lengthy questionnaire that identified working
class markers related to food, clothing, purchases, childhood, home, work, and
school; and viewed a hidden class rules chart (Payne, 1996). Students placed life
experiences on a graphic organizer, ranking them as accommodating, resisting, or
opposing cultural norms. During revision students also read bell hooks (2012),
Frank Dobson (2002), and Victor Villanueva (2004). Students had no problems
with selecting topics from diverse identity groups and consequently wrote mem-
oirs about race, music, alcoholism, religion, gender, and disability with only one
student selecting social class. These memoirs were more complex than earlier ones.
Accordingly, the previously mentioned student observed that social class is "a com-
plex system with many layers and much ambiguity."

    The third unit about "becoming" springs from Freire's use of "becoming" as
a trope in Pedagogy of the Oppressed (1973) for creating a critically conscious, fu-
ture-oriented, literate identity. In a previous critical pedagogy seminar, I created
an activity based on Friere's concept of limit situation that guided students to
trace moments of frustration to the larger social forces of oppression. Students
frequently connected their procrastination in completing assignments with forc-
es inherent to graduate education.

    A positive and negative graph activity (Rief, 1992) assigned students to
draw and annotate a time line of experiences in order to analyze critical patterns
in their lives. Readings included Jacqueline Jones Royster (1996), Janet Bean
(2003), and one of my articles (2007). An expanded limit situation heuristic
engaged students in listing personal, professional, and writing goals. Students
then selected one goal from each category and critically analyzed the forces that
thwarted their progress. Limit situations were described as "physical needs, time
constraints, financial problems, power obstacles (permission), social pressures
(other people), institutional constraints (rules), historical patterns, and cultural
biases." Next, students imagined impractical and practical solutions for each
goal and one small, immediate step that could be taken. The next activity, "Emo-

62
                                                                 Critical Memoir and Identity Formation

tional Indicators of Stress," requested that students think about social systems
in which they had been unrewarded, ignored, given extra duties, trivialized, un-
informed, left behind, rated poorly, given misleading information, or told lies.
After some explanation of who benefits from this type of cultural hegemony,
students tracked their recent negative emotions (rage, anger, passive-aggressive
desires, frustration, silence, procrastination, fear, guilt, self-loathing, or despair)
as a barometer for subtle forms of oppression. Next, a comparison was made
to circumstances that elicit the opposite emotions. Finally, students proposed
things that could be changed or that they did have power or control over such
as their own reactions. This activity was influenced by my interest in economies
of emotion, particularly the scholarship of Lynn Worsham (1998), Julie Lind-
quist (2004), Donna LeCourt (2004), Laura Micciche (2007), and Michalinos
Zembylas (2005). Reading explications of emotional labor has helped me to
acknowledge that feelings can be connected to agency in subject formation and
pedagogy. In other words, critical analysis of emotion brings the potential "to
think, feel, and act differently" (Mack, 2007, p. 22). The critical analysis pro-
cess can begin with an awareness of a bothersome or intense emotion. Feminist
scholar Alison Jaggar defines troubling emotions as "outlaw emotions."

    As well as motivating critical research, outlaw emotions may also enable us
to perceive the world differently from its portrayal in conventional descriptions.
They may provide the first indications that something is wrong with how things
are. Conventionally unexpected or inappropriate emotions may precede our
conscious recognition that accepted descriptions and justifications often conceal
as much as reveal the prevailing site of affairs. Only when we reflect on our ini-
tially puzzling irritability, revulsion, anger, or fear may we bring to consciousness
our "gut-level" awareness that we are in a situation of coercion, cruelty, injustice,
or danger (Mack, 2007, p. 161).

    To some extent I wanted students to view their outlaw emotions as an early
warning system that alerts them to examine the oppressive forces that may be
connected to these emotions.

    After drafting a limit situation memoir, students completed a pronoun re-
vision activity based on a presentation by Karen Hollis in which a paragraph is
selected that contains the singular pronouns of I, me, or my that are revised to
plural pronouns of we, us, and our. Students then pondered how their individ-
ual limit situation might be connected to the experiences of a larger group of
people. The diversity of memoir topics seemed to widen as the term progressed.
For the limit situation memoir, topics addressed family member's rejection of
educated vocabulary, deciding to leaving seminary, dealing with negative com-
ments from a professor, accepting polygamy, financial problems with meeting
social obligations, and negative comments about weight.

                                                                                                  63
Mack

    As part of the final portfolio reflection process, I shared my writing manifes-
to list and asked students to create one of their own, an activity I hoped would
help students reflect on what they wanted their writing to be in the future.

    When the only writing you do is school writing, the teacher controls all the
assignments, topics, and deadlines. Finding the time, motivation, and support
necessary to keep writing outside of school is incredibly difficult. It is as if every
other part of our lives conspires to prevent writing. Many other parts of our lives
cannot be delayed to give us time to write. What we can control is our attitude.
A negative attitude can block all possibilities to write. If the writer cannot be-
lieve in the importance of his or her own writing, then nothing will get done. It
is time to claim your writing for yourself, for your own projects, for your own
purposes, desires and dreams.

    In addition to reflective journal entries after each of the three essays, the
portfolio cover essay assignment requested that students contemplate insights
gained from writing their memoirs as well as themes that connected the indi-
vidual pieces and their readings. Here are two excerpts from different students:

         Both memoirs make a strong case for the claim that we must
         constantly reinvent ourselves while fighting against the socie-
         tal forces that want us to adhere to dominant rules that may
         not benefit us.

         Bell wrote about the price of an education. She argued that
         those who are less fortunate will be challenged with having to
         forget where they came from, wipe their memories clean of
         anything that is not fit for the educated elite. Unconsciously,
         I had already done this. If I was going to be successful in the
         world of academia, I had to learn to cover up my roots with
         the soil of the high-class. I had to forget that I came from a less
         than worthy background. I had to accept that education wasn't
         a right for me, but a privilege. I had to come to terms with be-
         ing neither black nor white, but instead the grey area that goes
         mostly neglected; the grey area that the minds of logic detest
         because it challenges their neatly organized world. I had to for-
         get everything that brought me to where I was if I was going to
         continue to persevere myself and make my mark in the world.

AGENCY AND THE CRITICAL MEMOIR

    Regardless of the mode or genre, the teacher must create writing assignments
that critically connect literacy to the student's agency in identity formation. The

64
                                                                 Critical Memoir and Identity Formation

traits that differentiate critical memoir from the personal narrative are primarily
that the writing is more subtly nuanced and critically complex. The writing
should open the author to the possibility of agency through the interpretation
and representation of memory. The meaning of the memoir is revised from the
student's current vantage point of an increased critical awareness and projected
towards a hopeful future, thus giving the author some degree of agency in shap-
ing identity.

    Discounting that the student has any agency in subject formation relegates
literacy to functioning only in a most dismal manner. Vygotskian scholars Dor-
othy Holland and William Lachicotte make room for agency in identity forma-
tion that might open up discursive spaces to new variants:

         People have to create selves that (in the metaphor of resi-
         dence) inhabit the (social) structures and spaces (cultural
         imaginaries) that collectivities create, but they produce selves
         that inhabit these structures and imaginaries in creative,
         variant, and often oppositional, ways .... And, in the circuits
         of emerging communities of practice, innovation may play
         out and regularize the semiotic means for new identities and
         activities that lie beyond existing structures of power. (2007,
         p. 135)

    This notion of creative variants is similar to Victor Turner's discussion of
liminal or in-between spaces in social structures that permit resistance and re-
vision (1977). However, unlike essays, identities take a great deal of time and
emotional energy to be revised.

    Hope is important, but agency should not be located only within the writ-
ing itself. To make the larger connection between writing critical memoir and
civic literacy might be too grand a claim. I do important work in the writing
classroom, but my goal is more that of increasing critical thought rather than
liberating anyone's identity. I agree with Rochelle Harris' insistence that emer-
gent moments of critical thought can happen in students' personal essays, auto-
biographies, and memoirs:

         Before institutional, community, national, and/or global
         transformation come the personal commitments and experi-
         ences that motivate one to claim the agency necessary to be-
         gin social critique. The most important critical work emerges
         as students write about the places they have been, the experi-
         ences they have had, the books they have read, and the ideas
         they have pondered. This is one of the most revolutionary of
         critical acts--to transform and empower one's own words as

                                                                                                  65
Mack

         they are embedded in that most difficult of intertextual histo-
         ries to negotiate, the history of one's own life. (2004, p. 417)

    I must remember that Freire cautioned that the classroom is dominated by
the hegemony of the larger society and not really the "lever of revolutionary
transformation" (Shor & Freire, 1987, p. 33). Education may not be the great
equalizer for my students (or for me, for that matter), but it can help us to
compose a more thoughtful draft in the endless revisions of ourselves and our
lives.

REFERENCES

Bakhtin, M. M. (1993). Toward a philosophy of the act. (V. Liapunov, Trans.).
   Austin: University of Texas Press.

Bean, J. (2003). Manufacturing emotions: Tactical resistance in the narratives of
   working class students. In D. Jacobs & L. R. Micciche (Eds.), A way to move:
   Rhetorics of emotion & composition studies (pp. 101-112). Portsmouth, NH:
   Boynton/Cook.

Berry, P. W. (2011). Beyond hope: Rhetorics of mobility, possibility, and literacy.
   (Doctoral dissertation).

Black, L. J. (1995). Stupid rich bastards. In C. L. B. Dews & C. L. Law (Eds.),
   This fine place so far from home: Voices of academics from the working class (pp.
   13-25). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Bragg, R. (1997). Prologue. In All over but the shoutin' (pp. xi-xxii). New York:
   Pantheon Books.

Brodkey, L. (1994). Writing on the bias. College English, 56(5), 527-547.
Calkins, L. (1986). The art of teaching writing. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Dews, C L. B, & Law, C. L. (Eds.). (1995). This fine place so far from home: Voices

   of academics from the working class. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Dobson, F. E., Jr. (2002). Beyond the limits: Reflections of a Black working class

   academic. Public Voices, 5(3), 85-91.
Fulkerson, R. (1990). Composition theory in the eighties: Axiological consensus

   and paradigmatic diversity. College Composition and Communication, 41(4),
   409-429.
Fulkerson, R. (2005). Composition at the turn of the twenty-first century. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication, 56(4), 654-687.
Fulkerson, R. (1979). Four philosophies of composition. College Composition
   and Communication, 30(4), 343-348.
Freire, P. (1973). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Ed-
   ucation.

66
                                                                 Critical Memoir and Identity Formation

Greer, J. (1995, March). "And now I can see:" The function of conversion ar-
   ratives in the discourse of cultural studies. Paper presented at the Annual
   Meeting of the Conference on College Composition and Communication,
   Washington, DC. Abstract retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/
   ED385838.pdf

Harkin, P. (1991). The postdisciplinary politics of lore. In P. Harkin & J. Schlib
   (Eds.), Contending with words: Composition and rhetoric in a postmodern age
   (pp. 124-138). New York: Modern Language Association of America.

Harris, R. (2004). Encouraging emergent moments: The personal, critical, and
   rhetorical in the writing classroom. Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching
   Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture, 4(3), 401-418.

Holland, D., & Lachicotte, W. (2007). Vygotsky, Mead and the new socio-
   cultural studies of identity. In H. Daniels, M. Cole & J. V. Wertsch (Eds.),
   The Cambridge companion to Vygotsky (pp. 101-135). New York: Cambridge
   University Press.

hooks, b. (2000). Learning in the shadow of race and class. The Chronicle of
   Higher Education, 14-16.

Horner, B., & Lu, M-Z. (2010). Working rhetoric and composition. College
   English, 72(5), 470-494.

Jagger, A. M. (1989). Love and knowledge: Emotion in feminist epistemology.
   In E. M. Jagger & S. R. Bordo (Eds.), Gender, body/knowledge: Feminist recon-
   structions of being and knowing (145-171). Rutgers University Press.

Jensen, B. (1997, June). Becoming versus belonging: Psychology, speech, and social
   class. Paper presented at the Youngstown Working Class Studies Conference,
   Youngstown, OH. Retrieved from http://www.classmatters.org/2004_04/be-
   coming_vs_belonging.php

LeCourt, D. (2004). Identity matters: Schooling the student body in academic
   discourse. Albany: SUNY Press.

Lindquist, J. (2004). Class affects, classroom affectations: Working through the
   paradoxes of strategic empathy. College English, 67, 187-209.

Mack, N. (2006). Ethical representation of working class lives: Multiple genres,
   voices, and identities."Pedagogy, 6(1), 53-78.

Mack, N. (2007). Being the namer or the named: Working-class discourse con-
   flicts. JAC: a Journal of Composition Theory, 27(1-2), 329-350.

Mack, N. (2009). Representations of the field in graduate courses: Using parody
   to question all positions. College English, 71(5), 435-459.

Marshall, P. (1983). The making of a writer: From the poets in the kitchen. In
   Reena and other stories (pp. 1-12). Old Westbury, NY: Feminist Press.

Micciche, L. R. (2007). Doing emotion: Rhetoric, writing, teaching. Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers.

                                                                                                  67
Mack

Payne, R. (1996). A framework for understanding poverty. Highlands, TX: aha!
   Process.

Qualley, D. J. (1997). Turns of thought: Teaching composition as reflexive inquiry.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Reed, I. (2010, February 4). Fade to white. The New York Times. Retrieved from
   http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/05/opinion/05reed.html?_r=0

Rief, L. (1992). Seeking diversity: Language arts with adolescents. Portsmouth,
   NH: Heinemann Educational Books.

Royster, J. J. (1996). When the First Voice You Hear Is Not Your Own. College
   Composition and Communication, 47, 29-40.

Sanchez, R. (2011). First, A Word. In S. I. Dobrin, J. A. Rice, & M. Vastola
   (Eds.), Beyond Post Process (pp. 183-194). Logan: Utah State University Press.

Sharp-Hoskins, K., & E. Robillard, A. E. (2012). Narrating the "good teacher"
   in rhetoric and composition: Ideology, affect, complicity. JAC: A Journal of
   Composition Theory, 32, 305-336.

Shor, I., & Freire, P. (1987). (1987). A pedagogy for liberation: Dialogues on trans-
   forming education. South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey.

Turner, V. W. (1977). The ritual process: Structure and anti-structure. Ithaca, NY:
   Cornell University Press.

Villanueva, V. (2004). "Memoria" is a friend of ours: on the discourse of color.
   College English, 67(1), 9-19.

Vygotsky, L. (1997). Educational psychology. Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press.
Weaver, R. M. (1953). The ethics of rhetoric. Chicago: H. Regnery.
Worsham, L. (1998). Going postal: Pedagogic violence and the schooling of

   emotion. JAC, 18(2), 213-245.
Yancey, K. B. (1998). Reflection in the writing classroom. Logan, UT: Utah State

   University Press.
Zandy, J. (1995). Liberating memory: Our work and our working-class conscious-

   ness. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Zembylas, M. (2005). Teaching with emotion: A postmodern enactment. Green-

   wich, CT: Information Age.

68
CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM'S
ALCHEMICAL CHALLENGE

Derek Owens
St. John's University

THE PERSONAL-TO-PROFESSIONAL LADDER

    From the beginning one of the messages I got (as far as teaching first-year
writing was concerned) was that pretty much one begins by "teaching the per-
sonal," moves as soon as possible to the "analytical," then closes with the "argu-
mentative." There might be other stops en route--"expository" and "persuasive"
and the like could all get slipped in between the bookends. But the trajectory
was clear: initially "allow" students to dip into their lives and experiences, with
the goal of eventually moving away from all that "personal stuff" into realms
more explicitly "academic," "rigorous," "scholarly." Hook the initiates, in other
words, by first "letting them" write about their lives and interests, the stuff that
floats their boats. Once we've whetted their appetite though, shift gears. "Per-
sonal expression" gets left behind as analysis of other people's texts takes center
stage. "Dissection" and "critique" and "debate" move in where the personal has
been evicted, or at least rendered secondary or subservient to the examination
of artifacts, the elucidation of ideas located beyond the writer's local experience.
One might picture the progression like some kind of game board--each student
entering via their own unique paths and histories, engaging with them along the
way, but ultimately everyone coming closer and closer to a common finish line
where it's not their "expressed" personal histories that matter but, say, the way
they marshal evidence, cite sources, make inferences, assemble claims. Establish
authority. Enter into other people's conversations.

    Occasionally this "personal-to-professional" path was made quite explicit. In
one place where I used to teach, a senior colleague and supervisor laughed dispar-
agingly of how our freshmen were "so in love with their little stories" and needed
to be "broken" of such self-indulgences. This was in marked contrast to the fairly
progressive graduate program I was in during the late 1980s where considerable
attention was placed on designing learning environments where students had
the freedom to explore writing on their own terms. And yet even there, once we
grad students got to our comps and the dissertation, the notion of incorporating
or validating the "personal"--however much that concept had been valued in
our conversations about students' rights to their own languages--was regarded

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.04  69
Owens

as risky and problematic. We were after all training ourselves to enter the profes-
sion; to not take seriously the genre conventions of the cover letter, dissertation
prospectus, the manuscript, the job interview, would have been self-defeating.

    I suppose what bothers me most of all is how seductive this one-directional
ladder is. I know because I'm no stranger to it. I have in fact embraced it in the
past and at times uncritically enforced it. I used to recommend it to faculty
looking for suggestions on how to introduce writing at different stages of the
semester. And this supposed progression--it really can be such a seductive little
formula, no? I mean, there is a comfortable logic to it. Those early-in-the-semes-
ter "personal essays" can be such excellent icebreakers. Everyone gets to find out
a tiny bit about each other, tell some "personal" stories. Students find it little
easier to open up in their small group discussions, maybe even locate common
ground. Then about a quarter into the semester the focus can turn to texts writ-
ten by real, published writers, the classroom vocabulary turning to matters of
"close reading" and "textual analysis" and "unpacking the text." Then, after they
graduate from this phase, students are channeled into the even loftier realms
of argumentation, and new vocabularies are adopted about "claims," "defining
terms," "evidence," "anticipating counter-arguments."

    It's not that any of the attendant topics or conversations that take place in this
linear continuum is inherently problematic. What's bothersome is the underlying
assumption that one inevitably goes in through the Expression door, exits out the
Critical door, and that these realms have to occupy rigid, separate geographies.

    Of course what I've articulated here is a crude cartoon. I don't personally
know anyone who teaches a writing course exactly this way, slavishly marching
through these realms in such predictable, lockstep manner. But I feel confident
that this trajectory remains alive and well and largely implicit in varying degrees
throughout writing curricula and textbooks. (If I'm wrong, we would probably
see just as many courses demonstrating the inverse: students beginning with re-
search papers, constructing arguments, analyzing texts, then wrapping up with
"personal narratives.")

    I also realize that the terms and binaries I'm invoking here--personal/expres-
sive vs. academic/critical--aren't givens. Some in this volume, like Peter Elbow
in his opening chapter, challenge the terminology altogether. Still, for me, these
terms retain some cash value. Ultimately I don't find either word meaningless
or inherently pejorative; instead I want to bear in mind these are working fic-
tions that point to distinct histories and perceptions, not intractable discourse
conventions, and that it's in their juxtaposition, their melding, where we find
exciting opportunities for imagining writing.

    I'm interested in how either end of the spectrum puts pressure on its alleged
antithesis, pushing and pulling us to a more hybrid middle arena where "critical"

70
                                                             Critical Expressivism's Alchemical Challenge

embodies the "personal," and "expressive" eats the "academic"--to a point where
the paired construction no longer reinforces either endpoint but actually calls
them into question. A binary issuing a challenge for us to recognize the limitation
of the very presupposed obligatory continuum. Ultimately this both/and con-
struction--or more accurately, reflective process--calls to mind (for me anyway)
the alchemical pairing of opposites referred to as the coniunctio, a reasonable met-
aphor, perhaps, to bear in mind as we explore the possible benefits of conjoining
these two modes of inquiry.

FROM MOTHER'S MILK TO SPEED

    Before unraveling that further let me take a detour into etymological terrain.
There's a richness of meaning in the root "express" that is absent in the manner
in which the word is commonly invoked in our field. For while "expressive" in
our compositional history has often been linked with, say, "personal," "emo-
tional," and "uncritical," a quick tour through the word's history points to some
interesting variations. An incomplete list, courtesy of the OED:

         One of the earliest meanings of "express" is "to press out,"
         specifically to press or squeeze out milk from the breast. An
         organic, feminine connotation--although express here also
         means being forced out by mechanical means.

         "Express" also means "to portray, represent," linking it with
         rendering--and so in this way "expressive discourse" could,
         one might think, have something in common with the de-
         tailed description associated with, say, more clinical, scientific
         observations.

         The term "beyond expression" is intriguing for it implies that
         "expression" is the endpoint, a culmination--as there can be
         no expression beyond expression. Expression thus as the final
         realm, a pinnacle of--well, expression.

         "Expressionless" of course means "destitute of expression;
         giving no indication of character, feeling, etc.; inexpressive."
         It means "expressing nothing, conveying no meaning." Here
         expression is thus saturated with meaning, the source and
         conveyor of meaning--whereas expressionless equals absence.
         No meaning, in other words, without expression.

         Expression is elsewhere defined as "to represent in language;
         to put into words, set forth (a meaning, thought, state of

                                                                                                  71
Owens

         things); to give utterance to (an intention, a feeling)." Not
         only is expression thus meaning saturated, but is here the
         very creation of meaning--meaning conjured within lan-
         guage. And when it's summarized as "To put one's thoughts
         into words; to utter what one thinks; to state one's opinion,"
         it comes very close to argumentation, the articulation of a
         position.

    If the earliest roots of "express" carry vestiges of the feminine and maternal,
embedded within the term are conventionally masculine connotations as well.
For express also means speed, no dillydallying, no time to stop unnecessarily
along the way. No pausing for reflection. Hence we have the express train, ex-
press delivery, express highway, express messenger, and even the express rifle.

    It seems some in our field have chosen to define "expression" and "expres-
sivist" and "expressionist" pretty narrowly. In composition such words have too
often been indicators of naive exuberance, narcissism, lack of self-reflection.1
Interestingly, we have been much savvier about the term "critical." While the
OED tells us that "criticism" certainly means "the action of criticizing, or pass-
ing judgment upon the qualities or merits of anything; esp. the passing of un-
favourable judgment; fault-finding, censure," we're quick to make clear to our
students that it is not that kind of criticism we're all about in the academy but
rather critique as measured, thoughtful, transparent, honest introspection in the
search for truth. Or something like that.

    Why has our field been more willing to acknowledge the multiple meanings
in the definitional aura surrounding "critical," and not so much "expressive"?
What is it about the "personal" that makes the academic so nervous?

OUR (NOT SO CRITICALLY) EXPRESSIVE ACADEMIC
DISCOURSE

    Which brings me to my second short detour in which I feel compelled to
highlight a contradiction we all know but which I don't think gets acknowledged
nearly enough: that, despite our professional tendency to reject the "personal" in
favor of "objectivity," academia, as a culture and a workplace, is as fraught with
as much raw, personal, messy personal emotion as any professional community
you can probably think of.

    As academics we do an incredible job at portraying ourselves as dispassionate
scholars privileging neutral objectivity and reasoned discourse and impartial rig-
or. More often than not we value the quantitative over the qualitative, "empirical
data" over storytelling, measured debate over in-your-face finger pointing. But

72
                                                             Critical Expressivism's Alchemical Challenge

let's be honest: we are no strangers to the most personal of the personal--as
any Human Resources office, dean, general counsel, chair, and most faculty,
adjuncts, and grad assistants can tell you. For while in our peer-reviewed jour-
nals we might (might) bend over backwards to effect a posture of measured bal-
ance--infusing our prose with obligatory phrases like "I would like to suggest"
and "an alternative reading might" and "perhaps we ought to consider," we are
also people who are no slouches at throwing tantrums in department meetings,
dissing colleagues, distributing ad hominem attacks in mailboxes, making stu-
dents cry in the classroom, making our colleagues cry, crying ourselves in our of-
fices, writing snotty emails, and sparring with colleagues in all manner of venues.
Nor are we strangers to favoritism, paranoia masked as overconfidence, jealous
petty exchanges, insults, one-upmanship, and character assassination. (It's why,
when academics read a novel like Richard Russo's Straight Man, they know im-
mediately a text like that has to be grounded in reality.)

    I'm not saying the "personal" or "expressive" are synonymous only with these
touchier emotions. Obviously much of our "expressive" discourse is also what
we would consider laudatory, necessary, and worth celebrating--we are after all
a breed of professionals who value academic freedom, speaking truth to pow-
er, and pursuing things like "truth" even when it disrupts various status quos.
My point is that such more emotionally problematic "expressive," "personal"
iterations are alive and well in our academy, always have been, and that a more
accurate and comprehensive assessment of "academic discourse" would have to
include this richer, messier pool of discourse. To pretend that the discourses of
academic culture aren't in a great many ways inherently "expressive" just isn't
true.

AN ALCHEMICAL INVITATION

    For me the challenge and appeal of "critical expressivism" is in its both/and
implications. Alchemically, the coniunctio refers to the wedding of opposites,
the bringing together of unlike materials or states of being in order to construct
some alternate hybrid form or perception that, synergistically, depends upon yet
is distinct from its components. For me the bridging of the "critical" and "expres-
sive" domains ultimately leads us to a reflective process where, Uroboros-like, we
continually cycle through both opposites to a point where the binary might be
left behind and some other, more interesting, complex, queered understanding
of introspection, and how it might be imaginatively conveyed, begins to surface.
These conjoined twins push us to continually problematize and question our
own positionality as we write--moving us to ask such questions as:

                                                                                                  73
Owens

         What's my own personal, private investment in this? (and if
         there isn't one, then, why exactly am I engaged in this writing
         act?) What does this writing task hold for me, personally, and
         how and why might I acknowledge (or conceal) the degree of
         that personal investment? Am I sufficiently subjecting my pre-
         dilections to healthy skepticism, processing them through a
         critical filter, unwilling to leave anything to assumption? How
         far am I willing to critique my own ideas, and in the process
         regard my lived histories that have made them part of who
         I am? If the discursive arenas I seek to enter and participate
         within frown upon rhetorical markers others might character-
         ize as too "personal," or likewise too "academic," how far am I
         willing to go to challenge the expectations of those audiences?
         When do I acquiesce? How might my concept of "the per-
         sonal" evolve into something that resembles nothing like all
         the forms and genres typically, maybe pejoratively associated
         with that word? And same for "critical," the "academic?" Most
         of all, how to write, and think through writing in ways that
         move outside both ends of this spectrum, that don't reject ei-
         ther the "expressive" or the "critical," but engage in a means of
         trying to make writing within (or outside--?) an arena where
         personal/academic, critical/expressive begin to drop their
         meanings, and no longer make all that much sense anyway?

    What I like about the concept of the "critically expressive" is how it queers
the binary, challenging each half by forcing them into the other's arms. Compa-
rable pairings (although, here, flipped) might be "personally academic," "locally
global," "emotionally objective." It's interesting too that in such pairings one of
these inverted twins is always the suspect term demanding validation, whereas
its partner is typically assumed to be more appropriate. "Expressive," "personal,"
"local," "emotional"--traditionally, in academic contexts anyway, such gestures
have to be justified, excused, permitted. Allowances made. We feel we have to
make good arguments for letting them through the door. On the other hand
"critical," "academic," "global," "objective"--these are assumed to be self-evi-
dent. Ultimately though it's not condemning one side over the other, or even
reversing this imbalance, but the invitation to create some wholly distinct third
space through writing that I find appealing. An invitation leading, perhaps, to
an understanding of writing as, say, art.

    So how might this manifest in the classroom? When we find ourselves com-
posing, verbally or in writing, "in the personal"--that is, self-consciously invoking

74
                                                             Critical Expressivism's Alchemical Challenge

the autobiographical or the local or the personal or even the "emotional"--we
might push ourselves and our students to consider never settling for "just" tell-
ing the story, venting, confessing, sharing. Not that there's anything wrong with
"just" doing any of that. But if the critically expressive is one of our interests,
we've an opportunity before us to question the stories we would otherwise "just"
tell (the classroom as a conversational, compositional realm distinct from, say,
the dinner table or bar). It's a space where we can expect ourselves to keep asking:
so why that story? Why convey this personal account? What's the motive behind
this desire to share these emotions? What might be some of the as of yet unreal-
ized stories percolating beneath this autobiographical rendering? In other words,
not to simply be satisfied with the presentation of story for story's sake, but pro-
voked to keep cracking story open, unraveling and unpacking it.

    On the flip side, when we find ourselves operating "in the academic"--that
is, attentive to all that critical stuff like evidence, analysis, arguments, and the
rest of it--we might seek to be more unabashedly up front about the personal,
and maybe even private, motivations and concerns behind the ideas and deci-
sions that grow out of this work. Here, the focus could also be on storytelling,
but the stories behind our professional and research needs.

    Many of us in composition studies do something like this already. Most of
our journals are filled with articles where authors make no apologies for intro-
ducing their own autobiographical, "personal" accounts and motives. Still, I'm
interested in what happens when we push ourselves further to the point where
considering the personal as critical, and the critical as personal, becomes risky,
startling, and maybe uncomfortable.

    I did this recently in a book I wrote where I struggled to tell a variety of
stories and pull together a bunch of research. The process was for me more
painful, awkward, invigorating, and ultimately revealing than any other writing
project I've undertaken. The book had its genesis in these so-called "recovered
memories" my mother started to have in her early fifties--accounts of rather
sensational abuse at the hands of grandmother. I wanted to tell these stories,
which my mother passed along to me, but needed to present that telling within
the context of something larger than "just" her childhood story. And so I found
myself researching the history of the region in which she grew up--a weird sec-
tion of central New York State. This historical mining unexpectedly led me back
to the "personal" as I turned up accounts of long lost relatives on my mother's
side (including, I discovered, the leader of a religious cult back in the late 18th
century).

    After a while I realized, somewhat reluctantly, that I would also have to in-
troduce some of my own childhood memories and photos in this narrative as
a means of contrasting the horrorshow my mom experienced with the more

                                                                                                  75
Owens

idyllic childhood my mother, and father too, constructed for me and my sister.
This was exceptionally hard for me. To shine a light on myself that way and be
so revealing to an outside audience made me incredibly nervous. I was much
more comfortable letting the focus be on my mother, dead relatives, and region-
al histories. As a result I learned that, while the "personal" and "expressive" are
often assumed to be problematic in that they invite undisciplined, narcissistic
navel-gazing, in truth a rendering of the intimate, the guarded, the innermost,
can require no small degree of difficult reflection and self-critique in figuring out
how to communicate all that to an invisible, imagined public audience. Being
"expressive," in this sense, for me, turned out to be way harder and weirder than
any of the academic writing I ever did. Developing that kind of confidence in
one's work, one's audience--it's just scary.

    As I worked through this business of bridging other people's stories with my
own, the focus of this book took on new significance. I became interested in the
strangeness of memory and the slipperiness of identity. In doing research into
accounts of child abuse as well as controversies surrounding concepts like recov-
ered memory, I found myself realizing I had to rethink concepts like "childhood"
and "trauma" from scratch. On top of all this I wanted to introduce as much
photographic and visual "narrative" as possible--old photos and postcards--
while messing around with the visual arrangement of text on the page in ways
that might (if only to me) indiscreetly reflect some of the ideas housed within.

    In the end it turned out to be the most difficult thing I've written and will
likely ever publish. More than anything else I've tackled in writing, this manu-
script represented more fully a sustained engagement with the merging of these
two endpoints--the critical, and the expressive. Working within this hybrid,
liminal realm now seems to me more challenging than self-consciously choosing
to reside within either side. A both/and embrace that seems fraught with diffi-
culties, but also unexpected surprises.

    I make mention of my manuscript not because it's how I'm pushing others
to write. I mention it because it's an example of what this whole critical/expres-
sive coniunctio (or whatever metaphor you prefer) might point to. Ultimately
I'm interested in classroom environments, and master's theses, and dissertations,
and published articles, where authors (and the faculty, directors, supervisors,
editors, and readers who say yea or nay to the worthiness of such work, validat-
ing them or not) grant themselves permission to dive into and beyond notions
of both "expressive" and "critical," "personal" and "academic," to a point where
the writing manifests messily, curiously. "Of its own accord." I've come to real-
ize that I privilege discovery, even when it surfaces in odd and uncomfortable
ways. Experimentation borne out of need and desire, not necessarily fashion or
convention or tradition. Right now "critical expressivism" seems to me about as

76
                                                             Critical Expressivism's Alchemical Challenge

exciting a new concept as any surfacing within our field, opening up strange and
startling new landscapes for composing.
NOTES
1. And when I say "we" I include myself. Because--and here is my essay's little mea
culpa moment--I was often one of those who was too quick to assign pejorative
connotations to "expressive" discourse. For the longest time I associated the word
with sloppy exuberance, or loud relatives, or the constant barrage of egos run amuck
on television and radio. Of course, my resistance to the "expressive" had more to do
with my own discomfort with conveying the autobiographical--something touched
on in this essay. So I failed to draw a distinction between the kind of obligatory,
scripted expressionism one finds in, say, reality television and bad memoir writing
and extroverted uncles, with the legitimately self-preoccupied explorations of first-
year writers who have every reason to be fascinated with their lives, histories, minds,
and emotions. Thanks, by the way, to the editors of this collection for providing me
with an opportunity to figure this out.

                                                                                                  77
PAST-WRITING:
NEGOTIATING THE COMPLEXITY
OF EXPERIENCE AND MEMORY

Jean Bessette
University of Vermont

    Early advocates of personal writing sought to use first-year composition
to restore authenticity to students who must suffer a "plastic, mass-produced
world" outside the classroom (Adler-Kassner, 1998, p. 218). In line with this ob-
jective, the rhetoric of early personal writing pedagogy is constituted by tropes of
ownership, expression, self-understanding, and "authentic voice," as the title of
Donald C. Stewart's 1972 expressivist textbook illustrates. Linda Adler-Kassner
contends that, as a result of this goal of authenticity and ownership, expressiv-
ism "started with and centered around experience--defined as personal, private,
individually felt understanding of the writer" (1998, p. 219).1 "Experience"
however, was almost always framed in terms of the past. Expressivist Gordon
Rohmann argued, for example, that it is in the nature of human beings to make
analogies between "this experience and others" gone by; we "know anything in
our present simply because we have known similar things in our past to which
we compare the present" (1965, p. 111). For Rohmann and other expressivists,
writing past experience--that is, composing with memory--was a means by
which students could achieve the self-understanding expressivists sought.

    More contemporary textbooks with calls for personal writing echo these
early understandings of "individually felt," authentic access to past experience,
making it clear that the reliance of personal writing on the authority of memory
persists. Robert Yagelski's 2010 Reading our World: Conversations in Context,2 for
example, asks students to write essays "based on memories of [their] childhood"
or essays in which they "describe an important memory [they] have of [their]
family" (pp. 80; 85). Assignments such as these often link memory writing with
present identity, asking students to focus on a "particular aspect of [their] up-
bringing and how the place where [they] were raised might have influenced
[their] sense of identity" (Yagelski, 2010, p. 85). When Yagelski asks students
to write the past experience that has constituted them as individuals today, he
treats experience as foundational in some way, as a stable referent students can
access and articulate in order to better understand their present selves. These
assignments invite the writing of narrative, chronological and linear in structure,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.05  79
Bessette

because the memories often end up in the form of a story, bolstered by the au-
thority of the writer's experience.

    This chapter takes a closer look at the "pastness" of the experience students of
personal writing are asked to compose. When we refigure "experience" as "mem-
ory," we emphasize the slipperiness of our perceptions of the past: the ways in
which changing present circumstances reconfigure our sense of what happened.
Lynn Z. Bloom explains that writing the past cannot be understood in terms of
truth, except in Joan Didion's sense of a subjective truth: the "truth of how it felt
to me" (as quoted in Bloom, 2003, p. 278). But even Didion's sense of a truth
of feeling is undermined when, as Bloom puts it, "the writer's vision varies over
time and intervening circumstances" and when, "as we experience more of life
and learn more ourselves and as the world itself changes, we come to understand
events and people differently" (Bloom 2003, p. 286). Memory is dynamic and
unstable, at odds with our attempts to grab hold of it in writing and make it
permanent as a foundation for understanding our present selves. Such under-
standings of memory upset calls to represent experience as individual, authentic,
chronological, and linear.

    What becomes of expressivist writing when the pastness of experience com-
plicates its foundational stability for present self-understanding? Rather than
view the complexity of writing with memory as support for discontinuing the
teaching of personal writing, I consider here how we might approach personal
writing in a way that takes into account the dynamic slipperiness of memory.
Writing memory with attention to its complexities is important work for stu-
dents not only because they are already writing with memory in many composi-
tion classrooms but also because, as I will show, memory writing offers a unique
opportunity for critical analysis of students' social and political locations. As a
feminist scholar, I offer in this paper a feminist pedagogical approach empha-
sizing strategies of alternative discourse as one way to address the complexity of
writing with memory.3 Ultimately, by drawing theories of collective memory
into conversation with feminist composition pedagogy, I hope to illustrate how
this kind of memory writing might be taught and learned.

    Before I describe a sequence of assignments and a course in which I attempt-
ed to put into practice my understanding of how writing with memory might
best be approached in first-year composition, I will briefly articulate the theoret-
ical perspective that informed the course. Historian and memory studies scholar
David Lowenthal argues that we

         select, distill, distort, and transform the past, accommodating
         things remembered to the needs of the present ... Memories
         are not ready-made reflections of the past, but eclectic selective

80
                                                                                                  Past-Writing

         reconstructions based on subsequent actions and perceptions
         and on ever-changing codes by which we delineate, symbolize
         and classify the world around us. (1985, p. 210)

    Lowenthal's emphasis on the "subsequent actions[,] ... perceptions," and
"ever-changing codes" that organize our memories underscores the elusiveness
of our grasp on a pure reconstruction of our experience. But it also suggests a
second, simultaneous focus for writers of experience to consider: not only the
experience "itself " they wish to recall and reproduce in writing but the dynamic
"codes" through which the experience becomes legible in the writer's present
structure of understanding. Historian Joan Wallach Scott's understanding of ex-
perience resonates with Lowanthal's. She objects to uncritical uses of experience
because such uses preclude our critical examination of the ideological system in
which the experiencer both enacts the experience and later recalls the experience.
Instead of analyzing the workings of the system, the authority of experience
reproduces the terms of the system, "locating resistance outside its discursive
construction" (Scott, 1991, p. 777).

    Lowenthal and Scott's theorizations of memory articulate the mediation
of our memories, the ways in which the experience itself and our subsequent
memory of it are constructed by the "system" or "codes" through which we
view the world. When we bring Lowenthal and Scott into conversation with
composition scholars of expressivism, the difference becomes apparent between
viewing memory as culturally situated and constituted and viewing experience
as "personal, private, [and] individually felt," as Adler-Kassner (1998, p.218)
characterizes expressivism. Instead, Lowanthall and Scott's theorization of mem-
ory shows it to be necessarily social and discursive. As Scott suggests, subjects
are constructed discursively through the act and memory of experience, which
in turn produces (not merely records) a particular perspective on the experience.
This view can be seen as a critique of the individualism implicit in expressivism
because it situates the self inextricably in the social and discursive world.

    Memory can be described as "collective" because, as Maurice Halbwachs ar-
gued in The Social Frameworks of Memory, "the mind reconstructs its memories
under the pressure of society" (1992, p. 51). Memories hang together in the
mind of an individual because they are "part of a totality of thoughts common
to a group" (Halbwachs, 1992, p. 52). According to Halbwachs then, individual
memories are not necessarily individual; they are produced in the social milieu
of the group the individual identifies with. This social memory can "character-
ize groups" by revealing a "debt to the past" and expressing "moral continuity"
(Klein, 2002, p. 130). Taken together, the implications of Lowenthal, Scott, and
Halbwachs are that, when we set out to recount past experience, we must attend

                                                                                                  81
Bessette

to the ways in which memories are formed with others in the present as a means
of connection, group coherence, and a sense of shared past and future. I see their
theorizations as a call to view experience not as such but rather for the social and
discursive frames through which we understand the experience and the social
(which is to say, identificatory) uses to which we put the experience--the ways
we shape memories to fit those we believe we share with others, as a way of co-
hering more securely as a group.

    If students of personal writing are asked to attend to the social, discursive
forces and the present identificatory uses that might shape their memories, their
approach to expressivism becomes "critical." This attention to how "personal"
memories are socially or discursively shaped in service of present identifications
begs questions of power and agency. In what narrative forms do the experiences
we remember take shape? How are certain experiences remembered and others
forgotten? The ability to use a memory and to define for others its use is funda-
mentally related to historical distributions of power (Connorton, 1989, LeGoff
& Nora, 1977). This tension between memory and forgetting reveals the past
to be a dynamic, perpetually contested site, constantly open to varying degrees
of fluctuation depending on the contingent power of the group in question.
Memory is a dynamic, "processional action by which people constantly trans-
form the recollections they produce" (Zelizer, 1995, p. 218). In sum, when we
reconfigure experience as memory, the task of expressivism becomes decidedly
social and decidedly critical.

    Though "personal" memory cannot be extricated from present social forces,
composing critically with memory is not without opportunities for agency. As
Nancy Mack explains in her contribution to this collection, writing what she
calls "critical memoir"

         should open the author to the possibility of agency through
         the interpretation and representation of memory. The mean-
         ing of the memoir is revised from the student's current
         vantage point of an increased critical awareness and projected
         towards a hopeful future, thus giving the author some degree
         of agency in shaping identity.

    When we think of memory as dynamic, processual, presentist, and very much
situated in the social and discursive world, agency is made possible when such
complexity is both represented and interrogated in language. While convention-
al personal narratives are structured chronologically with a beginning, middle,
and end and often conform to familiar plots, a presentist, processual, social, and
discursive understanding of memory calls for a disruption of conventional struc-
tures. Because such structures can be understood as a present "system" or "code"

82
                                                                                                  Past-Writing

that produces, rather than records, the experience, adherence to these conven-
tions of narrative inhibit the simultaneous interrogation of memory's social and
discursive construction that makes identificatory agency possible.

    Thus, writing with memory compels alternative rhetorical strategies to con-
ventional personal narratives. My considerations of alternative discourse are in-
spired by Kate Ronald and Joy Ritchie's critical reading of Dorothy Allison's
creative nonfiction piece, Two or Three Things I Know For Sure. Ronald and
Ritchie see in Allison's memoir a "model for how to use language to survive and
change one's reality" (2006, p. 7). Allison's work takes an unconventional form
for writers to imitate, a "method of unfolding and holding on to the paradox-
ical relationships between fiction and fact, silence and speaking, certainty and
doubt, cultural norms and taboos" (2006, p. 7). That is, for Ronald and Ritchie,
the rhetorical strategies Allison employs allow her to accomplish seemingly im-
probable contradictions in the same text, which I reread here in the language of
memory: to show through memory writing what is remembered and forgotten,
what "was" and what present circumstances reconfigure, and to situate these
potential contradictions in the context of "cultural norms and taboos" (that is,
how they align with cultural expectations and where they transgress). The use of
alternative discourse in writing memory may accomplish what Lisa Ede and An-
drea Lunsford call "crimes of reading and writing," the upsetting of normative
conventions with the goal of facilitating "transformative agency" (2006, p. 17).

    Taking my cues from these feminist pedagogues, I set out to design a peda-
gogical approach through which students might be taught to read for the rhe-
torical strategies used by writers of memory who employ alternative discourse,
in order to then selectively imitate the strategies in their own personal writing.
How do memory writers like Allison, or Susan Griffin, or Gloria Anzaldua, for
example, grapple and rhetorically represent their past experience in the context
of larger social and historical discourses? What do their particular choices in
language allow them to think through that more conventional personal narra-
tives do not? What alternative sentence structures do they employ? How do they
position themselves vis-à-vis others, vis-à-vis "history," vis-à-vis their memories,
in language?

    To examine how this work played out in my own classroom, I will describe
how this project was undertaken with Susan Griffin's creative nonfiction/mem-
oir chapter, "Our Secret," published in her collection Chorus of Stones (1993).
"Our Secret" is a complex, fragmented essay, amalgamating and juxtaposing
interpretations of Griffin's memories of her family life with her interpretations
of Heinrich Himmler's family life. Himmler was the chief of the SS under Hitler
during the Second World War--clearly an unlikely candidate and cultural con-
text for a contemporary American writer to situate her own memories among.

                                                                                                  83
Bessette

But Griffin does so in order to ask larger questions about where rage comes from,
how it emerges and manifests culturally, and how acts of rage disseminate and
influence others across time and place. Her inquiry into her own past unearths
and analyzes the source of her acts of childish rage against her grandmother
and leads her to compare own family's strict childrearing practices to Himmler's
context of rigid, almost torturous German childrearing. She asks questions akin
to more traditional expressivist writing: she wants to learn "how it is" that peo-
ple--herself, Himmler, others--"become [them]selves." But she does so in a
complex mélange of personal and historical pasts, using her own memories to
better understand larger historical happenings and vice versa.

    In the classroom, I sought to help students see Griffin's strategies for en-
gaging with and problematizing the past. I designed discussion questions and
writing assignments that asked students to attend to her particular rhetorical
strategies for identifying and disidentifying with a larger cultural past. We read
Griffin's essay for the textual cues of her unique rhetoric of memory--her radical
disruption of chronology, use of uncertain speculative language, and strategic
shifts in perspective that emphasize the intersections of personal and cultural
pasts. As a class, we looked for what "pieces" constituted Griffin's fragmented
essay and found it to be an interweaving of interviews; readings of diaries, pho-
tographs, and art; scientific facts; and her own familial memories into a tapestry
of emotion, tragedy, and perhaps hope.

    Looking more closely at particular paragraphs and sentences, we looked for
textual cues that indicated how she represented the relationship between in-
dividual and collective memory. Students saw fragility and incertitude in her
readings of others and her own pasts, revealed in particular choices of language
that disrupted any sense of historical accuracy. For example, we focused on a
passage in which Griffin describes an interview with a woman who witnessed the
aftermath of a German concentration camp as a young child. In her description
of the woman's memory, Griffin's language is initially assured, employing jarring
imagery of concrete things: she saw "shoes in great piles. Bones. Women's hair"
(1993, p. 114). But immediately the woman's memories are called into question:
"She had no words for what she saw. Her father admonished her to be still.
Only years later, and in a classroom, did she find out the name of this place and
what happened here" (Griffin, 1993, p. 114). Students saw the certainty of the
woman's experience, represented by lists of objects, threatened by her inability
to capture it in language; they saw, through careful close reading for rhetorical
strategies in representing memory, that it was only through the later safety of
sterilized classroom history that the woman could "understand" what happened.

    In close-reading passages like these, students saw a kind of dual representation
and interrogation.4 The woman's memory is of a time when she had no words

84
                                                                                                  Past-Writing

to understand her experience. The experience, as she can access it, is not foun-
dational because it is only later in school when she realizes what happened--a
delayed realization that becomes the foundation for her response to Griffin's
interview, and which may be understood as a "system" or "code," in Scott and
Lowenthal's terms, through which the experience is constructed legibly. My stu-
dents began to see the slipperiness of experience because Griffin sprinkles her
tapestry with reminders that, though she speaks of and through various histor-
ical figures (from Himmler to her grandmother), it is always mediated through
her own memory. The aforementioned interview, a form of evidence collection
often validated by its claim to direct experience, is called into question when
Griffin writes, "I give [the interviewee] the name Laura here," (1993, p.114)
suggesting that it is Griffin who controls the representation of "Laura's" memory
and that ultimately, it is Griffin's memory to share. In-class close reading practice
helps students see how individual memories are constructed retrospectively in
different social environments, and that it matters how we represent memory in
language, because to do so critically is to interrogate how memories get made
and what present needs they serve.

    In order to get students close-reading these kinds of rhetorical moves so they
could later put them into practice in "personal" writing, I asked them to write
an analytical essay first, in which they examined and evaluated the rhetorical
strategies Griffin used to "write the past." One student5 wrote that

         Griffin keeps herself in the story as an `imaginer' that tries to
         see how an event transpired. Perhaps this gives her an oppor-
         tunity to include her own stories of childhood in compari-
         son with Himmler's. For instance, she details Dr. Schreber's
         [German, WWII-era] advice on childhood parenting: "Crush
         the will, they write. Establish dominance. Permit no disobe-
         dience. Suppress everything in the child." She then compares
         the childrearing acts with what she had gone through with her
         grandmother. She too was suppressed: "When at the age of six
         I went to live with her, my grandmother worked to reshape
         me ... not by casual example but through anxious memoriza-
         tion and drill."

    This student is noticing how Griffin is able to incorporate her personal mem-
ories into a larger collective past: by remaining in the story always as an "imag-
iner" who looks through the same lens of inquiry at historical pasts as she does
her own memories.

    Another student wrote of rhetorical moves that allow Griffin to evade talking
about the past "as though it had actually occurred" and instead allow her to "state

                                                                                                  85
Bessette

them in a way that they were possibilities, using qualifying cues such as `did...?,'
`must have,' and maybe,' etc." Between seemingly straightforward, traditionally
historical statements garnered from interviews, photographs, art, and science, this
student noticed that Griffin interjects with her own memory's "I." After definite
claims like, "it is 1910. The twenty-second of July," he noticed that Griffin ex-
tended into the imaginary, speculating that "his father must have loomed large to
him. Did Gebhard lay his hand on Heinrich's shoulder?" (Griffin, 1993, p. 118).
"I can see him," Griffin writes of the long deceased Himmler, but it is always, ul-
timately, herself she sees: through Laura, through her grandmother, through the
mélange of fact and fiction that constitute her exploration and generation of the
past. The student thought that "the fact that she has produced her own stories"
formed a "biased view of Himmler and his childhood" but one that "generates
a different perspective on the war and her relationship to it." The student, in
other words, was noticing how Griffin's rhetorical strategies for writing the past
produced something that other, more traditional strategies could not, despite
the accompanying loss of "objectivity." Griffin writes her memories but employs
stylistic strategies to perpetually question the certainty of the claims to memory
she makes. She situates herself in different perspectives and historical moments,
destabilizing herself as a unified, prediscursive self with unmediated access to
experience even as she interrogates the larger sociocultural structures that would
make the events she remembers (the Holocaust, childhood abuse) possible.

    After my students wrote essays analyzing the rhetorical strategies with which
Griffin writes her personal past and situates it in a larger cultural/historical con-
text, they were tasked with a project like hers: to write an experimental essay
in which they situate and interrogate their own memories in relation to other
historical figures and histories. I see this assignment as enacting what Toni Mor-
rison calls the "willed creation" of memory writing (1984). Morrison's use of
the term "willed" juxtaposed with "creation" emphasizes how rhetorical choices
in representing the past are inventive and painstakingly strategic, rather than a
mere record of the past as it was. As Morrison suggests, "there may be play and
arbitrariness in the way a memory surfaces but none in the way the composition
is organized, especially when I hope to recreate the play and arbitrariness in
the way narrative events unfold" (1984, p. 216). The writing of the analytical
essay prior to the composition of the more "personal"/experimental essay helps
students see that the rhetorical choices we make in writing the past facilitate or
inhibit the critical expressivist work we can do.

    I will close by describing one student's response to this assignment, for
which she was tasked to read her own memories through the art and life of a
historical figure, as Griffin did with Himmler and other figures. My student,
Dylan Gallagher, was to use the past of a historical figure to raise questions in

86
                                                                                                  Past-Writing

inquiry into her own past, and to represent this inquiry experimentally: to use
unorthodox form and "crimes of writing" to subvert conventional modes of
historiography (Ede &Lunsford, 2006). She was to take seriously our discus-
sions of Griffin's stylistic subversions of form and the ways in which Griffin's
textual cues undermined historical (and memorial) accuracy in favor of a dif-
ferent project: a complex merging of history and personal writing, a powerful
connection between the personal and the political, and a simultaneous interro-
gation of personal memory and cultural history.

    Dylan chose her own unorthodox writer to read her memories against and
through: e. e. cummings. Inspired by the visual of Griffin's fragmented, italicized
layout, Dylan incorporated images and fragments with her own inventive and
imitative twist. She emulated a childhood letter from cummings to his mother
that was handwritten with columns, horizontal and vertical writing, and hand-
drawn pictures. Dylan replicated cummings' visual layout, typing in columns
and interweaving excerpts from his poetry and biography with analysis of her
own memories. The strategies of speculation and sentence fragments she learned
from Griffin stand out to me: buried in an opening paragraph of seemingly
straightforward biography of cummings' early life, she writes "I can picture his
mother, Rebecca, looking at one of his letters and laughing at the lopsided draw-
ings of elephants and dinosaurs and planets. At his scattered writing."

    But later strategies are of her own invention, inspired by cummings. Using
the close reading strategies she learned in her analysis of Griffin, Dylan reads
cummings, interweaving interpretations of his poetry with her memories. I
quote her at length:

         He did not shy away from writing about death or sex. Death
         has always been an uncomfortable subject for Many People.
         Many People refuse to acknowledge death and worms and
         ceasing to exist. But ee does not. He asks and answers the
         hard questions through a simple arrangement of words ...

         i like my body when it is with your

         body. It is so quite new a thing.

         muscles better and nerves more.

         i like your body. I like what it does,

         i like its hows ...

         and possibly I like the thrill of

         under me you so quite new (cummings 218)

                                                                                                  87
Bessette

         The first time I had sex I was terrified and uncertain. I was full
         of questions, about how sex works, how it alters the relation-
         ship between two people and also about who I was. But more
         than that, I was excited. It was thrilling, losing my virginity.
         Independence is an odd thing to gain from sex. Often, I hear
         people feel an inappropriately strong attachment to the per-
         son with whom they lose their virginity. I experienced no such
         attachment. As ee describes. An initial attraction to a body,
         loving perfections and flaws, loving bones and skin, wanting
         to touch feel, know their body. The physical act of sex. The
         thrill. And afterwards,

         nothing.

    From Griffin, she learns to play with visual form (unorthodox layout and
fragments), and she learns to amalgamate diverse materials to get at her own
memory (she looks to letters, poetry, and biography).

    But more importantly, she learns to read cummings' history and work
through her own memories, which has an apparent transformative effect. From
Dylan's own experience with cummings, a poet who is himself a part of the
memories of her upbringing, she learns to play with the combinations of words,
capital letters, and punctuation because something about the way he puts words
together speaks "her"--but not a unified or static sense of self. The excerpt above
implies that at first she was terrified, and then through the experience of reading
cummings, she articulates a new memory, one that replaces vulnerable emotion
with a detached tactile physicality she finds empowering. Afterwards, when the
man's body has left her side, she feels nothing and she fears nothing of the noth-
ingness, unlike "Many People." The past she arrives at is arguably subversive:
using cummings' life and work, she arrives at a memory that defies larger socio-
cultural expectations for what she, as a young woman, should feel. She rejects
expectations for sentimentality and attachment through a "crime of reading and
writing," subverting conventional sentence structure and spatial layout. I read
this as a kind of identity work with a feminist edge. She is putting pressure on
the expectations of "Many People" and revising her memory from her initial
recollection of "terror," which Many People would expect, to a sense of detach-
ment that might protect her from retrospective and future feelings of fear and
dependence.

    While Dylan's and my other students' writing was not "perfect" and while
there were certainly some students who could or would not break out of con-
ventional modes of personal writing, Dylan's and other students' essays re-
vealed the ways in which writing memory with complexity is something that

88
                                                                                                  Past-Writing

has the potential to be taught. Students can learn to write with memory to
reveal a discursive self in motion, an understanding of a self as always shifting
and multiple depending on the memory texts the writer comes into contact
with and the present circumstances in which she finds herself. For Griffin, it
was through representations of "Laura" and Himmler and so many others;
for Dylan, it was through representations of cummings and his work. In the
process of examining and imitating cummings' life and work in unorthodox
ways, she articulated a transitioned understanding of her own past--against
dominant narratives of what a young woman should feel during and after
physical intimacy. I want to suggest that Dylan's work be read as a feminist
memory, written through feminist means, in a way that does some justice to
the complexity of writing with memory.6 Dylan uses cummings to write her-
self to an empowering memory of physical intimacy, simultaneously showing
us her transformation such that we know this memory is not stable and foun-
dational. It is something to be generated and used for strength in this moment,
perhaps to be revised again and again as she continues to find herself in new
present circumstances.

    When we bring collective memory studies into conversation with feminist
composition pedagogy,7 it becomes clear that memories sit in the intersection
between the personal and the social, a location that is always political with
real implications for individuals' sense of their relationship to the world. This
chapter has contended that memories' location in the intersection between
the personal and social is something that can be rhetorically represented and
simultaneously interrogated, in such a way that students are called to attention
to the role of pasts in their present lives and cultural locations. Unorthodox
"crimes of writing" have the potential to help students represent the self that
emerges from memory work as one that is as processual and collective as mem-
ories themselves and one with the critical potential to challenge the social and
discursive frameworks that might be constraining their present senses of self.
This chapter is a call to complicate experience, to disrupt traditional, narrative
approaches to personal writing, and to help students learn to read and write
for a more critically expressivist understanding of the intersections between
personal and collective memory and identity.

NOTES

1. Like Adler-Kassner, Wendy Hesford finds in expressivism a point of view that

reads "autobiography ... as a doorway to the apprehension of an original experience
or an unchanging essence" (1999, p. 65). Instead, she advocates autobiographical
acts that attend to the "social signifying practices shaped and enacted within ...

                                                                                                  89
Bessette

ideologically encoded" social and historical forces" (p. 64).

2. Yagelski's is representative of textbooks that do not forefront personal writing as
their central pedagogy but nonetheless incorporate assignments that ask students to
write with memory, indicating expressivism's subtle but enduring legacy.

3. I want to underscore that feminist pedagogy is only one way to approach the
complexity of writing with memory, stemming from my own investments in fem-
inist studies, which have, as the chapter will show, led me to experimental and
alternative discourse. Feminist pedagogy and experimental writing may not be, I
believe, the only way to address the problem of memory's over-simplification, but
they are the methods that inspired the assignment sequence I describe later in this
chapter.

4. Students' simultaneous attention to representation and interrogation resonates
with Min-Zhan Lu's problematization of experience. Lu argues that uncritical uses
of experience, even in the pursuit of feminist goals, can work to subsume differences
and essentialize gender as distinct from other cultural- or identity-based vectors of
difference. Instead, she advocates a use of personal experience that works on both
experiential and analytical levels to disrupt a "false notion of `oneness' with all wom-
en purely on the grounds of gender" (1998, p. 242).

5. I cite three students in this essay. All three were from a recent first-year com-
position course at the University of Pittsburgh; the first two have allowed me to
reference their work but preferred to remain anonymous, while the last, Dylan Gal-
lagher, permitted me to use her full name.

6. Ronald and Ritchie write that a feminist pedagogy "locates theory and practice in
the immediate contexts of women's lives," helping students move toward a "resistant,
critical stance toward monolithic descriptions of discourse and gender" (1998, p.
219). Writing, through a feminist pedagogy, becomes an act of constant awareness
of one's particular location, working "among and between" analytical, experiential,
objective, subjective, authoritative and local strategies. I'm contending that Dylan's
transformed memory does indeed take a "resistant, critical stance" toward expecta-
tions for her age and gender in its very movement "among and between" analytic
and experiential, subjective and authoritative strategies: she is analytic and author-
itative in her use and reading of cummings and subjective and experiential in her
representation of a transitioned memory.

7. Marianne Hirsch and Valerie Smith attest to feminism and memory studies'
shared concern with the reception of a version of the past in the context of larger so-
ciety forces. As Hirsch and Smith put it, "feminist studies and memory studies both
presuppose that the present is defined by a past that is constructed and contested.
Both fields assume that we do not study the past for its own sake; rather, we do so
to meet the ends of the present" (2002, p. 12).

90
                                                                                                  Past-Writing

REFERENCES

Adler-Kassner, L. (1998). Ownership revisited: An exploration in progressive era
   and expressivist composition scholarship. College Composition and Communi-
   cation, 49(2), 208-233.

Allison, D. (1996). Two or three things I know for sure. New York: Plume Books.
Bloom, L. Z. (2003). Living to tell the tale: The complicated ethics of creative

   nonfiction. College English, 65(3), 276-289.
Connerton, P. (1989). How societies remember. New York: Cambridge University

   Press.
Ede, L., & Lunsford, A. (2006). Crimes of reading and writing. In K. Ronald,

   & J. Ritchie (Eds.), Teaching rhetorica: Theory, pedagogy, practice (pp. 13-31).
   Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann/Boynton.
Griffin, S. (1993). Chorus of stones: The private life of war. New York: Anchor
   Books.
Halbwachs, M. (1992). On collective memory. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.
Hesford, W. S. (1999). Framing identities: Autobiography and the politics of peda-
   gogy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hirsch, M., & Smith, V. (2002). Feminism and cultural memory: An introduc-
   tion. Signs, 28(1), 1-19.
Klein, K. L. (2000). On the emergence of memory in historical discourse. Rep-
   resentations, 69, 127-150.
LeGoff, J., & Nora, P. (Eds.). (1977). Constructing the past: Essays on historical
   methodology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lowenthal, D. (1985).The past is a foreign country. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
   University Press.
Lu, M. (1998). Reading and writing differences: The problematic of experience.
   In S.C. Jarratt, & L. Worsham (Eds.), Feminism and composition studies: In
   other words (pp. 239-251). New York: Modern Language Association.
Morrison, T. (1984). Memory, creation, and writing. Thought, 59, 381-390.
Rohmann, G. D. (1965). Pre-writing: The stage of discovery in the writing pro-
   cess. College Composition and Communication, 46, 111.
Ronald, K., & Ritchie, J. (1998). Riding long coattails, subverting tradition:
   The tricky business of feminists teaching rhetoric(s). In S. Jarratt, & L. Wor-
   sham (Eds.), Feminism and composition studies: In other words (pp. 217-238).
   New York: Modern Language Association.
Ronald, K., & Ritchie, J. (2006). Teaching rhetorica: Theory, pedagogy, practice.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann.
Scott, J. W. (1991). The evidence of experience. Critical Inquiry, 17(4), 773-797.

                                                                                                  91
Bessette

Yagelski, R. (2010). Reading our world: Conversations in context. Independence,
   KY: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.

Zelizer, B. (1995). Reading the past against the grain: The shape of memory
   studies. Critical Studies in Mass Communication,12, 214-39.

92
ESSAI--A METAPHOR:
WRITING TO SHOW THINKING

      Lea Povozhaev
      Kent State University

    An "essai" writer responds to the world with a sense of dynamic responsibili-
ty. Her task has roots in the European enlightenment and can be understood as a
means to critical, personal, and socially relevant writing. My notion of essai (the
word means "an attempt" in French) comes from the sixteenth century French
essayist Michel De Montaigne who wrote essays to better understand who he
was. He wrote in response to ancient philosophers, and he, like them, reflected
upon the meaning of one's own life, found in a felt-sense of personal experiences
within socially situated realities. His thinking was critical and deep, and it went
so far as to inform him on how to live and die. Montaigne valued honest inquiry
above word play and verbosity and considered himself a gentleman more than
a scholar. For Montaigne, writing was for self-knowledge and understanding of
human nature. Consequently, his writing was to actualize improvement in him-
self and society. In an "essai," one demonstrates self-awareness in the context of
socio-cultural situations within which one lives. For example, this article arises
naturally from my work as a writer and teacher with the ever-present inquiry:
Why write and why teach students to write? From my experiences writing and
teaching writing, I find composition is a tool towards understanding social issues
in personal ways. I argue that students of composition should be invited to write
essais in which they compose first-person life narratives of embodied experiences
in the world.

    To illustrate my point, allow this small essaistic indulgence. I write true sto-
ries of my experiences in a multicultural family, raising three children, and ex-
ploring issues of faith. I teach composition at a large state university where I am
completing studies for a doctorate in English. As I study writing philosophies
and practice pedagogy, the question of why I write merges with questions on
the importance of writing for students of various backgrounds studying a range
of subjects with different jobs in mind. I consider students' real lives, busy with
work and families, as I also teach writing at a community college. Some of my
students are adults who have returned to earn their long-awaited college de-
grees. Particularly adult students alert me to the need (and their ability) to see
meaning-making as central to composition. Purpose tends to motivate students

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.06  93
Povozhaev

to carve out the time and exact the necessary patience from their busy lives and
engage in the task of essai writing. I relate with students at this community
college ten minutes from my husband's host-family, with whom we have been
living since last Christmas. I understand the push-pull of returning to school
and fighting to earn a degree with academic objectives and balance family life. I
am motivated to write and enter a public conversation when the subject matters
in particular ways to my life. For example, researching vaccinations and writing
essays on alternative medicine in the face of rising health costs and threats of
increasing bodily toxicity. Answers seem further away the deeper one probes and
attempts to understand; however, the care deepens and, ultimately, one asserts a
stance as knowledge is gathered (both life experiences and facts).

    Writing has been a way to locate myself in time and to contextualize others'
lives around me by the concrete act of words on a page. Time seems fluid as I
live in an old castle on a hill with extended family. My children swim in a pool
where once I first met their father. I have composed essays to understand where
I am, and why I'm here. By essai writing, my personal life intersects with my
academic life and there is liberty to become self-aware, to construct meanings,
and to articulate the purposes emerging in a present vision of life. In addition
to temporality, writing can be a resource for increasing wellness by lessening
isolation and seeking understanding as one's personal realities are made public.
Furthermore, individuals writing essais learn to evaluate socially situated mean-
ings, which they may wish to challenge against their own embodied realities. In
the process of realizing one's own positions on issues, an essai writer pays critical
attention to details of others' arguments. By so doing, an essai writer becomes
more conscious of herself as well as others.

    For me, an essai writer analyzes aspects of life and constructs meanings for
the benefit of self and others. An essai writer engages others with the passion
she encounters in writing to understand relationships among aspects of life that
might otherwise have seemed unrelated. Accordingly, an essai moves from close-
up-and-personal, divulging details of one's own life, to academic and scholarly,
whereby one relates to others' ideas and extends them. In addition, one devel-
ops notions and continuously connects the personal and the social to render
a cohesive and coherent essai. A composer of the essai aims to push past the
obvious and delve into the deeply meaningful, and one is ultimately surprised
by understandings gained through writing that relates personal experiences to
social issues researched.

    Essai writing can be pragmatic, particularly for students of composition, be-
cause it is a non-foundational approach to writing that enables a critical, search-
ing spirit and invites students to construct personally relevant meanings within
the social contexts of their everyday lives. Composing essais can be in line with

94
                                                                                          Essai--A Metaphor

Deweyian philosophy as an experimental, hybridizing act that extends students'
thoughts and experiences with others. Furthermore, when students develop
greater understanding of their own lives, and learn to compose essais that relate
this knowledge, their critical thinking and writing skills develop alongside their
sense of confidence as intellectuals.

    My approach to writing the essai comes from a pedagogical philosophy in
line with critical social expressivism. In order to further discuss the benefits in
teaching composition with the inclusion of essai writing, I turn now to an ac-
count of scholars whose basic pedagogical principles are expressivistic and whose
notions lead us to critical social expressivism.

A HISTORY OF RE-FIGURING EXPRESSIVISM

    Harkening back to ancient Rome, composition was the capstone of a clas-
sical education, "helping students make a smooth transition of the `play' of the
classroom and to the `business' of real-world civic action" (Fleming, 2003, p.
109). Language informed students' identities and was a source of power. Ancient
rhetors argued for social action in civic arguments at court or in the arena where
they aimed to persuade the masses. An argument was structured by one's per-
sonal style, including word choice, arrangement, and narrative accounts. There
was then, as there is now, a dialectic of form and expressiveness. Today, with
my proposal for writing essai, one communicates his or her perception of self
and relationship of self with the world. An essai is not only a genre but a way of
thinking, and a way of demonstrating thoughtfulness by writing.

    John Dewey understood that academic work required a balance of one's at-
tention on what was near and what was more distant. His work has been used
by figures such as Janet Emig, Stephen Fishman and Lucille McCarthy, Thomas
Newkirk, Lad Tobin, and Donald Jones to refigure the social climate of com-
position studies. Like Dewey, they understood that "to be playful and serious
at the same time is possible, and it defines the ideal mental condition. Absence
of dogmatism and prejudice, presence of intellectual curiosity and flexibility,
are manifest in the free play of mind upon a topic" (Dewey, 1916, p. 224).
Dewey explained at the turn of the century how the self and the world were not
separate but necessary for one another. He shook loose the rigid boundaries set
around personal versus social concerns and suggested pragmatism serve as the
loop hole, the means to a negotiated end. According to Deweyian philosophy,
what worked in practice took precedence over, even validated, theory. Therefore,
Dewey and his followers perceived the social and the personal as cooperative,
and "experience, knowledge, and habits of good living" (Dewey, 1916, p. 224)
governed educational practices. In this way, nested dualisms, or concepts that

                                                                                                  95
Povozhaev

appeared mutually exclusive, blended and overlapped into complementary forc-
es. For example, Dewey's educational philosophy was a flexible, constructive
endeavor:

         Dewey's educational goals focus on the development of cer-
         tain habits and dispositions rather than on the acquisition of
         a fixed body of knowledge or belief. He maintains the world
         is changing. He calls it "unstable, uncannily unstable" (Ex-
         perience and Nature, Dewey, 1958, p. 38) ... Dewey wants
         students to develop flexibility or `intelligence'--the ability
         to respond to novel situations, access their culture's resourc-
         es, reshape their plans, and take positive residue from these
         experiences. Of course this critical and constructive process
         must be done, if it is to be moral, in cooperation with others.
         (Fishman & McCarthy, 1996, pp. 346-347)

    With a non-foundational approach to education, the context and the in-
dividual within the situation were important. In fact, Dewey advocated active
learning or a "reconciliation of tensions between the self and its surroundings"
(1916, p. 19). In the writing classroom, this meant personal narrative because
the personal experience transitioned into a dialogic, social activity as others re-
lated and reacted. In the field of composition, proponents of Deweyian philos-
ophy have argued for the effectiveness in using personal narrative writing in the
classroom.

    Perhaps the most influential proponents of Dewey's theories written in the
field of composition were Fishman and McCarthy. They revisited criticisms of
expressivism that proclaimed the movement "dead." Fishman defended expres-
sivism against the notion of the isolated writer. He supported Peter Elbow's
use of expressivist pedagogy as a means to better understanding one's self and,
ultimately, society. Considering expressivism as rooted in German romanticism,
Fishman explained that personal experience was not used for isolation but to
identify with one another and restructure community. Elbow and the German
romanticist Johann Gottfried Herder suggested writing was a social connection.
In eighteenth century German romanticism, people sought unity through di-
versity. The people didn't trust one another and constructed a social contract
to ensure protection: the trade of liberty for protection. The contract united
the personal and social--Elbow and Herder suggested we write to understand
our own thoughts and to communicate with society, continually reshaping and
reforming our social worlds (Fishman, McCarthy, 1998, p. 648).

    Neo-expressivists or pragmatists such as Thomas Newkirk, Lad Tobin, Kar-
en Paley, and Michelle Payne examined writing and writing pedagogy from a

96
                                                                                          Essai--A Metaphor

non-foundationalist perspective. They advocated use of the personal narrative
for pragmatic reasons, but their focus remained predominantly social. Personal
narratives were a pragmatic way to develop writers. Newkirk discussed students'
autobiographies, or essays, as narratives of development. Erving Goffman's no-
tion of "presentation of self " supported Newkirk's belief that students strived
to formulate their ideas, experiences, and understandings into acceptable form
through their writing. As Goffman suggested, "in all public performances ...
we selectively reveal ourselves in order to match an idealized sense of who we
should be" (Tobin, 1993, p. 4). Writing personal narratives was viable, explained
Newkirk, because students saw themselves as learners, revised beliefs, learned
narrative conventions of literature, celebrated self-discovery, and developed crit-
ical thinking skills (quoted in Payne, 200, p. xxi).

    Newkirk supported the narrative of development, derived from Montaigne,
that was challenging and exploratory, open to inconsistencies that demonstrated
critical analysis of the self and world. Personal student writing was criticized for
cornering the teacher into the role of counselor, but Newkirk pointed out that
students who confess their intimate realities want to share, and through the
act of writing they become consoled. Students want to have their experienc-
es treated as normal, and their texts allow them this right. Personal narratives
were criticized for their emotionality, but Newkirk affirmed the importance of
emotion in real life. While there is a place for emotion in personal narrative, he
also addressed the need for reason and ethos. The most persuasive writing stems
from personal, emotional concerns that are examined reasonably and presented
credibly.

    Tobin argued that emotion and relationships were essential in the writing
classroom. The most effective pedagogical approach depended upon the stu-
dents' and their teacher's interactions. A writing teacher is not a counselor, but
feelings needn't be omitted from writing because of the fear of role confusion:

         By attempting to edit feelings, unconscious associations, and
         personal problems out of a writing course, we are fooling
         ourselves and shortchanging our students. The teaching of
         writing is about solving problems, personal and public, and I
         don't think we can have it both ways: we cannot create inten-
         sity and deny tension, celebrate the personal and deny the sig-
         nificance of the personalities involved. In my writing courses,
         I want to meddle with my students' emotional life and I want
         their writing to meddle with mine. (Tobin, 1993, p. 33)

    Tobin addressed the expressivist shift of teacher authority, correcting the
faulty assumption that teachers got out of the way so students could just write.

                                                                                                  97
Povozhaev

Rather, he argues that teachers were still the center of decentered classrooms and
the stakes were even higher with personal narrative and conferencing, which
gave the teacher more authority. Tobin suggested the real key for student-teacher
success was to develop good relationships.

    Like Tobin, Karen Paley worked with elements of expressivism and construct-
ed a philosophy which proved useful for her. Paley called herself a social-expres-
sivist and argued that expressivism included, but was not limited to, narratives
in which a writer focused on personal experiences. A writer used first-person and
could isolate his or her individual consciousness; however, a writer could use
first-person and write about social issues without mention of the individual writ-
er's thoughts and feelings, experiences and understandings. Paley's re-assessment
of expressivism justified criticisms of the movement's strictly personal focus. She
called her notion of the personal essay "psychosocial" and argued that it could
communicate social significance--not that it must or should, but that it could
(2001). Paley's pragmatic distinction opened the personal narrative genre to the
social, while not forcing the social into it indefinitely. To her, personal narratives
often represented gender, class, family, and ethnic group matters. Accordingly,
personal issues were social, and social issues were personal.

    Picking up on the potential of personal narratives, Michelle Payne examined
personal narratives that explored physical pain, and surmised that we "stop see-
ing emotion, pain, and trauma as threatening, anti-intellectual, and solipsistic,
and instead begin to ask how we might, like therapists, feminist theorists, and
philosophers, begin to recognize them as ways of knowing" (2000, p. 30). The
body, she argued with reference to Foucault, was not only a representation of
the personal but a composite of the social. The body was "not our own anymore.
Or, at least within the academic discussions of the body. It is more text than sub-
stance, more a product of language than a corporeal presence" (Payne, 2000, p.
xxi). We did not need to fear personal writing, but, rather (as Foucault argues),
we should consider the implications of deviant identity, emotion, power, and
discipline suggested by writing about the physical body.

THE ESSAI AND CRITICAL SOCIAL EXPRESSIVISM

    I propose teaching writing with the essai, following the above conversation
on the development of critical, social expressivism. My conceptualization of the
essai extends the various discussions above by drawing together aspects of these
effective, pragmatic arguments on using personal writing in the academy. For
example, my notion of the essai incorporates Newkirk's narrative of develop-
ment within which one explores and analyzes one's self and the world (Tobin,
1993, p. 4). Writing an essai, one works from a similar pedagogical impulse as

98
                                                                                          Essai--A Metaphor

proposed by Newkirk and Tobin who argue that emotion, reason, and ethos
inform writing (Tobin, 1993, p. 33). Furthermore, Tobin argues that teaching
writing effectively depends upon teacher-student relationships (Tobin, 1993, p.
34). Teaching the essai can foster positive, responsive relationships by the teach-
er's invitation (by assignment) for students to compose on personally signifi-
cant and socially relevant topics. Additionally, essai writing can be therapeutic as
one realizes that one's personal life relates with others and is, therefore, socially
significant. While Paley notes that the personal essay can communicate social
significance (2001), so can the essai, even if the tone is highly personal and even
intimate. Essai writing can demonstrate an awareness of the body as it moves
and thinks within the social situations of life. Furthermore, the act of composing
an essai necessitates awareness of the reader. A writer of the essai pays critical
attention to how she writes so that another can understand what is personally
important to the writer; therefore, it is even more essential for an essai writer
to achieve clarity because the message is valuable on both a personal and social
level. Additionally, an essai writer evaluates the messages she arrives at from the
process of writing and, ultimately, must determine if it is pre-essai writing or
personally relevant and socially significant and therefore worth submitting to
another.

    Within a critical social expressivist pedagogy, using the essai to teach writing
in freshman composition is ideal. Essais might bridge the gap between play and
rigor in a freshman composition course where students are expected to assimilate
within a new academic culture. Using students' own lives as material for inquiry
teaches them early on in their academic careers to self-reflect and apply critical
thinking to their real lives. However, despite the effectiveness of the essai in draw-
ing together the personal and the social and inviting students to critical reflection,
three false assumptions relegate personal narratives to creative writing classrooms:
serious writing is void of playfulness; emotion hasn't a place in academic dis-
course; and private is irrelevant in public institutional settings. However, writing
with a spirit of playfulness can motivate the writer. And a challenging intellectual
task is to write one's emotions in a controlled and exacting manner. Furthermore,
emotion, whether cloaked or exposed, is always a part of communication, as it
informs one's positions and leads one to reason in particular ways. When one
develops an ethos and reasons alongside emotional claims, one develops an essai.

    Though school essays have diverged from essai's original attempt to think
critically and construct meanings with personal relevance, scholars such as Gra-
ham Badley harken back to Montaigne by his reflective essaying model for high-
er education. For Badley, as with Montaigne, essai writing is a process where
students try out opinions and test responses, reflect on ideas, and develop valu-
able relationships with others. Badley's reflective essaying model is "the free and

                                                                                                  99
Povozhaev

serious play of mind on an interesting topic in an attempt to learn" (2009, p.
248). He bases this definition on four assumptions: that there is academic free-
dom, that the university is a safe place to be serious and playful, that reflection is
useful for students and teachers who respond to questions, and that the process
of composing an essay is an attempt to learn (Badley, 2009, p. 249). In Badley's
model, learning occurs as writers interpret experiences and reconsider previous
interpretations. The writer's objective is to convince an audience that his or her
reflections are plausible and to convince another that his or her ideas are useful
and even valuable (Badley, 2009, p. 251). The reader and writer together deter-
mine what constitutes use and value. Badley's model illustrates that essai writing
is social and personal because meaning is made by the construction of relation-
ships whereby the student initiates learning and acts upon necessary impulses
and needs. Moreover, by clearly seeing the relationship between the personal and
the social, students learn to invest in social concerns and mature past solipsistic
and immature thinking "only of me." Importantly, the personal and the social
are in relationship.

    James Zebroski presents Mikhail Bakhtin's argument that many voices in-
form one's thoughts and this "accentuates the plurality of a text and the push-
pull, center-seeking, center-fleeing forces of the word" (1989, p. 35). Because
meanings in an essai can be constructed within relationships between readers
and writers, my argument lies beyond the debate of personal versus social impe-
tuses for writing. Instead, composing the essai implicates the individual writer
with the writer's audience and, thus, "the author gives [ideas] to the world, nei-
ther as a work wholly original, nor as a compilation from the writings of others.
On every subject contained in them, he has thought for himself " (Blair, Lectures
on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, quoted in Ferguson, Carr, and Schultz, 2005, p.
20). Consequently, essai writing can be personal, social, and cognitive.

    Some may still argue that my interpretation of the essai's personal, I-voiced,
anecdotal narrativist nature belongs with creative writing. But academic and
creative writing have the similar objective of clear, concise, and, ultimately, per-
suasive writing. By composing an essai, students might learn to reason, present
emotion, and demonstrate a trustworthy ethos. Of course, a writer learns to
write appropriately for a given audience, and a coffee house reading is not the
same as a graduate seminar for which one presents an essay. However, there is
more benefit in teaching composition students to write essais than funneling
them into an academic vacuum within which the five-paragraph essay becomes
a formula for thoughtless composition.

    At first glance, academic writing may often have different expectations from
creative writing. However, as Carini demonstrates through work with children
creating art, prisoners writing poems, and student writing, creative acts can be

100
                                                                                          Essai--A Metaphor

pleasurable, therapeutic, and educational (1994). It is not my intention to de-
fine the many genres and objectives for writing. Instead, writing as "verbal habits
and dispositions oriented to public effectiveness and virtue" (Fleming, 2003, p.
110) is not a form but a way of perceiving and responding with words. Writing
to more carefully consider and reconsider things, including one's own experienc-
es, is academic and real-to-life.

    An essai is like creative writing and school essay writing, but can be more
than both because it is a way of illustrating one's thoughts by details and scenes,
as well as research and representation of others' ideas. Importantly, the writ-
er's response to his or her own life and the writer's response to scholarship is
what can set the essai apart from other forms of writing and makes it a form
that shows one's thinking. Janet Emig observes: "all student writing emanates
from an expressive impulse and that they then bifurcate into two major modes,"
which she calls "extensive" (interactive, writer and situation) and "reflexive"
(contemplative, personal meaning-making) (1967, p. 130). An essai can blend
these dichotomies through the vein of writing to show thinking of one's own
life as well as of others' lives and social issues pertinent to the writer's time and
place. The in-between place of the essai serves as a spine and holds together the
extending frame that explores and expresses meaning.

    Gregory Light distinguishes between creative writing and essay writing and
differentiates between surface understanding where students reproduce concep-
tions and deeper grasping where students transform conceptions. Light argues
that when the essay is essentially about another's argument, and not the student's
own, the writing can be unreflective and mechanical (2002, p. 258). The goal of
an essai is to move past filler words and borrowed thoughts and to demonstrate
understanding in specific, personally relevant ways.

    Students often find the jump between high school and college writing intim-
idating. They seem to understand that more is expected of them, and that "bet-
ter" writing is supposed to result. However, the expectation in much of college
writing seems to be a confident rhetorical sense of self. And yet, one's voice is
always changing and being found. Diane Glancy argues that one writes as one is
written by "circumstance and environment" to make use of one's self as a "found
object" (quoted. in Adrienne Rich, 1993, p. 206). In order to make use of one's
self as a found object, one must inquire and rethink the familiar. One learns to
examine things near and far, and to believe that in the process of seeking to un-
derstand relationships among aspects of life, meanings will emerge.

                                             *

    An essai is an attempt to understand and should be used as such. I view it as
essentially a process and not a finished product. Carini argues that students are

                                                                                                 101
Povozhaev

composing a sense of themselves, and, therefore, professionals who use writing
in such a way could treat these attempts as "thinking spaces" in which students
think through "images, ideas, form and media" (1994, p. 53).

    However, after the rigors of drafts, conferences, and peer work, instructors
often expect students' essays to be polished. I submit that teachers might shift
their focus instead on how well students express what has happened to them per-
sonally, information and ideas related to larger societal concerns, and meanings
derived from reflecting upon that relationship between one's experience and so-
cially relevant issues. Teachers might evaluate work based on how well students
have demonstrated the degree their subject holds personal relevance.

    Students entering academe contribute to discourse communities by writ-
ing their own cultures into existing frames. Through the more experimental,
intuitive processes that go along with the essai, we might convey that intellec-
tual rigor is worthwhile because it transcends the classroom. Using the essai can
allow students to connect personally to socially relevant issues, respond with
confidence, and speak to society in important ways--beginning with the college
writing classroom and reaching past it.

REFERENCES

Badley, G. (2009). A reflective essaying model for higher education. Education
   + Training, 51(4), 248-58.

Carini, P. (1994). Dear sister bess: An essay on standards, judgment and writing.
   Assessing Writing, 1(1), 29-65.

De Montaigne, M. (1580/1958). Essays. (J. M. Cohen, Trans.). Harmond-
   sworth, UK: Penguin Books.

Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education. New York: Macmillan.
Emig, J. (1967). On teaching composition: Some hypotheses as definitions. Re-

   search in the Teaching of English, 1, 127-135.
Ferguson, S., Carr, L., & Schultz, L. (2005) Archives of instruction: Nine-

   teenth-century rhetorics, readers and composition books in the United States.
   Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Fish, S. (1980). Is there a text in this class? Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fishman, S., & McCarthy, L. (1998). John Dewey and the challenge of classroom
   practice. Urbana, IL: NCTE.
Fishman, S., & McCarthy, L. (1996). Teaching for student change: A Deweyan
   alternative to radical pedagogy. College Composition and Communication, 47,
   342-364.
Fleming, D. (2003). The very idea of progymnasmata. Rhetoric Review, 22, 105-
   118.

102
                                                                                          Essai--A Metaphor

Light, G. (2002). From the personal to the public: Conceptions of creative writ-
   ing in higher education. Higher Education, 43, 257-276.

Nystrand, M. (1989). A social-interactive model of writing. Written Communi-
   cation, 6(1), 66-85.

Paley, K. S. (2001). I-writing: The politics and practice of teaching first-person writ-
   ing. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Payne, M. (2000). Bodily discourses: When students write about abuse and eating
   disorders. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Rich, Ad. (1993). What is found there, notebooks on poetry and politics. New York:
   W.W. Norton.

Tobin, L. (1993). Writing relationships: What really happens in the composition
   class. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Zebroski, J. (1989). A hero in the classroom. In B. Lawson, S. Ryan, & R. Win-
   terowd (Eds.), Encountering student texts: Interpretive issues in reading student
   writing (pp. 35-48). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

                                                                                                 103
    SECTION TWO:
PERSONAL WRITING
AND SOCIAL CHANGE
COMMUNICATION AS SOCIAL
ACTION: CRITICAL EXPRESSIVIST
PEDAGOGIES IN THE WRITING
CLASSROOM

      Patricia Webb Boyd
      Arizona State University

    In his highly influential essay "Rhetoric and Ideology in the Writing Class,"
James Berlin positions expressionistic rhetoric as a "romantic recoil from the
urban horrors created by nineteenth-century capitalism" (2009, p. 674). In the
early twenty-first century, we face a new set of horrors based in a sense of immi-
nent threats from both domestic and global forces along with strident concerns
about the influence that our government is having on individual lives. In this
time, many feel unable to control their own lives much less effect change in larger
society. Academics have responded to the problems of modernity by construct-
ing theories that emphasize the importance of language in constructing reality
and the need to critically analyze our social and material conditions. As compo-
sitionists have taken up these postmodern goals, they have, as Diane Freedman
points out, eschewed expressivism, positioning it as a supposedly "naïve accep-
tance of the notion of a rational, coherent and unified `self,' a notion critiqued
by postmodernists and thought to inhere in all personal writing" (2001, p. 206).
Instead of focusing on the importance of the self as a counter to problematic
social conditions, postmodernists argue that the expressivist individual actually
"conspire[s] in the replication of a capitalist/consumerist hegemony responsible
for various forms of political, social, and economic oppression" (O'Donnell,
1996, p. 423).

    How can we imagine creative alternatives where students and teachers can, as
Paul Markham suggests, see themselves as active participants in public spheres/
discourses who can co-create change rather than be passive consumers waiting
for others to "fix things"? Giving importance to individual experiences and be-
liefs is an important step in this process. Critical expressivism highlights that the
individual is not a fixed or unchanging entity, acknowledging the role that cul-
ture plays in individuals' identity and identifications. As Sherrie Gradin argues,
social expressivism (her version of critical expressivism) "suggests that all subjects
negotiate within the system; they act and are acted upon by their environments.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.07  107
Boyd

In order to be effective citizens and effective rhetorical beings, student must first
learn how to carry out the negotiation between self and world" (1995, p. xv).
In order to carry out these connections between the individual and the world,
though, "a first step in this negotiation must be to develop a clear sense of one's
own beliefs as well as a clear sense of how one's own value system intersects or
not with others, and how finally to communicate effectively" (Gradin, 1995, p.
xv). So, students need to begin with their own experiences in order to be active
participants in the larger society.

    Critical expressivism suggests that it is through individual experiences that
commitments are made, stances are taken, responsibility is assumed and actions
are advanced--not through an ephemeral, relative subject position that can easily
be seen as objectified by social structures. The more ephemeral and fragmented
we see ourselves, the less ability we feel we to have to transform things. Further,
the more fragmented we feel, the less connection we sense to communities around
us. Feeling connected to communities is an important aspect of transforming the
issues that face us today. Feeling disconnected from the self translates into partic-
ular views on the power (or lack thereof ) of one's ability to act as well. Too often,
people feel disempowered to change any of the problems they see in the world,
thinking that the problems are too large and must be changed by someone else.

    These feelings are also translated into beliefs about communication. Too of-
ten students see discussions and writing as empty exercises that have no ability
to change social situations. Critical expressivist practices can help us challenge
these views of communication. Instead of seeing communication as empty exer-
cises or as tools to only analyze social texts rather than change society, students
can learn to see writing--and social discussions--as social action--i.e., a way of
being an agent in public discourses. When students realize their words matter
and can have impact on social action (and can even be social action), then they
become more aware of how important it is to take responsibility for their words
and the work those words do in their communities and the lives of people.

    Critical expressivists' emphasis on individual experiences illustrates the im-
portance that those experiences play in one's interactions in the world--includ-
ing the political and social problems that face us domestically and globally. In-
stead of seeing the individual as an isolated, monolithic entity whose sole intent
is to search for inner truth, critical expressivists demonstrate that the individual
is situated within larger social experiences. Eschewing the importance of indi-
vidual experiences as postmodernism does fails to acknowledge the important
work that a fairly stable concept of the individual plays in the beliefs we have;
our lived realities of who we are and how we engage with others; and the actions
we take and their impact on others. Even as they recognize the durable quality
of the individual, critical expressivists are aware (and work to teach students to

108
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

be aware of as well) that these beliefs and actions are socially situated and con-
structed over time. Learning how we learned and developed those beliefs and
how they have solidified over time is an important step in building public voices
that help us become active agents in public arenas, both of which are important
practices in critical expressivist classrooms. We need to see both the "stable" self
that is somewhat durable across time and recognize how it is constructed to be
durable and the consequences of that durability.

    In this chapter, I analyze how critical expressivist pedagogies can help stu-
dents learn to incorporate individual experiences into education in order to cre-
ate public voices that provide them with agency in public arenas. Critical ex-
pressivism focuses on "conditions of language use," not "studying private truths"
(O'Donnell, 1996, p. 437). By doing so, critical expressivism can help students
learn to situate their own experiences and personal narratives within larger social
arenas and take responsibility. Students can become more responsive to their
audiences and more responsible for their words so that they can see the ways
communication is more than just an empty exercise. Students can "become in-
vested as writers when they realize that being articulate when something is at
stake ... is what launches individuals into public life" (Danielewicz, 2008, p.
444). Communication can be social action.

THE IMPORTANCE OF PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
AND PERSONAL GENRES

    Postmodern critics argue that expressivists define the individual much like
the modernist individual: eternal, universal, rational, coherent, unique, and au-
thentic (Judd, 2003, p. 489, Freedman, 2001, p. 206). Berlin argues that for ex-
pressivists, reality resides "within the individual subject. While the reality of the
material, the social, and the linguistic are never denied, they are considered sig-
nificant only insofar as they serve the needs of the individual" (Berlin, 2009, p.
674). In Berlin's estimation of expressivism, the external world serves as material
for the individual to "understand the self " (2009, p. 674) and "awaken in read-
ers the experience of their selves" (2009, p. 675). He argues that expressivism
denies "'the place of intersubjective, social processes in shaping reality. Instead,
it always describes groups as sources of distortion of the individual's true vision,
and the behavior it recommends in the political and social realms is atomistic,
the individual acting alone' (2009, p. 146)" (quoted in Paley, 2001, p. 190).
Other critics insist that expressivist rhetoric and pedagogy focus "upon personal
growth while ignoring the social setting of the specialized skills and bodies of
knowledge," thus emphasizing "a naïve view of the writer ... as possessing innate
abilities to discover truth" (Fishman & McCarthy, 1992, p. 648).

                                                                                                 109
Boyd

    This definition of the individual leads to problematic views of the solutions
to the world's problems. Berlin argues that for expressivists, the solutions to the
problems of a commodified culture are supposedly found through re-experienc-
ing the self. For expressivists, the only hope in a society working to destroy the
uniqueness of the individual is for each of us to assert our individuality against
the tyranny of the authoritarian corporation, state, and society. Strategies for
doing so must of course be left to the individual, each lighting one small candle
in order to create a brighter world (Berlin, 2009, p. 676-677).

    Donald Judd shares Berlin's critique of expressivist solutions to the current
social problems, describing a class project on homelessness that had only mini-
mal success. Although students were awakened to new ways of thinking about
homelessness through discussing their personal beliefs on homelessness, Judd
claims expressivist practices left students "ignorant of larger social forces which
play fundamental roles in the eviction of the homeless" (Judd, 2003, p. 77).
Judd argues that because it focuses only on individual's reflections on social is-
sues, expressivist teaching "offers little guidance on how to think more critically
about homelessness and many other important social issues" (2003, p. 76). Judd
insists that focusing on individual responses to problems--a practice he attri-
butes to expressivism--leaves students floundering to find solutions.

    Interestingly enough, although Judd agrees with Berlin on some accounts,
he argues that Berlin offers an overly simplified definition of the individual used
by expressivism. Countering Berlin's argument that expressivists see the "self as
`universal, eternal, authentic ... that beneath all appearances is at one with all
other selves'" (Judd, 2003, p. 489), Judd shows how, in actuality, for expressivists
"the self goes through changes in its interactions with other selves and with the
world. The self is neither universal, eternal, nor autonomous" (Judd, 2003, p.
63); instead expressivists argue that the self is shaped by other people and in-
stitutions (2003, p. 71). And he is not alone. Many critics have illustrated that
branches of expressivism like critical expressivism draw on an individual that
is not "monolithic, centered or rational" (Gradin, 1995, p. xv). In fact Sherrie
Gradin argues that the expressivist individual is one who "confronts one's own
beliefs and examines her interaction with culture [and] is particularly plural and
decentered because the self is constructed differently in various times and in
multiple classes and cultures" (1995, p. xv). Critical expressivists highlight the
way the individual builds connections with communities in which the individu-
al is situated, valuing both individual experiences and social relationships.

    This process of building relationships can be facilitated by genres that have
been traditionally labeled "personal" and have been critiqued by postmodernism.
These genres can help students become more engaged in the classroom and their
worlds because they encourage students to start with their own experiences, and

110
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

then negotiate between them and different worlds. Freedman writes of "the capac-
ity of personal classroom writing ... to negotiate the divide college students often
feel between school and work or school and home, their writing and their caring,
their knowing and their being" (2001, p. 199). When students begin with their
own experiences, they can feel empowered in institutional settings that can often
be alienating, and they can find a public voice that gives them agency. Students
begin to see the ways that various institutions and various identities/identifications
have shaped their actions (and inactions) and have caused them to feel powerful or
powerless in particular situations. Writing about these instances can help students
understand the causes behind their actions (or inactions), help them feel passion-
ate about these life experiences, connect them to others through these analyses,
and lead them to take different kinds of actions out of those new realizations.

    As Freedman insists, "students are unavoidably bringing their personal lives
into their academic work, the classroom space, and their conversations with
teachers and peers" (2001, p. 200). Drawing on those experiences in both the
kind of discussions they have and the kind of writing they do are useful ways for
students to learn what is at stake in their communications. Starting with per-
sonal experiences and locating them in larger social contexts is a center stone of
critical expressivism practices that help students learn they are "supposed to have
something at stake" in their learning. As Danielewicz argues, there are two key
results of personal writing genres: "students learn that they are supposed to have
something at stake in writing an argument, academic or otherwise" (2008, p.
421) and "students who do write when something is at stake are participating in
public discourse; they expect something to happen as a result of writing" (2008,
p. 421). Both of these benefits highlight why the genres typically denigrated as
"personal" hold much value for students and our classrooms.

    The next section discusses two examples that illustrate the way critical expres-
sivist pedagogies in the classroom can help students be responsive to audiences
and take responsibility for their words and actions. They show the ways that
discussions and writing in personal genres can help students start with personal
experiences in order to create authoritative public voices that make them active
participants in public arenas.

EXAMPLES OF CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM AT WORK

Example 1: Curriculum as Conversation and Discussion

    Class discussions and conversations are one crucial way that students can
learn to be responsible language users. Instead of seeing them as "just" discus-
sions, critical expressivist pedagogies can turn class discussions into moments

                                                                                                 111
Boyd

where students take responsibility for their words in a community and learn
to place their own experiences within larger social contexts. Once students see
how their ideas have been shaped, they realize that their ideas are not "givens"
but have been produced and can, thus, be changed and transformed. Classroom
discussions and the curriculum the teacher establishes can be a starting point for
this kind of change.

    The narratives students bring to the classroom should be an important part
of the class curriculum. In "What Is Public Narrative," Marshall Ganz argues
that we make sense of the world through three types of stories: story of self, story
of us, and story of now. The story of self "communicates who I am--my values,
my experiences, why I do what I do;" the story of us "communicates who we
are--our shared values, our shared experience, and why we do what we do;" and
the story of now "transforms the present into a moment of challenge, hope, and
choice" (Ganz, 2008, p. 1). All three steps are important in critical expressivist
classrooms because the story of us cannot be built without a thorough knowl-
edge of the story of self and the story of now, which leads to civic agency and
action, requires both of the other two stories.

    Making these stories a central part of the class situates the curriculum as
a conversation rather than a merely a presentation of information (Shields &
Mohan, 2008, p. 296). Carolyn Shields and Erica Mohan advocate for curricu-
lum as conversation that focuses on "teaching students to ask about other per-
spectives, and to question, reflect, critique, and challenge" (2008, p. 296). This
approach requires that instructors honor "each student's unique experiences in
the sense-making conversations of the classroom" (Shields & Mohan, 2008, p.
296) in order to "ensure that a greater range of student experiences is considered
valid and valuable as a basis for learning" (2008, p. 296). Thus, classroom con-
versations should honor students' experiences and situate them in larger social
contexts as a way of making sense of what is happening in the world, just as
Ganz's three types of stories encourage students to do. Creating the curriculum
as a conversation means the students' stories and sense-making are the basis of
the class, but these experiences are situated within a questioning of, reflecting
on, and challenging of other perspectives--connecting the story of self and story
of us, ultimately moving toward a story of now that can be filled with hope and
choice.

    Thomas O'Donnell's article "Politics and Ordinary Language: A Defense of
Expressivist Rhetorics" (1996) provides a good example of how class discussion
can use the story of self, story of us, and story of now to create curriculum as con-
versation that helps raise students' awareness of the way their views are situated
within larger social contexts. He describes a class discussion on whether health
insurance should pay for alcoholics' rehabilitation treatment--a discussion that,

112
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

interestingly enough, quickly turned into a debate about what "free will" meant.
The discussion pivoted around the question of whether alcoholism was a disease
or a choice. If students saw alcoholism as a disease, then they thought that al-
coholics should be given treatment, just like any other sick person. If, however,
students thought that alcoholism was a "free will" choice that one made, then
they did not think that health insurance should pay for that choice. Instead of
an abstract discussion of public policy, the class discussion quickly turned to a
story of self in which they discussed what "free will" meant to them and where
they learned that term; then because they were discussing their perceptions
within the classroom, they had to take responsibility for their word use and be
responsive to their audience. Through deep engagement with their peers in the
classroom discussions which were situated in curriculum as conversation (not
curriculum as information transmission), they were participating in the story of
us. They began to learn the culture's shared values and shared narratives about
"free will." The story of now came into play when students realized those larger
cultural narratives of "free will" (in which they played a part) had an impact on
the actions taken by public policy makers and health care agencies as well as on
those whose lives were directly affected by those decisions. They realized that
narratives of "free will" and other such concepts directly shaped people's lives
and were not abstract terms that meant little beyond personal opinion. These
concepts were based in public narratives that could create despair or could be
challenged and questioned to create hope and choice.

    O'Donnell's class demonstrates that critical expressivist teaching does offer
students help in sorting through public issues, thus challenging critiques like
Judd's who argues that students in expressivist classrooms are offered "little guid-
ance on how to think critically" (Judd, 2003, p. 76). Discussions like the one
on health care that centered on multiple socially-constructed definitions of "free
will" illustrate that "it makes little sense to see the expressivist move to the per-
sonal as emerging from an inordinate confidence in the capacity of individuals
to apprehend untainted truth" (O'Donnell, 1996, p. 432). The point of the class
discussion was not to find the one "true" meaning of "free will" and therefore the
"right" policy; instead, the point of the discussion was to explore the impacts of
language use and the importance of being responsible for one's language use. In
O'Donnell's class, the group helped individuals sort out their assumptions about
"free will" and consider the impact on public policy. The conversational nature
of the curriculum focused on students' stories of how they learned the terms
and shifted those conversations to considering how the community used the
various narratives to construct policies and who was served (and not served) by
those policies. Knowing what stories they are a part of will help students realize
the impact of the public narratives. Realizing this, according to Paul Markham

                                                                                                 113
Boyd

in "You Don't Know Where You're Going until You're on the Way There: Why
Public `Work' Matters," can help them create public narratives--"a discursive
process through which individuals, communities, and nations construct their
identity, make choices, and inspire actions" (2011, p. 6). Critical expressivist
pedagogies that center on the importance of drawing on multiple narratives in
class and establishing the curriculum as a conversation can help students take
responsibility for their words and to see their communications as actions that
have impact--that matter.

    O'Donnell's class illustrates that expressivist principles can help students en-
ter into public discourse in a way that makes them engaged and active citizens
rather than passive dupes of institutional structures, as Berlin and others want to
position them. How students use language and to what effect becomes the main
focus in critical expressivist classrooms, not the solipsistic analysis of the self, as
critics of expressivism claim. Students in critical expressivist work need to con-
nect to their audiences and to be responsive to and responsible to their audiences
for their words to have impact and to create a powerful public voice. Students
focus on the communities they are located within, they begin to contextualize
their views within difference, and they work to build intercontextual connec-
tions to be responsive to and responsible to their communities and audiences.

Example 2: Writing Personal Genres/Creating Public Agency

    Critical expressivist pedagogies shape class discussions in ways that teach stu-
dents about taking responsibility for their language use and studying the impact
that use has on the communities in which they are located. Critical expressiv-
ist pedagogies can also teach students to achieve similar goals through writ-
ing--to help them become "invested as writers" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 443)
and create public voices in their writing. In her article "Personal Genres, Public
Voices," Jane Danielewicz advocates for teaching personal genres that have too
often been short-sightedly critiqued as "solipsistic indulgent exercise[s]" (2008,
p. 439) and "private, confessional discourse[s], personal catharsis" (2008, p.
440). In an analysis of her seminar course called "Reading and Writing Wom-
en's Lives," Danielewicz illustrates how students can draw on personal genres to
create public voices. In the process of writing personal genres like autobiogra-
phies, students can learn the process of being responsive to their audience and
being responsible for their words. They can learn to write multiple versions of
their stories and multiple tellings of the "I," thus seeing that there is not one
true inner "I" revealed through writing, that interactions with their audiences
powerfully shape their tellings, and that personal stories are powerful material
for creating public agency.

114
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

    Danielewicz asserts that writing in personal genres does not mean that the
self written about is solipsistic, or that the topics written about are only person-
al. In her class, the first drafts of the personal genres focused on religion, family
drama, sexual orientation, cherished hobbies and were written in very writer-
ly-based prose, presenting one version of the "I" and one particular retelling
of the experience. While these were "personal" stories, they were also common
experiences, ones that contained "issues that concern us all"--"surface[ing] or-
ganically," even though public issues were not assigned, and even in their first
drafts (2008, p. 443).

    As Danielewicz points out "when students write their own autobiographies,
a two-way process is at work: first, they identify and articulate their distinctive
positions, and second, in writing for a public audience, they come to terms
with how to represent themselves and then must contend with how audiences
respond" (2008, p. 436). Students begin writing to express their experiences,
but through discussing their work in small peer groups and learning about genre
conventions, their goals for their work shift to connecting with the audience,
wanting the audience to understand the individual's experiences. In order to do
so, they have to be responsive to how the audience reacts to the telling of the sto-
ry and the "I" that is constructed through that telling. The small groups, then,
help students locate the individual in larger social contexts and lead to changed
motivations for writing. Danielewicz disagrees with critics like Berlin who "re-
duces the dialectic in expressionist editorial groups to one function: `to enable
the writer to understand the manifestation of her identity in language through
considering the reaction of others--not, for example, to begin to understand
how meaning is shaped by discourse communities'" (Paley, 2001, p. 191); in-
stead, she found in her class that critical expressivist peer response groups have
a significant impact on an individual's understanding of how their identities--
their "I's" are individually situated and socially constructed. These kinds of
groups help students understand how their representations of themselves impact
their audiences and shape their possibilities for agency and effective public voice.

    Jackie, one of the women Danielewicz studies in her article, is a good ex-
ample of how writers can use personal genres to create a public voice that gives
them agency and authority in public spheres. More importantly, perhaps, Jack-
ie is a great example of how writing personal genres can help students learn
"more effectively than any book they might read the truth of the hard, theoret-
ical claim that identity is constructed by institutions, groups, and other social
forces" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 443). Jackie's first draft of her autobiography ex-
pressed strong resentment and anger toward God and toward her family whom
she felt pushed religion on her when she was growing up. Through extensive
small group peer responses, though, Jackie realized that the way she represented

                                                                                                 115
Boyd

the "I" in her first draft alienated her audience. It was through the small group
work and through studying the genre of autobiography that Jackie came to see
that in order to connect to her audience, she had to rewrite the outpouring of
emotion included in her first draft since her representation of that emotion
that was off-putting to her audience. She had to step back--in her thinking
and writing--to analyze the original situations she included and rewrite them
so that her audiences understood "the origins of `the outpouring of shocking
and offensive rhetoric' or her life as `a trained monkey,' descriptions that were
included in her early draft" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 430) of her autobiography.
In order for her work to be relatable to a larger audience, she needed to un-
derstand how her audience responded to her language use and the impact it
had on her ability to achieve her goals in her autobiography She had to learn
to construct an "I" that was situated in a larger social context. She positioned
herself as one writing with "authority, knowledge, convictions, and self-con-
sciousness about issues that concern us all" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 443) rather
than presenting an "I" giving an angry diatribe. As she made these revisions, she
clearly felt she had much at stake in writing. "Her portfolio letter states the case
with conviction: `I adore this piece and I hope that the readers I hope that the
readers can connect to it as much as I do'" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 434). Instead
of seeing her autobiography as a personal expression of feelings or as an empty
exercise, Jackie hoped her writing made a difference to a public audience. She
felt her writing made a difference--at least she hoped it did, that it somehow
changed her audience. This is a powerful outcome from a class assignment. As
Danielewicz asks: "How often do our first-year writers `adore' an essay? That
achievement alone--recognizing and valuing a powerful piece of work--is sig-
nificant. But I'm most impressed with that Jackie's criteria for success include a
consideration of whether or not `the readers can connect to it'" (2008, p. 434).
She truly wanted to make her assertions of "I" relatable to the collective--to
make her "I" a "we."

    It is clear, then, that Jackie wrote her way into an authoritative, agentive voice
that responsibly connected to an audience to help her position her stories within
a larger social context, not to better understand her "inner" self but to under-
stand how the self is socially constructed by engagement with others and how
one's representation of self is never unmediated or "pure." Her revisions show
that voice is not an internal truth but is instead socially constructed, based on
responses from and responsibility to audiences. Personal genres as used in critical
expressivist pedagogies help students learn more about public issues. Genres like
autobiographies can help them understand relationships between self/other/in-
stitutions/world (Freedman, 2001, p. 199; Danielewicz, 2008, p. 442). Daniele-
wicz argues "experiments that involve writing different versions of the self lead

116
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

to growth, to knowledge of public issues, and to authority. Writing about one's
own or another person's life makes the stakes personal, therefore immediate, tan-
gible, even urgent" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 442). In fact, Danielewicz contends
"we (and our cultures, communities, families) need such assertions of self, such
articulation of differences, as a way to fight against the depersonalization and
homogenizing effects of globalization" (2008, p. 439). Instead of conspiring to
replicate "a capitalist/consumerist hegemony responsible for various forms of
political, social, and economic oppression" (O'Donnell, 1996, p. 423), critical
expressivist practices can help students fight oppression by seeing the ways they
can take actions in our current cultural moment. Unlike critiques that personal
genres are empty exercises (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 442), it is clear that they can
help students actively engage with social issues and develop public voices that
make them active participants in public arenas. If students realize that some-
thing is at stake when they write, they become more invested and may, perhaps,
see writing as social action (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 443-4). Drawing on critical
pedagogies like these, we can help students learn to be responsible language users
in public spheres.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS/STORY OF THE ARTICLE

    Near the beginning of this article, I asked if we could imagine creative alter-
natives that could help students position themselves as active voices in public
discourses. I suggested that an important step in the process is valuing individ-
ual experiences and beliefs. Throughout the chapter, I have illustrated some of
the ways that critical expressivist pedagogies use individual experiences to help
students become more responsible language users in public discourse. So, if we
return to that question now, I hope I have presented a few useful ideas.

    I recognize the paradoxical nature of this chapter: I am advocating for incor-
porating individual experience into academic and other kinds of work in both
writing and discussion, and yet there is not one bit of evidence of my individual
story here. I have also encouraged including personal genres into academic and
other kinds of writing, and yet there is not a stitch of autobiography or autoen-
thography or auto-anything in this article. And to be honest, it didn't even occur
to me to include it in the chapter until I was writing the 27th out of the 50th
draft of this piece (numbers are approximate)--I was trained well in traditional
academia.

    In an effort to answer some of the calls I have made in this article, I want to
tell some of the stories of this article--to foreground the motivations, beliefs,
values, and hopes that drive this article. Ganz's story of self, story of us, and story
of now help me do so.

                                                                                                 117
Boyd

Story of Self

    My motivations for writing this piece come from a strong belief: The indi-
vidual matters! By this, I do not mean to suggest that I am resorting to a "naïve
acceptance of the notion of a rational, coherent, and unified self " (Freedman,
2001, p. 206); nor am I suggesting that the individual is "insular, confined or
private" (Danielewicz, 2008, p. 440). I am suggesting we need to examine the
work that ideas like "self " and "individual" play in people's lives. Many people
find it important to have a "ground" to stand on--a sort of foundation that they
can rely on in this world, and that ground can come from many places. Yes, it's
important to realize that the "ground" changes over time and that we learned
that "ground" through social experiences. Nevertheless, a sense of identity--i.e.
being an individual--does important work in people's lives. Susan Hekman ar-
gues that "selves must necessarily experience themselves as coherent identities,
historically located and contingent, but enduring through time" (2010, p. 299).
It is the both/and that is appealing to me, that I believe in, and that attracts me
to critical expressivism: stablity and contingency.

    Just as I passionately argue that the individual matters, I just as passionately
insist that pedagogy matters--that composition is a valid and valuable field and
that critical expressivism is an important part of teaching. I am disturbed by
the divisiveness I sense every time I go to meetings where those who identify
themselves loudly as "rhetoricians" work actively to distance themselves from
"teaching." Many moons ago, Stephen North said that the field was suffering
because the Researchers didn't value the Practitioners, the Philosophers didn't
value the Researchers, and so on (1987). All too often I see this same struggles
occurring today. My lived experiences in departments that too often feel that
rhetoric and theory is privileged over teaching and composition (although I re-
alize that teaching is not the only thing that scholars of composition study). I
have lived through many meetings where I alternately felt like sinking in my
seat, somehow feeling ashamed to value teaching, or standing up on the table
shouting "Teaching matters!" I have lived--and sadly continue to live--a sense
of alienation as "the" composition person in an area where Rhetoric is privileged.

    My first passion and interest in higher education is teaching and writing
about teaching. That's why it was so important to me to contribute to this collec-
tion. I believe in students. I believe in studying learning. I believe it's important
to study teaching. I believe that the divisiveness in our departments and our
own areas is corrosive. I like how Karen Surman Paley puts it: "I am not asking
naively, `Why can't we all just get along?' but rather I am saying, `Let us look
more carefully before we write each other off.'" (2001, p. 197). That is precisely
what North urged us to do in 1987. I believe books like this can help move us

118
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

toward that. These are core personal beliefs I bring with me to the writing of this
chapter, to the conversation.

Story of Us

    "Our stories of self overlap with our stories of us .... A story of us express-
es the values, the experiences, shared by the us we hope to evoke at the time"
(Ganz, 2008, p. 12). The "us" being invoked in this collection is the kind of
teacher I want to be--the kind of compassionate, critical, thinking, reflective
teacher (person) I want to be. It is an "us" I want to use to help shape my sto-
ry of self because we are collectively constructing a community of values and
experiences that help our students, communities, and worlds. The "collective
identity" being constructed here across the articles is one I wish to be a part of.
The overlap of my story with this collective "us."

    "Like the story of self, [the story of us] is built from the choices points--
the founding, the choices made, the challenges faced, the outcomes, the lessons
learned" (Ganz, 2008, p. 12). I see this book as a story of us, covering all of these
ideas (explicitly or implicitly)--beginnings, ongoing choices, perpetually chang-
ing outcomes, ever blossoming lessons. It is a story in which I feel welcomed, not
isolated. It is a story in which teaching is valued.

    Ganz says the story of us requires one key storyteller, "an interpreter of expe-
rience" (2008, p. 12), but I suggest that we are all storytellers. We are all serving
a critical leadership function in interpreting "the movement's new experience"
(Ganz, 2008, p. 12). That is a central part of this book's story seen through the
emails we've shared, the engagements across articles, the nature of the "collec-
tive" part of the edited "collection."

Story of Now

    This is the hardest of the three stories: "A story of now articulates an urgent
challenge--or threat--to the values that we share that demands action now.
What choices must we make? What is at risk? And where's the hope?" (Ganz,
2008, p. 13).

    While I do not think one writing class can change the world, I do believe that
one writing class can help students become stronger language users and can learn
that language can be an important part of social action. Words have impact;
words can make things happen; words do things; words are action. Students can/
should take responsibility for their words. Students can/should be responsive to
their audiences. Instead of seeing writing assignments as, well, assignments, they
should/can see them as actions that matter--as tasks that matter.

                                                                                                 119
Boyd

    But some writing matters more than others. Part of our responsibility as
teachers is to make sure the writing we have them do and the discussions we have
them participate in matter. It is also our responsibility to help them see how they
matter and to realize that they won't matter to every student in the same way. We
can't assume that they should see the world the way we do and that they should
take the stances we do--i.e. take on our political views or political agendas.

    But we do face a collective sort problem--i.e. a view that someone else some-
where else should fix the problems that plague us. In "You Don't Know Where
You're Going until You're on the Way There: Why Public `Work' Matters," Paul
Markham summarizes it well. He argues that we must "re-imagine citizenship
for the twenty-first century" (2011, p. 4). Challenging the "customer service
mentality" where we wait for someone else to serve us and fix our problems "re-
quires more than policy change alone--it requires a cultural change, a new civic
imagination. This new kind of everyday politics emphasizes the creative role of
citizens and their ability to solve a wide variety of complex public problems"
(Markham, 2011, p. 4). That emphasis on "a new civic imagination" and "the
creative role of citizens" is something that there is an urgent need for. However,
there is certainly not one path to fulfilling that need. And there is definitely not
one political agenda that will achieve that goal.

    Likewise, there is not one writing method or approach that best prepares
students to learn the kind of creative problem solving that sort of citizenship
will/does require. Valuing individual experiences and situating them in larger
social contexts--larger social narratives--will, however, be a crucial part of it.
And critical expresssivism can be an important part of that process, as I have
argued. Critical expressivism can, thus, be an important part of the story of now.
Ganz writes: "In a story of now, we are the protagonists and it is our choices that
shape the outcome" (2008, p. 13). The choice/action does not need to be huge/
monumental, but it must be specific and hold a vision. When making choices,
Ganz points out, "It can begin by getting that number of people to show up at
a meeting that you committed to do. You can win a `small' victory that shows
change is possible. A small victory can become a source of hope if it is interpret-
ed as part of a greater vision" (Ganz, 2008, p. 13).

    What we need is small steps and new stories to tell about those steps--ex-
actly what this article has allowed me to do, to consider: what do I want for my
students? For our classrooms? For our educational institutions? For our commu-
nities? For our nation? While hope may seem like a vague and abstract concept,
Ganz insists that "it is a strategy--a credible vision of how to get from here
to there" (2008, p. 13). We all have that hope. This collection has allowed me
(us?) to make a space for vision and hope in our academic pursuits. The story of
now--the hope of critical expressivism.

120
                                                                          Communication as Social Action

REFERENCES

Berlin, J. (2009). Rhetoric and ideology in the writing class. In S. Miller (Ed.),
   The Norton book of composition studies (pp. 667-684). New York: W. W. Nor-
   ton.

Danielewicz, J. (2008). Personal genres, public voices. College Composition and
   Communication, 59(3), 420-450.

Fishman, S., & McCarthy, L. P. (1992). Is expressivism dead? Reconsidering its
   romantic roots and its relation to social constructivism. College English, 54(6),
   647-661.

Freedman, D. P. (2001). Life work through teaching and scholarship. In D.
   Holdstein & D. Bleich (Eds.), Personal efects: The social character of scholarly
   writing (pp. 199-219). Logan, UT: Utah State Press.

Ganz, M. (2008). What is public narrative? Retrieved from New England Grass-
   roots Environmental Fund Web site: http://wearesole.com/What_is_Public_
   Narrative.pdf

Gradin, S. (1995). Romancing rhetorics: Social expressivism on the teaching of writ-
   ing. Pourtsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Hekman, S. (2010). Private Selves, public identities: Reconsidering identity pol-
   itics. Penn State Press.

Judd, D. (2003). Critical realism and composition theory. New York: Routledge.
Markham, P. (2011). You don't know where you're going until you're on your

   way there: Why public "work" matters. Journal for Civic Commitment, 17,
   1-17.
North, S. (1987). The making of knowledge in composition: A portrait of an emerg-
   ing discipline. Pourtsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
O'Donnell, T. (1996). Politics and ordinary language: A defense of expressivist
   rhetorics. College English, 58(4), 423-439.
Paley, K. S. (2001). The social construction of "expressivist" pedagogy." In D.
   Holdstein & D. Bleich (Eds.), Personal effects: The social character of scholarly
   writing (pp. 178-198). Logan, UT: Utah State Press.
Shields, C. M. & Mohan, E. J. (2008). High-quality education for all students:
   Putting social justice at its heart. Teacher Development, 12(4), 289-300.
Warnock, T. (2003). Bringing over yonder over here: A personal look at ex-
   pressivist rhetoric asi action. In T. Enos, K. Miller, & J. McCracken (Eds.),
   Beyond postprocess and postmodernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhetoric (pp.
   203-216). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence/Erlbaum Press.

                                                                                                 121
FROM THE PERSONAL
TO THE SOCIAL

      Daniel F. Collins
      Manhattan College

        We live, think, and write between baby steps and master theories, where the
        richness, confusion, tragedy, violence, and joy of life rush at us where we are
        and await us where we go.

                                                       --Robert L. Davis and Mark H. Shadle

    "We are all learning to live together." So reads the banner hanging in the pro-
totypical classroom depicted in the graphic introduction to teaching, To Teach:
The Journey, in Comics, by William Ayers and Ryan Alexander-Tanner. Good
teaching prompts students to engage the surrounding world. Such engagement
commences by honoring each student in the room, each voice, each person.

                                             *

    We are all learning to live together. So evoked President Barack Obama in
his January 2011 Tucson speech after the shooting of Congresswoman Gabrielle
Giffords and others. "It's important for us to pause for a moment and make sure
that we are talking with each other in a way that heals, not a way that wounds,"
the President advised (2011). Learning to live together, we check our ideas and
their expression through others.

                                             *

    We are all learning to live together. Mary Rose O'Reilly describes her compo-
sition pedagogy in the same intertwining of the personal and the social. O'Reilly
asks students to begin writing in the personal, because such a stance honors their
voice and provides them an opportunity to write from who they are, what they
know, and what they want. Her pedagogy concludes in the social, or the com-
munal, as students write for an audience, and this audience informs what they
say and how they say it. Writing to find one's voice, O'Reilly argues, "defines a
moment of presence, of being awake, and it involves not only self-understand-
ing, but the ability to transmit that self-understanding to others. Learning to
write so that you will be read, therefore, vitalizes both the self and the commu-
nity" (2009, p. 58). By encouraging writing as the expression of the inner world,
O'Reilly escorts students from the idiosyncrasies of the personal to the checks

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.08  123
Collins

and balances of the social. "It seems important," O'Reilly writes, "that many
opposing communities exist in balance, polishing each other up like rocks in a
river bed, with the friction of daily contact" (2009, p. 11).

                                             *

    We are all learning to live together. This is the feeling and tenor of the writ-
ing classroom I try to construct and implement, a classroom set to up to explore
writing from personal and social perspectives. This collage--an homage to the
writers and teachers that inform my practice--attempts to articulate the ways
in which personal and social dimensions of writing are embedded in expressivist
thinking. Writing, Sherrie L. Gradin describes,

         is an act of the whole being; it is through reflecting, question-
         ing feeling, experiencing, reasoning, and imagining that writ-
         ers become writers. While this might seem an ambitious and
         ideal approach to writing instruction, I would argue that it is
         such an ideal that we need to hold to fully educate students in
         a system that often denies the emotive, creative, and imagina-
         tive aspects of the intellect. (1995, p. 57)

    For Gradin, expressivism has always been an exploration of self and social
world, a form of inquiry and discovery; expressivism has always been about the
construction of meaning, about the development of self through a concern for
voice and lived experience.

                                             *

    Robert Yagelski asks writing teachers to uphold writing as an ontological act:
"When we write, we enact a sense of ourselves as beings in the world. In this
regard, writing both shapes and reflects our sense of who we are in relation to
each other and the world around us. Therein lies the transformative power of
writing" (2009, p. 8). While Yagleski upholds the act of writing over any prod-
uct, the transformation of self and world enmeshed in writing as an ontological
act mirrors an expressivist impulse to write in two specific ways. First, Yagelski
endorses "the capacity of writing to enhance an awareness of ourselves and the
world around us, both in the moment and over time" (Yagelski, 2009, p. 16).
Second, Yagelski acknowledges the transformative qualities of writing as "it opens
up possibilities for awareness, reflection, and inquiry that writing as an act of tex-
tual production does not necessarily do" (Yagelski, 2009, p. 7). The act of writing,
from Yagelski's perspective, affirms the need to compose one's story in meaningful
ways and provides the means through which to develop a need to reckon with the
self through the act of writing. Expressivism reinforces these same dimensions.

124
                                                                            From the Personal to the Social

                                             *

    Expressivist writing theory, it seems to me, upholds the idea that to write is
to discover oneself amidst an array of others. It honors the importance of the
student engaging and making sense out of the world. Expressivism grew from
personal uses of language to using language to engage others. "Personal modes
of writing," Peter Elbow argues, "help writers take more authority over their
writing: not to feel so intimidated by it and not to write so much tangled or
uninvested prose or mechanical or empty thinking" (2002, p. 16). Randall R.
Freisinger agrees, arguing that an academic neglect of the expressivist function of
language impairs the cognitive development of students simply because students
remain alienated from writing by a strict emphasis on academic writing (1980,
p. 162). Sherrie Gradin seeks to redress this neglect by reminding her readers of
these social dimensions of expressivism:

         I envision a social-expressivism where the best of both expres-
         sivism and social epistemic theories are practiced: students
         carry out negotiations between themselves and their culture,
         and must do this first in order to become effective citizens,
         imaginative thinkers, and savvy rhetorical beings. Learning
         to enact these negotiations means first developing a sense of
         one's own values and social constructions and then examin-
         ing how these interact or do not interact with others' value
         systems and cultural constructs." (1995, p. 110)

    Freisinger argues that the end result of the expressivist impulse is no less than
connecting personal experience and voice to an expansion of the student's con-
ception of the world (1980, p. 164). We are all learning to live together.

                                             *

    bell hooks offers a productive definition of voice from a social perspective:
"Coming to voice is not just the act of telling one's experience. It is using that
telling strategically--to come to voice so that you may also speak freely about
other subjects" (1994, p. 148). Part of hooks' instruction here is the direction of
student attention to the voices of others. hooks' sense of self-understanding has
both personal and social dimensions: "A personal definition of self aids, and is
indeed necessary in, the development of an awareness of one's socially defined
interactions with others" (1994, p. 166). In other words, writers come to know
themselves through their actions as social beings. Without a voice, Gradin argues,
students may be unwilling to begin important work: "understanding what their
beliefs are and where they come from in terms of their own experiences, so that
they can see how their value systems might differ from others'" (1995, p. 119).

                                                                                                 125
Collins

                                             *

    An expressivist classroom can become a transformative community, one that
embeds personal discoveries in social engagement (Fishman & McCarthy, 1992,
p. 659).

                                             *

    "We believe that all learning is autobiographical and passionate," Robert Da-
vis and Mark Shadle confess (2007, p. 9). Davis and Shadle go to great lengths
to paint themselves as composition traditionalists upholding the sanctity of aca-
demic projects and academic discourse even as they work to extend (and undo)
the purview and parameters of both. "We do not think that being the best of
academicians is the end point for students or the most useful manner of being.
Instead, we hope that students will be intellectuals pursuing pressing questions
and fertile mysteries, who can engage, and change, the rhetorical and actual
situations of their lives" (Davis & Shadle, 2007, p. 3). Davis and Shadle offer a
useful distinction here: writing from the self versus writing about the self (see,
too, Elbow, 2002, p. 18): expressivist writing begins from the self, from the per-
sonal experiences and observations of the writer. But the writer is not separate
from larger social contexts, and so the writing process does not end until such
inquiry is used in the making of meaning for the writer and for others.

                                             *

    Peter Elbow considers expressivism as a form of discourse that addresses the
ways in which interested parties engage other interested parties, all the while
identifying (and checking and modifying) our individual and collective stakes
in the matters at hand. Elbow endorses the intellectual tasks of "giving good
reasons and evidence yet doing so in a rhetorical fashion which acknowledges
an interested position and tries to acknowledge and understand the positions
of others" (2002, p. 148). Self in a world of others--we are all learning to live
together.

                                             *

    Stephen M. Fishman and Lucille Parkinson McCarthy argue that Peter El-
bow "hopes to increase our chances for identifying with one another and, as a
result, our chances for restructuring community" (1992, p. 649). Expression,
then, becomes about both self-discovery and social connection (Fishman & Mc-
Carthy, 1992, p. 650). Both goals rest in the clarification of meaning embodied
in the act of expression, acts designed to help us engage our sense of selves and
of others (Fishman & McCarthy, 1992, pp. 650, 652).

126
                                                                            From the Personal to the Social

                                             *

    Ken Macrorie writes, "All good writers speak in honest voices and tell the
truth" (1985, p. 15). Macrorie values writing as truth-telling: "a connection be-
tween the things written about, the words used in the writing, and the author's
experience in a world she knows well--whether in fact or dream or imagination"
(1985, p. 15). Such truth-telling overrides the perceived importance of academ-
ic discourse, which rings so false and pretentious to Macrorie that he gives it
another name: Engfish. Engfish, according to Macrorie, prevents the telling of
truth and promotes the telling of lies (1985, p. 14). Instead of Engfish, Macrorie
promotes the use of natural, authentic, alive voices, voices that recount and
recreate experiences using concrete facts and details to produce meanings for
readers (1985, p. 34).

                                             *

    Macrorie identifies three resources at hand for any writer. First, the writer has
her experiences from which to draw. These experiences can and should acknowl-
edge the ways in which the thoughts and feelings of others have impacted the
writer. Second, the writer has her writing skills, those rhetorical strategies used
to speak in an authentic voice to connect with her readers. Third, she has her
writing group, this circle of others to be used to hone the writing, the practice of
writing (Macrorie, 1985, p. 74). "Good writers meet their readers only at their
best," advocates Macrorie, indicating a concern for audience that is generally
downplayed in discussions of his work (1985, p. 35). This concern for audience
seems fundamental to the ways that Macrorie's work is about the impact of
writing on its readers.

                                             *

    Robert Yagelski offers three important points relating to the act of writing:
"the experience of writing is an experience of our being as inherently social; it
is the experience of the interconnectedness of being" (2009, p. 14); writing "is
an act of the self becoming more fully present in the world at the moment of
writing" (2009, p. 13); and writing can be a profound act of self-awareness, a
deepening of understanding of the self as a being in the world (2009, p. 15).
"Writing is therapeutic not because it is the catharsis of confessing," argue Davis
and Shadle, "but because writing about topics that writers are passionate about
can help transform lives" (2007, p. 72). The ontological act of writing favors an
expressivist emphasis on imagination, creativity, and process.

                                             *

                                                                                                 127
Collins

    Mary Rose O'Reilly asks her students to enchant themselves with their writ-
ing, through their writing (2009, p. 54). To be enchanted suggests that the work
will be engaged, completed, relished. One danger may be that that students sim-
ply fall in love with their stories. I don't simply want student narratives, stories
about their lives. I want well-written narratives, crafted compositions about who
they are and who they want to be. Meaning made by meaning shaped. Ander
Monson helps me out here, in a passage I distribute to my students for discus-
sion. Forgive the lengthy quotation:

         But I still don't want to read what most people have to say
         about themselves if it's just to tell their story. I want it to
         be art, meaning that I want it transformed, juxtaposed,
         collaged--worked on like metal sculpture, each sentence
         hammered, gleaming, honed .... The action of telling is fine:
         kudos for you and your confession, your therapy, your bravery
         in releasing your story to the public. But telling is performing,
         even if it seems effortless .... With years of reflection on that
         story and how it can be shaped as prose (and how its shape
         changes from our shaping it, reflecting on it), given audience
         and agents and editors, rhetoric and workshop and rewriting
         for maximum emotional punch--given the endless possibili-
         ties of the sentence on the page, I expect to see a little fucking
         craft. I guess I want awareness, a sense that the writer has
         reckoned with the self, the material, as well as what it means
         to reveal it, and how secrets are revealed, how stories are told,
         that it's not just being simply told. In short, it must make
         something of itself. (Monson, 2010, p. 13)

Yes, writing should move and surprise; it should teach its readers and writers
something new.

                                             *

    Bristling against the personal narrative, Ander Monson attempts to articu-
late his concerns: "These writers presume--and doubtlessly been told, perhaps in
workshops, perhaps by me--that their stories, finally, matter in themselves. Still,
I see something in these also-rans: they might serve to matter if explored further,
with style, an angle, some kind of action working as a countermeasure against the
desire of the I to confess" (2010, p. 16). Against this backdrop, Monson argues
the need "to tell a compelling story, but also to examine that compelling story and
the act of storytelling through the prose, to let the sentences get some traction
and complexity, to generate friction against what is being told" (2020, p. 17). Yes,

128
                                                                            From the Personal to the Social

through their writing, writers explore their relationship with others and with the
social and cultural conditions that inform their writing. And through their writ-
ing, students develop a conscious linguistic shaping toward purpose and effect.

                                             *

    "I am learning to consider what my students can do with their knowledge,"
offers Ken Macrorie in his book A Vulnerable Teacher (1974, p. 111). Increas-
ingly discouraged about the lack of student engagement in the classroom, Mac-
rorie sought to create ways that students could engage classroom texts through
their experiences. Classroom teaching became concerned with the mutual il-
lumination of course texts and student experiences. "When my students and
I are learning most powerfully, we are ever remembering where we came from.
And so there is some living going on in our learning place" (Macrorie, 2010,
"Preface"). No longer bored, Macrorie and his students began to surprise one
another, if only because they do not know what others might say aloud to the
class. Macrorie's practice becomes an invitation to self-reflection and self-scruti-
ny in a community of others doing much the same work. With no monopoly on
knowledge, students and teachers alike use their experiences to offer insight into
course materials and then use course materials to reframe their understandings
of the world (Macrorie, 2010, p. 79). Students come to value their own experi-
ence and their insights into these experiences.

                                             *

    Our courses fail, Macrorie argues, when we deny students their lives (Mac-
rorie, 2010, p. 13). Macrorie's sharp reminder indicates the need to ask students
to connect their lives to the classroom. By making actual feelings, thoughts, and
experiences significant to the ways in which students and teachers engage each
other in the classroom, vulnerability becomes an important ingredient in the
construction of knowledge. This is a vulnerability not based on fear and weak-
ness--which would be simply another form of trampling on students (which
is probably worse than simply ignoring them)--but a way of exercising their
power as thinkers, writers, and people.

REFERENCES

Ayers, W., & Alexander-Tanner, R. (2010). To teach: The journey, in comics. New
   York: Teachers College Press.

Davis, R. L., & Shadle, M. F. (2007). Teaching multiwriting; Researching and
   composing with multiple genres, media, disciplines, and cultures. Carbondale,
   IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

                                                                                                 129
Collins

Elbow, P. (2002). Exploring problems with "personal writing" and "expressiv-
   ism. The Selected Works of Peter Elbow. Retrieved from http://works.bepress.
   com/peter_elbow/16

Elbow, P. (1991). Reflections on academic discourse: How it relates to freshmen
   and cColleagues. College English, 53(2), 135-155.

Fishman, S. M., & McCarthy, L. P. (1992). Is expressivism dead? Reconsidering
   its romantic roots and its relation to social constructionism. College English,
   54(6), 647-661.

Freisinger, R. R. (1980). Cross-disciplinary writing workshops: Theory and
   practice. College English, 42(2), 154-166.

Gradin, S. L. (1995). Romancing rhetorics: Social expressivist perspectives on the
   teaching of writing. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Harris, J. (2006). Rewriting: How to do things with exts. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New
   York: Routledge.

Macrorie, K. (1974). A vulnerable teacher. Rochelle Park, NJ: Hayden.
Macrorie, K. (1985). Telling writing (4th ed.). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Monson, A. (2010). Vanishing point: Not a memoir. Minneapolis, MN: Gray-

   wolf.
Obama, B. (2011, January 14). The Washington Post. Retrieved from http://voic-

   es.washingtonpost.com/44/2011/01/obama-in-tucson-full-text-of-p.html
O'Reilly, M. R. (2009). The peaceable classroom. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Yagelski, R. P. (2009). A thousand writers writing: Seeking change through the

   radical practice of writing as a way of being. English Education, 42(1), 6-28.

130
"IS IT POSSIBLE TO TEACH
WRITING SO THAT PEOPLE STOP
KILLING EACH OTHER?"
NONVIOLENCE, COMPOSITION,
AND CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM

      Scott Wagar
      Miami University

        Can we say that our pedagogies are not about expressivist writing or about
        entrance to the academy but about learning how to live?

                                                        --Michael Blitz and C. Mark Hurlbert

        Perhaps what I am encouraging ... is Inner Peace Studies, which asks Who
        am I? Am I at peace with who I am? Who are these other people? What is the
        nature of community? What do they believe, and why? Is it possible for us to
        work together?

                                                                          --Mary Rose O'Reilley

    A small, quiet movement within composition studies, focusing on connec-
tions between nonviolence and the teaching of writing, was arguably established
by Mary Rose O'Reilley's 1993 The Peaceable Classroom, in which O'Reilley
asked "Is it possible to teach English so that people stop killing each other?" In
O'Reilley's wake have come works such as Michael Blitz and C. Mark Hurlbert's
Letters for the Living: Teaching Writing in a Violent Age (1998) and essays by com-
positionists such as Sara Dalmas Jonsberg and G. Lynn Nelson. Such attempts
to link composition and nonviolence have often been characterized by advocacy
of what might be termed an expressivist approach to writing pedagogy. And yet
a primary element of the notion of nonviolence is, of course, the relationship
between self and other. How, then, could expressivist writing, with its focus
on the personal, possibly lead to less violent ways of being in society? Below, I
attempt to explain this seeming paradox by arguing that attempts at nonviolent
composition provide signal examples of critical expressivism (a term I want to
embrace, at least in the present context)--an approach foregrounding writing
that is simultaneously based on personal experience and intimately connected
with how individuals relate to one another.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.09  131
Wagar

NONVIOLENCE, THE PERSONAL, AND THE SOCIAL

    To locate the origins of nonviolent sympathies within rhetoric and language
studies, we might go at least as far back as Kenneth Burke, whose early cold
war Rhetoric of Motives is offered as a small gesture "to counteract the torrents
of ill will" he observed in the world of his time, sentiments that drove him ever
more to believe "that books should be written for tolerance and contemplation"
(1969, p. xv). Burke takes pains, for instance, to point out the irony of war,
"that ultimate disease of cooperation:" a thousand instances of rhetorically in-
duced coordination must occur to make a single destructive martial act possible
(1969, p. 22). Elizabeth Ervin argues, meanwhile, for the impact of Wayne C.
Booth's World War II experiences on his development as a rhetorical theorist,
and quotes a late piece of his writing: "human love, human joining, `critical
understanding' as a loving effort to understand--that has always been at the
center [of my endeavors]'" (Booth, as quoted in Ervin, 2003, p. 190). But in the
contemporary era of composition and rhetoric, O'Reilley's The Peaceable Class-
room is probably the best-known work explicitly focused on nonviolent English
teaching, and not only because of its very quotable articulation (borrowed from
Ihab Hassan, one of O'Reilley's graduate-school professors) of the "Is it possible
... ?" question. Much of the book's impact stems from O'Reilley's honesty about
her life, about the situatedness of her perspective on nonviolence, and about her
failures. Relatable yet provocative, and endlessly quotable--"bad teaching ... is
soul murder" (1993, p. 47)--the book follows O'Reilley's attempts to enact a
pedagogy of nonviolence, from the beginning of her career in the Vietnam era
up through the then-recent first gulf war. The primary foundational element of
her pedagogy is teaching personal writing (in perhaps all three of the senses artic-
ulated by Peter Elbow in this volume) to her students: "First of all, as teachers in
the humanities, we encourage students to explore the inner life" (1993, p. 32).
But--and this point is crucial in a discussion of critical expressivism--O'Reilley
insists that

         our second goal should be to help the student bring his sub-
         jective vision into community, checking his insights against
         those of allies and adversaries, against the subjective vision of
         the texts he studies, and in general against the history of ideas.
         The classroom, then, must be a meeting place for both silent
         meditation and verbal witness, of interplay between interiori-
         ty and community. (1993, p. 32)

    She goes on to write that "finding voice [in writing]--let's be clear--is a po-
litical act ... it involves not only self-understanding, but the ability to transmit

132
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

that self-understanding to others. Learning to write so that you will be read,
therefore, vitalizes both the self and the community" (1993, p. 58). Preemp-
tively asking the question her reader might be formulating--"What Does This
Have to do With Nonviolence?"--O'Reilley argues that "war begins in banality,
the suppression of the personal and idiosyncratic" (1993, p. 59) and in linguis-
tic abstractions such as "sacrifice" and "glory" (drawing on terms taken from
Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms) (1993, p. 60). Abstractions have their place,
she notes, "particularly in manipulating broad areas of cultural consensus," but
"before we buy into an abstraction, we need to know what we think" (1993,
p. 60). Here again she writes of the connection between the personal and the
communal, but in this case, rather than focusing on how the community must
bring the individual vision into check, O'Reilley reverses the argument: social-
ly-constructed, and possibly dangerous, abstractions must be checked against
individual perspectives and experiences.

    Claims about the importance of the individual viewpoint for nonviolence
are also advanced in Michael Blitz and C. Mark Hurlbert's 1998 Letters for the
Living: Teaching Writing in a Violent Age. Blitz and Hurlbert suggest that their
work "is one attempt to peel away some theoretical abstractions so that we might
better understand the personal and culture implications of what each student
is telling us, the uniqueness of each student, of each life. No one encounters
violence or peace in general. The experience of each is always unique" (Blitz
& Hurlbert, 1998, p. 21). With Blitz and Hurlbert, unlike in The Peaceable
Classroom, samples of personal experience-based student texts make up a sizable
percentage of the book; it is this direct inclusion of student writing that perhaps
most distinguishes Letters for the Living as a "composition" work (despite her
interest in the teaching of writing, O'Reilley might be said to identify more
as a literature scholar and poet than a compositionist). The book, however, is
similar to O'Reilley's in a couple of key ways: it foregrounds a writing pedagogy
that asks students to bring their subjective experiences into conversation with a
community; and it is itself written in a highly personal style, although structured
mainly as a chronological transcript of an ongoing email exchange between the
co-authors. Blitz and Hurlbert muse about the role of violence--and peace--in
their students' lives as well as their own. The three main textual threads running
through the book--the authors' messages to each other, their students' writing
(mostly embedded in the email message texts), and the jointly-authored com-
mentary in between--add up to a more intense version of the familiar back-
and-forth between student writing and researcher commentary often seen in
composition studies literature. In some sections, the effect is soothing, as these
two friends trade late night messages. But in any given chapter, the reader is nev-
er far from a jarring personal account from a student: a neighborhood murder,

                                                                                                 133
Wagar

family violence, a friend's suicide. In this sense, Letters for the Living embodies
its twin subjects: the violence of students' worlds and the world at large, and the
moments of peace that Blitz and Hurlbert maintain are possible to find in our
lives as well as in our students' writing and our own.

    This focus on peace, not just violence, and on the personal also distinguishes
another notable contribution to this conversation about composition's possible
relationship with nonviolence: a 2000 special issue of English Journal, entitled "A
Curriculum of Peace," that emerged in the wake of the 1999 Columbine High
School shootings. Though English Journal is primarily aimed at secondary school
instructors, this issue includes contributions from college compositionists Sara
Dalmas Jonsberg, Marsha Lee Holmes, and G. Lynn Nelson, among other uni-
versity instructors. (Sadly, of course, prominent college shootings such as those
at Virginia Tech would soon take place after this issue appeared.)

    Nelson insists that a "personal story" must be at the heart of any attempt
to work toward peace through teaching writing: "Deny me my stories, as the
modern dominant culture does, and I will eventually turn to the language of
violence" (2000, p. 43). Indeed, he insists that his writing classes and workshops
at all levels are built around variations on the simple injunction, "tell me a story"
(2000, p. 45)--but, citing O'Reilley's concept of "deep listening," he also em-
phasizes the importance of fostering audience attentiveness in those classes. That
is, stories do not achieve their full value when they are mere expression; they
have to be heard, not just told, and in the classroom this means that a commu-
nity of listeners must be constructed, including students and the instructor. So
the personal cannot be disconnected from the social.

    Jonsberg, meanwhile, invokes this connection in her own way, insisting on
the importance for nonviolent teaching of respecting what each individual stu-
dent brings to the classroom and to her or his writing and reading. Respect in
this context is

         born of understanding first the source of a reader's unique vi-
         sion--seeing that there are reasons behind a particular reading
         of a text, reasons of experience, gender, religion, cultural, and/
         or linguistic background. With that introspective understand-
         ing comes an awareness that others will read differently, out
         of their experiences and genders and religious training and so
         on. (2000, p. 30)

    The "unique vision" of the individual, then, can be simultaneously honored
for its own value and understood as a perspective to which social factors make
an absolutely crucial contribution. Further, "introspective understanding" leads
not to self-absorption but to knowledge of a commonality with others: other

134
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

people are different, paradoxically, for the same reasons I am "myself "--because
of personal experiences and a mix of socializing elements.

    Jonsberg thus follows O'Reilley, Blitz and Hurlbert, and Nelson in arguing
for a pedagogy that gives pride of place to the stories and voices of individual
students, without in any way discounting the importance of the social (that
is, fellow students and the teacher, but also the world at large). Below, I offer
pedagogical possibilities in presenting a small toolbox of projects and practices
that might aid the composition instructor inspired by nonviolent principles. But
first I want to point out another of Jonsberg's arguments that highlights a second
key commonality in the work of many compositionists of nonviolence. Jonsberg
suggests provocatively that "WHAT we teach doesn't matter half so much as
HOW we teach it. WHO we are, what values we model, has far more effect on
our students than the words they may read or hear" (2000, p. 28). For Jonsberg,
a posture of absolute respect and acceptance on the teacher's part is critical; she
strives for a classroom where "all members are welcome in the fullness of their
being" (2000, p. 30). Nelson's valuation of deep listening seems to arise from a
similar place. O'Reilley bluntly argues that the "adversarial stance" (1993, p. 30)
of many traditional teaching methods leads to "academic brutalization" (1993,
p. 31), and that the little things we do matter, down to our comments on stu-
dent papers: "rude and demoralizing labeling of student work" is one example of
how students are "insulted, bullied, and turned into objects," planting "seeds of
violence. It follows, therefore, that the first step in teaching peace is to examine
the ways in which we are already teaching conflict" (O'Reilley, 1993, p. 31).

TEACHERLY REFLECTION

    But how can we conduct such an examination? O'Reilley's and Blitz and
Hurlbert's longer texts point toward an answer: as teachers we should reflect
with seriousness and honesty on our own lives, considering how they connect
to and influence what we do in the classroom. Blitz and Hurlbert claim in their
introductory chapter that "writing and living and teaching are not separable.
As you will see, our lives are in this composition [Letters for the Living] as our
students' lives are in their compositions" (1998, p. 2). And indeed, even though
their book is overwhelmingly focused on their experiences with their writing
students, a reader also witnesses the two teachers wrestle with fears for their
own children; relate stories of troubled visits to dying hometowns; and recall
quiet moments when they sat peacefully as friends, staring into the night. These
details are offered not gratuitously but as part and parcel of Blitz and Hurlbert's
project of wondering how they might help their composition students navigate
violent landscapes; one gets the impression that these teachers are better able to

                                                                                                 135
Wagar

sympathetically encounter their students' writings by reflecting on their own
values, goals, and experiences vis-à-vis peace and violence. Their work, then,
grows out of a desire to "stop pretending that that our real lives are secondary
or irrelevant to the work of teaching" (1998, p. 2). O'Reilley, for her part, has
followed up The Peaceable Classroom with two similarly personal and candid vol-
umes (1998's Radical Presence: Teaching as Contemplative Practice and 2005's The
Garden at Night: Burnout and Breakdown in the Teaching Life) focusing on teach-
ers' lives as they relate to the classroom. In the view of these compositionists of
nonviolence, critical expressivism isn't just for our students; it's for us too. Any
teacher who's been unable to banish from her head a negative comment from a
student evaluation, or been troubled for days afterward about a testy exchange in
the classroom, knows that our teaching hours influence our non-teaching ones.
But a moment's thought will reveal that the influence runs in the other direction
as well, and the critical expressivism of Blitz and Hurlbert and O'Reilley's own
writing helps us consider some of the connections between violence, nonvio-
lence, and what we bring into the classroom from outside it.

    Part of what we bring into the classroom, of course, is our personal sense of
highest meaning and purpose, of our connection with the rest of the universe
and how we might act to deepen that connection: what I will call our spiritu-
ality. In considering the history of nonviolence, we do a disservice to figures
such as King and Gandhi if we forget how entwined their spiritual ideals were
with their commitments to turning the other cheek. Of the compositionists of
nonviolence, O'Reilley in particular is unabashed about the influence of her
spiritual beliefs and practices, to the point where Peter Elbow, in his foreword
to The Peaceable Classroom, classifies the book's subfield as spirituality (xi). Ear-
lier, I cited O'Reilley's claim that "finding voice [in writing] ... is a political
act"--but here I want to note her parallel claim, given equal weight in the text,
that "finding voice is a spiritual event" (61), the province of prophets; and a
"prophet, or a prophetic writer, calls us to a higher standard of what we could
be. That's simply a prophet's job description" (62). In this view, the spiritual and
the political are as tied together as the personal and the political: an individual's
spiritual experience--which may be triggered by finding voice in writing--gives
rise to a call for the betterment of the community. Certainly, O'Reilley seems
to suggest that this pattern holds for her. Each of her books on the teaching life
is substantially concerned with her experiences as an eclectic mix of Quaker,
Buddhist, and Roman Catholic, and how these traditions motivate her to be a
particular kind of person, writer, and teacher (a nonviolent one, among other
things). She notes in The Peaceable Classroom that her purpose in highlighting
her spirituality is not to forward "dogma" but instead to foreground the impor-
tance of "discipline: a way of being-in-time that these traditions propose" (73).

136
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

Variously referred to by O'Reilley as contemplation, deep listening, presence,
mindfulness, or being awake, such discipline--which for O'Reilley is particular-
ly influenced by the teachings of the Vietnamese Zen practitioner Thich Nhat
Hanh1--helps a teacher to actually be there with students, paying full attention
in the given situation: in the classroom, during office hours, while planning class
or commenting on papers.

    "Spirituality" in this sense, then, involves not so much a set of beliefs as a set
of practices and ways of understanding, and relating to, others and the world.
For O'Reilley, we know that the frameworks of Buddhism, Quakerism and Ca-
tholicism feed these ways of being. Blitz and Hurlbert are quieter about their
relation to established spiritual traditions, though Hurlbert occasionally quotes
the wisdom of a rabbi neighbor, and fondly remembers the "peace be with you"
of the Catholic masses of his childhood. But in any case I think that we can see,
in these teachers' deep concern for student well-being and their intense personal
reflection, a commitment to the same values that spirituality-in-education pro-
ponent Parker J. Palmer approvingly attributes to O'Reilley in his foreword to
Radical Presence: "seeing one's self without blinking, offering hospitality to the
alien other, having compassion for suffering, being present and being real" (ix).
When Blitz and Hurlbert ask in Letters for the Living, "what if ... peace depends
upon a constant, incremental, local, personal vigil?" (1998, p. 56), they seem
not far from the mindfulness-based notion of "being peace" forwarded by Thich
Nhat Hanh in books such as Being Peace and Peace is Every Step. And at the same
time they hint at why their pedagogy is based on personal writing: the "local,
personal vigil" is what they encourage in their students' experience-based com-
positions, and exemplify in their own prose in Letters for the Living.

    Nhat Hanh's notion of interbeing also seems worth mentioning here; it's the
idea that every seemingly separate thing in the universe is in fact, from a certain
perspective, connected in a web of interdependence. For example, the computer
keyboard I'm typing on wouldn't exist without the sun and soil that helped grow
the food for its designers; or without the ancient creatures whose compressed
remains created the raw material for the petroleum-based keys; or without the
inventors of the letters represented on those keys; and so on and so on. Accord-
ing to Nhat Hanh, to really understand the theory we have to be able to see its
truth at an intuitive level, not just logically. But I think understanding it logical-
ly can still be valuable for a project involving composition and nonviolence. As
teachers and scholars of language and writing, we have little problem accepting
a similar theory about texts: any given book, for instance, is written in an alpha-
bet the author did not create, using a language of words with rich histories and
ever-shifting meanings, and indebted to myriad other texts and thinkers--either
implicitly or explicitly--in its allusions, quotations, adherence or lack thereof

                                                                                                 137
Wagar

to genre conventions, and so on. So we may be especially well-positioned to
accept a theory of interbeing. Our familiarity with Burke's notions of rhetorical
identification and consubstantiality may also help us appreciate a perspective
highlighting connection. It's important that we not understand interbeing in a
manner that denies the existence of difference.2 Rather, in the Buddhist tradi-
tion of embracing paradox, we see that from one perspective things are separate,
whereas from another (perhaps more profound) viewpoint they're inextricably
connected. My point here is that if one of our operative frameworks--or ter-
ministic screens, to use Burke--as teachers is a perspective of interbeing, we
may be bolstered in our efforts toward nonviolent teaching: simply speaking, we
come to understand that hurting others means, at a fundamental level, hurting
ourselves. And it's not hard to see the connection with critical expressivism, if by
this term we mean the notion that in writing (from) the self we must inevitably
encounter, and consider our relationship with, others and society. As Blitz and
Hurlbert suggest, quoting Nel Noddings, "We need to create curricula which
include ample `opportunity to study response, beauty, and almost mystical in-
terdependence'" (1998, p. 83).

    The purpose of this discussion of spirituality is not (necessarily) to call for
teachers to take up any particular reflective practice (e.g., meditation, contem-
plation) but to point out spirituality's importance in one of the most frequently
cited texts (The Peaceable Classroom) among compositionists of nonviolence, as
well as to show how certain spiritual perspectives align with both a nonviolent
stance and a critical expressivist one. More broadly, my focus on teachers' spir-
ituality is one way of calling attention to the importance compositionists of
nonviolence place on the value of deep listening to students and to committed,
continuing self-scrutiny on the part of instructors; for those so inclined, a dis-
cipline of personal spiritual practice may help support such attentive teaching
and honest self-reflection.3 Those for whom the notion of "spirituality" feels
problematic may, of course, draw inspiration from other wells and frame the
values underlying their commitment to nonviolence in different terms--"hu-
manist," "feminist," "progressive," or something else.4 Similarly, in what follows,
I include pedagogical suggestions that might be understood as spiritual by some,
but simply secular by others.

WORKING TOWARD A COMPOSITION CLASSROOM
OF NONVIOLENCE

    To this point I've written mainly about the philosophical perspectives in-
forming attempts at nonviolent composition. Here I'd like to talk a bit more
practically, discussing possibilities for assignments, activities, and classroom

138
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

practices drawn from or inspired by the work of compositionists of nonvio-
lence as well as by the notion of critical expressivism. Obviously, composition
is taught in a wide variety of contexts, and my suggestions encompass first-year
as well as advanced composition courses, themed and non-themed courses. This
examination is certainly far from comprehensive and interested readers are, of
course, encouraged to consult cited works for further information.

Longer Assignments

    If we strive to work toward peace in our teaching of composition, we might
ask students to write about violence and nonviolence explicitly, or we might ask
them to focus on these issues in less direct ways. In attending to the personal and
the local when thinking about where peace, and violence, reside, Blitz and Hurl-
bert detail a project that asked students to reflect upon and research various as-
pects of their cities and neighborhoods and compile a collaborative class "book."
For the first part of this assignment (the focus of an entire chapter in Letters for
the Living), Blitz's students, most of them based in New York City, corresponded
with Hurlbert's rural Pennsylvania students to describe their respective cities
and neighborhoods and their lives there. Blitz and Hurlbert write, "in every
case" students reported this letter-writing aspect of the course as their favorite
(1998, p. 96). The potential value of such a place-based approach for students'
critical rhetorical understanding is articulated by David Seitz elsewhere in this
volume. Further, a local approach is in keeping with the work of some writers in
ecocomposition, a subdiscipline that seems allied with composition and nonvi-
olence; for instance, Derek Owens offers a "place portrait" assignment (2001, p.
30) designed to help students think about their immediate environments. Eco-
compositionist Christian R. Weisser, meanwhile, asks students to write a paper
about their "relationships with non-human others" (2001, p. 92), an assignment
certainly relevant to present purposes since a robust vision of nonviolence would
extend to nonhuman animals as well as the natural world at large.5

    Compositionist Michael Eckert, author of "Writing for Peace in the Compo-
sition Classroom," asks students to think more directly about peace and violence
as well as about the role of rhetoric in both when he assigns a paper focusing
on "personal argument style" in which "students tell a story about a time when
they personally tried to make peace" (Writing for Peace). Marsha Lee Holmes,
arguing that meeting violence head on is an effective strategy for understanding
and ameliorating it, suggests having students focus on their experiences with vi-
olence in popular culture such as music, television, and film. Citing Ann E. Ber-
thoff, Holmes believes that such an approach is pedagogically effective because
it "begin[s] with where they are" (as quoted in Holmes, 2000, p. 105), calling

                                                                                                 139
Wagar

on texts with which students are intimately familiar to allow for deeper thought
about students' relationships with those materials and with the various kinds of
violence they represent (physical violence, to be sure, but also mental violence as
well as racism, sexism, homophobia, and the like).

Informal Writing

    Perhaps unsurprisingly, O'Reilley is an unabashed fan of freewriting, which
for her specifically means "automatic" writing or writing without stopping or
editing, not just informal writing in general. Sometimes calling it "prewriting,"
O'Reilley (1993) cites the practice as one of the key "tool[s] of nonviolent disci-
pline in the writing class" (p. 43). She goes so far as to suggest that in outlining
"what we now think of as a process model of teaching writing," early freewriting
proponents "Macrorie, Elbow and their colleagues were laying out, I believe, a
pedagogy of nonviolence" (pp. 38-39); in other words, modern composition,
with a focus on process almost a given, is in some ways inherently a nonvio-
lentist enterprise. For O'Reilley, freewriting moves students away from being
"generic products" formed by years of conformist socialization: "in prewriting
... we begin to listen to voices inside. They may surprise us" (p. 44). So far,
so expressivist. But characteristically, O'Reilley goes on to connect interior and
exterior: the inner voices accessed through freewriting may also "surprise the
world, which badly needs new ideas" (p. 44). However, she does not believe in
surprising the world with raw freewriting, preferring to employ some type of
intermediate "`focus' exercise that allows the reader to revisit the material, shape,
amplify, cut, explain, and edit ... thus, we teach both appropriate sharing and
appropriate restraint" (p. 51). Journals, long a mainstay of composition courses,
could serve well as a medium for such "sharing" in a course working toward non-
violence, motivating regular writing practice and self-reflection--on the part of
teachers as well as students.

Readings

    The appropriate role of writings generated by authors other than the students
in the class has long been debated in composition; although it's probably safe
to say that most composition classes include outside readings, the issue is worth
raising again in the context of a critical expressivist pedagogy of nonviolence,
at once concerned with students' personal stories and with an outside "topic"
(nonviolence/peace). However, the seeming conflict need not be. Students can
certainly respond from experience to outside readings, and these could be texts
with or without overt nonviolent perspectives; in fact, the argument could be

140
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

made that a critical expressivist approach would--or should--by definition
put students' own experiences into dialogue and tension with existing texts and
cultural conversations. O'Reilley reports that her "peaceable classroom" exper-
iment began with a literature course on War and the Modern Imagination fea-
turing authors such as Hemingway and Vonnegut (1993, p. 20); as mentioned,
Holmes calls on familiar texts from students' pop-culture experiences; and Blitz
and Hurlbert's Interstate Neighborhood Project occurred in the context of the
two teachers' research writing courses, where students were responsible for find-
ing and using outside sources. However, teachers can expect challenges--for
instance, Blitz and Hurlbert (1998) report rather glumly on a widespread failure
in their students' work that semester to "make connections between the insights
they created about their own lives during the letter writing in the first half of
the semester and their research" about their neighborhoods detailed in the final
class book project (p. 128). Eckert (Writing for Peace), for his part, details two
assignments built mainly around outside texts: one asks students to research a
"peace hero" (e.g., Jane Addams) and to write a Rogerian-style encomium about
that figure for a skeptical audience; while the other requires a comparative-con-
trastive argument about two literary representations of "nonviolent sentiment."
Though these projects lack overt expressivist elements, we can certainly imagine
that they might be modified to include experiential input from students, includ-
ing in accompanying writer's-letter-type reflections.

CLASSROOM PRACTICES AND PERSPECTIVES

    What other practices and attitudes might characterize a writing classroom of
nonviolence? Another standby of many classrooms, the peer-response group, is
likely to be one. O'Reilley (1993) writes:

         I think the writing group--as envisioned by contemporary
         writing theorists--functions specifically as a peacemaking
         strategy: it encourages us to listen to each other and figure out
         ways of criticizing without inflicting terminal injury, and it
         helps us learn to accept criticism without rancor. The writing
         group forces us to stake out the terrain between our own and
         other people's view of reality; hence, it reinforces both person-
         al identity and the sense of relationship to a community. (p.
         33)

    Blitz and Hurlbert (1998) summarize their teaching style thusly: "A work-
shop pedagogy: an organic, creative, socially responsible pedagogy" (p. 138). So
yet again, in this view, critical expressivism and nonviolent pedagogy are under-

                                                                                                 141
Wagar

stood as intertwined.
    There is also the question--hinted at above in Eckert's "peacemaker" assign-

ment--of how to approach the concepts of rhetoric and argument themselves
with students. Although some scholars, such as Sally Miller Gearhart (1979),
have provocatively suggested that "any intent to persuade is an act of violence"
(p. 195), others, such as Barry Kroll (2008) and Richard Fulkerson (2005), have
proposed that we instead re-envision rhetoric in different, more peaceable terms.
Kroll, in a 2008 College Composition and Communiation article, introduces writ-
ing students to possible parallels between the martial art of aikido--which fo-
cuses on meeting physical attacks with minimal force and an intention to do no
harm--and more harmonious ways of arguing with adversaries; he suggests that
taking such a rhetorical approach may be akin to "practicing the art of peace" (p.
468).6 Fulkerson, meanwhile, surveying feminist critiques of argument, wonders
if rhetoric could be reconceptualized as "partnership rather than battle" (and,
relevantly for a discussion of critical expressivism, notes that his attempts to
encourage students in this direction include requests for personal experience
as part of their research-based arguments).7 Teachers seeking shorter activities
along these lines might ask students to play around with metaphor in the vein
of M.J. Hardman (1998), who has suggested possible alternatives, drawn from
realms such as gardening and cooking, to violent and war-based metaphors; for
instance, "This is a battle over principles, not just opinions" can become "This is
rooted in principles, not just opinions" (p. 43) and "You can't mount a successful
attack if you're afraid to speak up" can be reconceived as "You can't have a gour-
met meal if you're afraid to turn on the stove" (p. 45).

    Finally, as I've pointed out, many compositionists of nonviolence make per-
sistent cases for the importance of our quality of attention with students, and
even mundane pedagogical practices can take on new meaning when viewed
through this kind of lens. In her fellow teachers' meetings with students, O'Reil-
ley (1998) witnesses deep presence, respect, and a gift for cultivating students'
own understanding of their experiences: "I see my colleagues practicing this pa-
tient discernment as seriously as any Zen master, though they may call it simply
draft conferencing" (p. 3). I'm enamored of the idea of using a "back-and-forth"
attendance-keeping sheet for every student: each class session, the sheets are
distributed, and each student signs in on her or his sheet with some kind of very
brief note or question to the teacher, either formal or informal. The instructor
collects the sheets and writes a very brief response to each student before the next
class, when the cycle begins again. The response process can take as little as five
minutes per class for the teacher, and a written dialogue between the student and
teacher is established for the entire semester, ideally fostering a greater sense of
connection.8 Other daily practices matter too: in Letters for the Living, Blitz and

142
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

Hurlburt (1998) quote a holiday card from a former student, Jeremy, who shares
the good news of a new job as a Youth Division caseworker, noting that in his
employment interview he cited Blitz as the teacher who "made the most serious
impression" on him during college. Jeremy at first found "weird--almost corny"
Blitz's daily practice of greeting the class by saying "I'm glad you're here." But
Jeremy "started to admire" the practice because he "could tell [Blitz] meant it,"
and he emphasizes the practice's importance to other students by recounting the
time Blitz forgot to greet the class and was prompted by "that girl in the front" of
the room. "So you see," the student concludes, "you made a difference to me and
so I want to wish you happy holidays and God bless you" (pp. 65-66). Surely all
of us can work at making at least this kind of difference as teachers.

CONCLUSION

        Peace is present right here and now, in ourselves and in everything we do and
        see. The question is whether or not we are in touch with it.

                                                                             --Thich Nhat Hanh

    My goal here has been to highlight some of the core claims of composition-
ists of nonviolence, and in so doing to argue that notions of nonviolence in
composition and critical expressivism can be mutually illuminating. Although I
agree with much of what these teachers have to say, I don't mean to present their
ideas unproblematically. It's worth noting that Blitz and Hurlbert and O'Reilley
in particular do not sugarcoat the accounts of their attempts at the peaceable
teaching of writing. But for my part, in the limited space of this essay, I've largely
played Elbow's believing game, and I've certainly left unaddressed many con-
cerns that might be raised about appropriate goals for teaching writing, politics
and religion in the classroom, and issues of terminology raised by Elbow himself
in this collection. So too has the lack of space prevented me from sufficiently
examining the influence of feminist, virtue, and care theorists on pedagogies of
nonviolence. And more activism-oriented critical pedagogues and purist propo-
nents of nonviolence may feel that the approaches discussed here don't go far
enough in the direction of social action and explication of nonviolent philoso-
phy. Certainly, these are all points worthy of discussion.

    On a more positive note, readers may have noticed that many of the sugges-
tions here don't necessarily lead us very far astray from where we already are in
terms of the philosophy and practice of teaching writing. This, then, is another
of my goals: to show what we're already doing right, and to hearten writing
teachers by suggesting that many mainstay activities of our classrooms can be
seen as peaceable (and critical expressvist) if viewed through the kind of lens of-

                                                                                                 143
Wagar

fered here. I'm pointing out, in other words, that we might consciously reframe
our work in nonviolent terms. I want to appeal finally to Jonsberg's notion of a
"hidden curriculum of peace" (p. 31) in which there might or might not be overt
mention of nonviolence but behind which there's certainly a reflective teacher,
searching within--and allowing students to do the same--in order to foster
connections without.

NOTES

1. English educators who have read bell hooks' Teaching to Transgress will recognize
Nhat Hanh's name since she, like O'Reilley, identifies his philosophy as foundation-
al for her, both personally and as an educator.

2. Since I've mentioned Burke here, I'd like to point out (especially in the context of
a conversation on nonviolence) that we've been reminded by scholars such as Krista
Ratcliffe (2005) of the importance of keeping difference firmly in mind when we
invoke notions of identification; if we neglect difference, we may neglect those most
marginalized or othered by it. In his essay elsewhere in this collection, Eric Leake
similarly considers some of the complexities and paradoxes inherent in concepts of
identification and empathy as they relate to self, other, and difference. I also want
to acknowledge that contemporary "spirituality" as a construct has come under crit-
icism for reasons related to questions of self and other: individualistic spirituality,
increasingly privatized and unmoored from institutions such as churches that have
traditionally been concerned with social justice, may breed quietism and narcissism
and allow injustice and inequality to grow. In fact, this line of argument--advanced
in works such as Jeremy Carrette and Richard King's 2005 Selling Spirituality--has
definite parallels with some of the most well-known claims against expressivism in
composition studies. It's well worth noting here, however, that Carrette and King
single out Nhat Hanh as a contemporary spiritual figure who bucks this narcissistic
trend, instead advocating a socially-engaged spirituality.

3. Those for whom a discussion of spirituality qua spirituality resonates may wish to
investigate the interesting and continuing conversation on this topic within compo-
sition and rhetoric. Among the sources I'd recommend would be the edited collec-
tions The Spiritual Side of Writing (1997), The Academy and the Possibility of Belief:
Essays on Intellectual and Spiritual Life (2000) and Presence of Mind: Writing and the
Domain Beyond the Cognitive (1994); College Composition and Communication arti-
cles by Ann E. Berthoff et al. ("Interchanges: Spiritual Sites of Composing," 1994)
and Gesa E. Kirsch ("From Introspection to Action: Connecting Spirituality and
Civic Engagement," 2009); and numerous essays from the Journal for the Assembly of
Expanded Perspectives on Learning (JAEPL), such as Briggs, Schunter, and Melvin's
"In the Name of the Spirit" (2000).

144
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

4. As scholar Ursula King (2008) notes, "some people may ... reject the language
of spirituality, but may nevertheless espouse what one might call spiritual values
through commitment in their lives to care and concern for others, or to such values
as social justice, work for racial and gender equality, or for peace making in their
communities" (p. 111).

5. Weisser (2001) also calls for the development of an "ecological self " (Weisser 86)
in scholars' conceptions of identity, suggesting that ecology be taken not just as a
metaphor for writing and knowledge but considered literally to include all aspects of
our environments. In an assertion easy to link with Nhat Hanh's interbeing, Weiss-
er writes, "ecological selves perceive their interconnection with others and compre-
hend the degree to which their own identities are inseparable from the non-human
world--a recognition that the material world `out there' is part of our identity `in
here'" (p. 86).

6. Relevant to my earlier arguments here, Kroll (2008) repeatedly notes the impor-
tance of spirituality in the development and practice of aikido, finally suggesting
in his concluding paragraph that more peaceable ways of arguing are in line with
aikido's insistence that "physical goals and ethical/spiritual ideals are enacted simul-
taneously" (p. 468).

7. Somewhat ironically, however, Fulkerson (2005) is quoted by Chris Warnick else-
where in this volume referring to arguments against expressivism as "poundings at
the cannons of postmodernism" (p. 655, as quoted in Warnick). It's worth pointing
out that the article Warnick cites shows that Fulkerson doesn't ally himself philo-
sophically with expressivism despite his advocacy of first-person accounts of person-
al experience in student argumentative writing.

8. Thanks to C.J. Opperthauser for introducing me to this idea.

REFERENCES

Berthoff, A. E., Daniell, B., Campbell, J., Swearingen, C. J., Moffett, J. (1994).
   Interchanges: spiritual sites of composing. College Composition and Commu-
   nication, 45(2), 237-263.

Blitz, M., & Hurlbert, C. M. (1998). Letters for the living: Teaching writing in a
   violent age. Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Brand, A. G., & Graves, R. L. (Eds.). (1994). Presence of mind: Writing and the
   domain behind the cognitive. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Briggs, L., Schunter, F., & Melvin, R. (2000-2001). In the name of the spirit.
   Journal of the Assembly for Expanded Perspectives on Learning, 6, 20-28.

Buley-Meissner, M. L., Thompson, & Tan, E. B. (2000). The academy and the
   possibility of belief: Essays on intellectual and spiritual life. (Critical education
   and ethics). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.

                                                                                                 145
Wagar

Burke, K. (1969). A rhetoric of motives. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Carrette, J. R., & King, R. (2005). Selling spirituality: The silent takeover of reli-

   gion. New York: Routledge.
Eckert, M. (n.d.). Writing for peace in the composition classroom. Retrieved from

   Journal for the Study of Peace and Conflict 1999-2000 Web site: http://jspc.
   library.wisc.edu/issues/1999-2000/article5.html
Elbow, P. (1993). Foreword. In M. R. O'Reilley, The peaceable classroom (pp. ix-
   xiv). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Ervin, E. (2003). Rhetoricians at war and peace. In T. Enos, & K. D. Miller
   (Eds.), Beyond postprocess and postmodernism: Essays on the spaciousness of rhet-
   oric (pp. 181-196). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Foehr, R. P., & Schiller, S. A. (Eds.). (1997). The spiritual side of writing. Ports-
   mouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Fulkerson, R. (2005). Composition at the turn of the twenty-first century. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication, 56(4), 654-687.
Fulkerson, R. (1996). Transcending our conception of argument in light of fem-
   inist critiques. Argumentation and Advocacy, 32(4).
Gearhart, S. Miller. (1979). The womanization of rhetoric. Women's Studies In-
   ternational Quarterly, 2, 195-201.
Hardman, M. J. (1998). Metaphorical alternatives to violence--Report from a
   workshop. Women and Language, 21(2), 43-47.
Holmes, M. Lee. (2000). "Get real: Violence in popular culture and in English
   class. English Journal, 89(5), 104-110.
hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New
   York: Routledge.
Jonsberg, S. D. (2000). A place for every student. English Journal, 89(5), 27-
   34.
King, U. (2008). The search for spirituality: Our global quest for a spiritual life.
   New York: Bluebridge.
Kirsch, G. E. (2009). From introspection to action: Connecting spirituality and
   civic engagement. College Composition and Communication, 60(4), W1-W15.
Kroll, B. M. (2008). Arguing with adversaries: Aikido, rhetoric, and the art of
   peace. College Composition and Communication, 59(3), 451-472.
Ratcliffe, K. (2005). Rhetorical listening: Identification, gender, whiteness. (Studies
   in rhetorics and feminisms). Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Nelson, G. L. (2000). Warriors with words: Toward a post-Columbine writing
   curriculum. English Journal, 89(5), 42-46.
Nhat Hanh, T. (1987). Being peace. Berkeley, CA: Parallax.
Nhat Hanh, T. (1993). Interbeing: Fourteen guidelines for engaged Buddhism.
   Berkeley, CA: Parallax.

146
                            "Is it Possible to Teach Writing So That People Stop Killing Each Other?"

Nhat Hanh, T. (1991). Peace is every step: The path of mindfulness in everyday life.
   New York: Bantam.

O'Reilley, M. R. (1998). Radical presence: Teaching as contemplative practice.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

O'Reilley, M. R. (2005). The garden at night: Burnout and breakdown in the
   teaching life. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

O'Reilley, M. R. (1993). The peaceable classroom. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
   Cook.

Owens, D. (2001). Sustainable composition. In C. R. Weisser, & S. I. Dobrin
   (Eds.), Ecocomposition: Theoretical and pedagogical approaches (pp. 27-37). Al-
   bany, NY: SUNY Press.

Palmer, P. J. (1998). Foreword. (1998). In M. R. O'Reilley, Radical presence:
   Teaching as contemplative practice. Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook.

Weisser, C. R. (2001). Ecocomposition and the greening of identity. In C. R.
   Weisser, & S. I. Dobrin (Eds.), Ecocomposition: Theoretical and pedagogical
   approaches (pp. 81-95). Albany: SUNY Press.

                                                                                                 147
THE (UN)KNOWABLE SELF
AND OTHERS: CRITICAL EMPATHY
AND EXPRESSIVISM

      Eric Leake
      Texas State University

    The common rap against expressivism is that it is solipsistic, endeavoring
to give clear expression to a personal voice speaking an individual truth. In this
understanding of expressivism the social and constitutive qualities of language
are largely ignored in favor of personal revelation. James Berlin aligns what he
calls "expressionistic" rhetorics with Platonism and later also psychoanalysis and
depth psychology (1987). I also align expressivism with psychology, but in this
case current understandings of empathy from developmental and social psychol-
ogy. I do so in order to propose an understanding of critical expressivism that
builds upon critical empathy to examine personal understanding and identity
within a network of social and affective connections.

    Any description of expressivism can be problematic because, like current-tra-
ditional rhetoric, it is a category created to encompass a constellation of more
and less disparate approaches that share some key features. As Peter Elbow notes
in this volume, there are relatively few who claim to be expressivists. The label
is more commonly placed on others and other approaches in a pejorative sense.
The diverse nature of those approaches is recognized by Berlin, who proposes
a spectrum of expressionists, with the "anarchists" of a completely uninhibited
writing on one end, and on the other "the few that are close to the transactional
category--especially to epistemic rhetoric" (1987, pp. 145-146). Those few in-
clude Ken Macrorie, Donald Murray, and Elbow. As Berlin describes their brand
of expressivism:

         These rhetoricians see reality as arising out of the interaction
         of the private vision of the individual and the language used
         to express this vision. In other words, in this view language
         does not simply record the private vision, but becomes
         involved in shaping it. The unique inner glimpse of the
         individual is still primary, but language becomes an element
         in its nurturing. This brand of expressionistic rhetoric finally
         falls short of being epistemic ... because it denies the place of

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.10  149
Leake

         intersubjective, social processes in shaping reality. (1987, p.
         146)

    The role of language in this description adds a social element to what is
otherwise solipsistic. Language is the "shaping" and "nurturing" element of the
private vision of that deeper individual. I am not as certain as Berlin that inter-
subjective and social processes are not already here in the shaping function of
language. Critical empathy offers a way to employ the personal to inform the
intersubjective and social. Indeed, the social qualities and questioning of the
personal in its assumptions and limitations is vital to the practice of critical em-
pathy. This is what needs to be added to an expressivism as described by Berlin:
more awareness and questioning of those social elements and an examination of
the relationships between the personal and the social in forming that not-quite-
so-private understanding of others as well as oneself.

    In this chapter I use theories of perspective-taking and critical empathy to
argue for a critical expressivism that moves beyond the limited personal that
Berlin identified as common to expressionist rhetorics. Berlin's characterizations
are useful in providing a rough map of the historical disciplinary terrain and in
providing terminology for discussing topographical differences. But an updat-
ed understanding of both critical expressivism and empathy provides a more
accurate mapping of the epistemological and rhetorical work of the personal.
Some of these features were already inherent in the work of Elbow and others, as
Berlin notes. Critical empathy makes clearer the social and affective dimensions
of a working critical expressivism. It calls for a critical voice that questions the
circumstances of its own speaking. A critical expressivism, rooted here again
in psychology and critical empathy, offers a social critique of that otherwise
personal voice, its privileges and assumptions, while recognizing that no voice
is purely individual, just as no language is a language of one's own. The vital
questions asked in a critical empathy concern social relations, power differences,
affective connections, and commonalities and differences. Critical expressivism
through critical empathy fosters a voice that speaks in order to simultaneously
ask these questions. It uses knowledge of oneself--and an ongoing critique of
that knowledge--to better understand and communicate with others about one
another and the world.

PERCEIVING SELF AND OTHER

    I begin with theories of identification and perspective-taking as a way to
establish how processes of empathy are always concerned with the tensions and
questions of knowing about the self and others. Personal knowledge, in this

150
                                                                       The (Un)Knowable Self and Others

critical sense, is always more than personal. The tension between self and other
in processes of empathy, and the tendency to shift between those perspectives,
reminds me of F. Scott Fitzgerald's (1945/1994) notion that "the test of a first-
rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in the mind at the same
time, and still retain the ability to function" (p. 520). Processes of empathy may
attempt to keep both self- and other-centered perspectives in mind at the same
time. The relation of these processes, as with definitions of empathy itself, var-
ies according to theorist. Some define empathy to include only other-oriented
perspective-taking (Coplan, 2011), while others define empathy more broadly
to also include self-oriented perspective-taking (Hoffman, 2001). While I align
myself with the broader definition, a review of both types of identification and
the tensions between them helps demonstrate how a critical empathy might
productively foreground such tensions within a critical expressivist framework.

    Developmental psychologist Martin Hoffman defines what he calls "self-fo-
cused role-taking" as "when people observe someone in distress [and] they may
imagine how they would feel in the same situation" (2001, p. 54). For Hoffman,
this involves a similarity in affective experience--essential to his definition of
empathy as "an affective response more appropriate to another's situation than
one's own" (2001, p. 4)--because "if they can do this vividly enough, they may
experience some of the same affect experienced by the victim" (2001, p. 54).
Hoffman's emphasis here is on people in distress, but the same process can apply
to other situations and affective states. He offers self-focused role-taking as a
way to imagine how the self would feel in the other's position. This applies one's
own experiences and background, as well as the narratives and interpretations
that one carries to another affective state and circumstance. The focus remains
throughout on how the self would feel if the self were in that other's position. In
contrast, Hoffman's "other-focused role-taking" occurs when "on learning of an-
other's misfortune, people may focus directly on the victim and imagine how he
feels; and doing this may result in their feeling something of the victim's feeling"
(2001, p. 54). Hoffman allows only that one may feel "something" of anoth-
er's feelings. Other-focused role-taking is much more limited and more difficult
than self-focused role-taking because one can only have partial and largely imag-
ined access to another's affective states and what another makes of those affective
states. At the same time, however, other-focused perspective-taking may provide
greater insight into the causes and consequences of another's affective state (Ma-
travers, 2011). The limits of knowledge about others is also at the core of phi-
losopher Amy Coplan's emphasis on other-oriented perspective-taking. Self-ori-
ented perspective-taking, she argues, "leads to a type of pseudo-empathy since
people often mistakenly believe that it provides them with access to the other's
point of view when it does not" (2011, p. 12). It follows that "one of the benefits

                                                                                                 151
Leake

of drawing attention to the distinction between self-oriented and other-oriented
perspective-taking is that perhaps some of us will begin to stop assuming that
we `get' the other's experience, when we do not." (Coplan, 2011, p. 12). While
self-oriented perspective-taking may contribute to a stronger affective response,
other-oriented perspective-taking requires more active imaginative and affective
regulation and results in a stronger differentiation of an otherwise blurry bound-
ary between affective states and knowledge among self and other. Other-focused
role-taking can be less susceptible to biases, which are always a risk of empathy,
and more amenable to critical processes. This is one of the benefits of a critical
empathy, the acknowledgement and questioning of one's own assumptions.

    The sometimes blurry and problematic nature of that boundary between self
and other in identification and perspective-taking is evident in the many types
of biases inherent in processes of empathy. These include egocentric biases, false
empathies, and biases of proximity and familiarity. Of particular interest here is
Hoffman's notion of "egoistic drift" (2001), which illustrates the slippery nature
of empathy and the tendency to slide in empathy toward the more comfortable
and familiar. Egoistic drift occurs when within the process of empathy one's at-
tention begins to shift away from an other-focused perspective and more toward
one's own affective experience of empathizing. The irony is that the very process
of identification that drives empathy can at the same time sever empathy as the
observer responds more affectively to his own memories and associated affected
states, which are initiated at the observation and perspective-taking of another.
Egoistic drift and associated biases demonstrate how empathic identification is
constantly in flux, shifting between self and other and among memory, situa-
tion, and affect. There is the constant risk of slipping into egoistic drift or, for
the sake of avoiding egoistic drift, losing the affective power and accuracy of
empathy. Identifying with another is also identifying with oneself and always at
risk of slipping further adrift. This is the paradox of trying to see the world of
another through one's own eyes. It requires, as Martha Nussbaum argues, "a kind
of `twofold attention,' in which one both imagines what it is like to be in the
sufferer's place and, at the same time, retains securely the awareness that one is
not in that place" (2003, p. 328). Here again in the idea of a "twofold attention,"
which Nussbaum borrows from Richard Wollheim, is a reminder of Fitzgerald's
notion of a first-rate intelligence as applied to rhetorics of empathy. That twofold
attention is exactly the work of a critical expressivism through critical empathy. In
acknowledging the implied paradox of identifying simultaneously with self and
other, it asks that we see the world with twofold attention. This is an important
shift, because in applying a twofold attention one is compelled to ask questions
of relation and purpose that may not otherwise be so obvious or demanding.
There is a sense, then, that like any paradox, that of empathic identification with

152
                                                                       The (Un)Knowable Self and Others

self and other points through its seeming contradictions to greater insights into
processes of understanding self and other in the work of critical expressivism.

THE PERSONAL AS COMMUNICATION AND BELIEF

    Empathy's communicative importance is well established in the work of Carl
Rogers. He argues for empathy in contrast to more competitive and judgmental
moves in communication. Rogers finds the major barrier to communication to
be "this tendency to react to any emotionally meaningful statement by forming
an evaluation of it from our own point of view" (1961, p. 331). Without using
the word "empathy" here, he proposes a communication strategy that nonethe-
less is very much grounded in empathy:

         Real communication occurs, and this evaluative tendency is
         avoided, when we listen with understanding. What does that
         mean? It means to see the expressed idea and attitude from
         the other person's point of view, to sense how it feels to him,
         to achieve his frame of reference in regard to the thing he is
         talking about. (1961, pp. 331-332)

    Rogers' work on empathy is based upon the relationship between therapist
and client in a clinical context. Although Rogers is not concerned with the rhe-
torical use of empathy--and even rejects the role of empathy in the employ of
argumentation--he does offer much of use in defining empathy and its com-
municative and epistemological potential. Rogers focuses on empathy as an
emotional perspective, as a means of understanding, and as potentially transfor-
mative in how it can change people and their interpersonal relationships. He un-
derstands empathy to be a powerful position of listening. Rogers' influence and
his attention to empathy have had a significant influence in rhetorical theory.
Elbow, for example, similarly offers his believing game as a positive alternative
to the traditional doubting game. Elbow has come to see the believing game as
the core of his work. He describes it as

         the disciplined practice of trying to be as welcoming or ac-
         cepting as possible to every idea we encounter: not just listen-
         ing to views different from our own and holding back from
         arguing with them; not just trying to restate them without
         bias; but actually trying to believe them. We are using believ-
         ing as a tool to scrutinize and test. (2009, p. 1)

    Elbow's believing game differs from Rogerian rhetoric in important ways--
the reference to "not just trying to restate them without bias" (2009, p. 2) is one

                                                                                                 153
Leake

of those--but more importantly it includes a process of empathy. The move
to not only understand other points of view but to try to believe them is at its
heart an exercise in empathy; it is an attempt to enter as fully as possible into
another's perspective and even another's experience of holding that perspective.
Elbow recognizes that such a move has cognitive, phenomenological, emotional,
and physical qualities. In an earlier draft of his contribution to this collection, he
advises that one "eat like an owl," which means "just listening and swallowing
and even trying to believe their (other's) experiences no matter how odd they
seem." He adds that "writers should trust that their organism will automatically
let go of what's useless or misleading and benefit from what's useful." The idea
that writers should trust their organism is a nod to ways of thinking beyond the
purely cognitive to include the emotional and physiological, as empathy pushes
people to do. This is not to reduce Elbow's method to purely trusting your gut.
Elbow stresses the methodical nature of the believing game as a form of critical
inquiry into the value of ideas, all of which is based upon the practice of empa-
thy in a critical expressivist framework.

    Empathy occupies a central position in how we imagine and come to under-
stand ourselves and others, and both self- and other-oriented perspective-taking
rely upon some degree of personal knowledge. In self-oriented, the empathizer
or observer is imagining him or herself in the position of the other and draw-
ing from experiences and emotions analogous to the context and conditions
of the observed. In other-oriented perspective-taking, the observer still must
draw upon his or her own experiences in attempting to imagine the state of the
observed. Philosopher Derek Matravers allows that a person may move beyond
personal history to experience empathy even in regard to emotions that he or
she has not previously experienced personally by empathizing "face to face with
another who is experiencing some strong emotions, or describing some situation
with strong emotion" (2011, p. 28). In these cases, emotions in empathy may
be recalled from one's past emotions and experiences in self-oriented perspec-
tive-taking and may be experienced personally through direct engagement with
the emotions of another. In either case, the personal recollection or immediate
personal experience of the emotions becomes a necessary part of empathy.

    As evident in Rogers, Elbow, Matravers, and elsewhere, empathy uses the
personal constructively as a route to knowledge about oneself and others. This
incorporation of the personal differs from that characterized as solipsistic. When
Berlin describes expressivism as concerned only with self-calibrated truths, pri-
vate and incommunicable to others, he may be accurately describing some types
of personal writing, but seems to be lumping together the merely personal with
the possibly critically so. As Elbow argues in this volume, there are many ways
that writing may be personal in topic, in language, and in thought. I would

154
                                                                       The (Un)Knowable Self and Others

add empathy or perspective-taking to Elbow's list of personal ways of thinking
and writing. It is an employment of the believing game when one imagines, in
self-oriented perspective-taking, "what if I were myself in that other person's
situation?" Or, in other-oriented perspective-taking, "what if I were that other
person in that other person's situation?" To attempt to experience and know
these positions is a cognitive, affective, and bodily move toward belief, under-
standing, and communication. In these ways and others critical empathy is a
personal mode, one that uses personal imagination, experiences, and knowledge
in order to arrive at greater understanding of self, others, and society. This is a
different use of the personal than inward-gazing self-discovery. And yet empathy
as a personal mode remains a liability because of its inherent assumptions and
biases, as illustrated in the concept of egoistic drift. This is why a critical empa-
thy, one that questions its own understanding, is such an important component
of a critical expressivism.

THE NECESSARY AND CONSTANT CRITIQUE OF EMPATHY

    Although scholars in the humanities have recently seized upon empathy as
perhaps best representing the hopes, values, and social purposes of a liberal arts
education, empathy itself is not without useful academic skepticism and criti-
cism. Amy Shuman calls for a critique of empathy in the circulation and telling of
other people's stories. She finds liberatory possibilities via empathy in critiquing
dominant narratives, even as "empathy is always open to critique as serving the
interests of the empathizer rather than the empathized" (2005, p. 18). Empathy
may be a way for some tellers to claim ownership, knowledge, or privilege over
another's story. At the same time, Shuman notes that stories need to travel beyond
their owners in order to accomplish cultural work. This is part of the paradox,
Shuman writes, because: "Empathy is one of the failed promises of narrative,
but in that failure, it provides the possibility of critique and counternarrative,
providing whatever redemptive, emancipatory, or liberatory possibilities narrative
holds" (2005, p. 19). Processes of empathy are both promise and failed promise.
But just as the liabilities of empathy can prove to be a productive asset, so can
the failed promise allow some redemption through the possibilities of counter-
narratives. The primary question that needs to be asked, as Theresa Kulbaga has
argued, is "empathy to what ends?" (2008, p. 518). This gets to the rhetorical and
epistemological purposes of empathy and helps raise further questions about the
relationships between empathizers and the empathized. Explaining her idea of a
critique of empathy, as well as the possibilities of empathy, Shuman writes

         Empathy offers the possibility of understanding across space
         and time, but it rarely changes the circumstances of those who

                                                                                                 155
Leake

         suffer. If it provides inspiration, it is more often for those in
         the privileged position of empathizer rather than empathized.
         Storytelling needs a critique of empathy to remain a process
         of negotiating, rather than defending, meaning. The critique
         of empathy, and the recognition of the inevitably failed prom-
         ises of storytelling, avoids an unchallenged shift in the owner-
         ship of experience and interpretation to whoever happens to
         be telling the story and instead insists on obligations between
         tellers, listeners, and the stories they borrow. (2005, p. 5)

    A critique of empathy foregrounds the relationships among those who are
involved with the story, its provenance, its telling, and its rhetorical and social
application. Shuman's critique of empathy is also a way to guard against the
erasure or removal of the other within processes of empathy. The critique of
empathy is an attempt to maintain the positive social potential of empathy as a
means of understanding and as a mover to action, even while guarding against
the liabilities of empathy. In their criticisms of rhetorics of empathy, Kulbaga
and Shuman are not discounting empathy but are arguing for a more reflective
and responsible understanding and use of rhetorics of empathy.

    They are not alone in pushing toward a more critical empathy. Those who
advocate for some form of critical empathy do so because of how empathy func-
tions, how it is situated socially and culturally, and how the questions of a crit-
ical empathy can themselves help us negotiate larger issues. I borrow the term
"critical empathy" from Todd DeStigter, who credits the idea to Jay Robinson.
Critical empathy, as DeStigter defines it

         refers to the process of establishing informed and affective con-
         nections with other human beings, of thinking and feeling with
         them at some emotionally, intellectually, and socially significant
         level, while always remembering that such connections are
         complicated by sociohistorical forces that hinder the equitable,
         just relationships that we presumably seek. (1999, p. 240)

    DeStigter's definition is notable for being both hopeful and realistic. He, like
Shuman, is proposing a form of critical empathy that seeks to fulfill the promise
of more just relationships while maintaining awareness of the severe limitations
and complications that are always part of that empathic seeking. DeStigter's
critical empathy is of additional value because it focuses upon the context of
empathy as always situated within sociohistorical forces, just as critical expres-
sivism should always recognize an already social self. This brings attention to the
circumstances that inform and limit rhetorics of empathy and the differences in
social positions among those involved.

156
                                                                       The (Un)Knowable Self and Others

    DeStigter defines empathy as a way of thinking and feeling, which is in line
with how Nussbaum as well as many psychologists, including Hoffman, define
empathy. Such definitions of empathy align with a contemporary understanding
of empathy from cognitive neuroscience as including processes of both mirror-
ing (purely affective) and imaginative reconstruction (directed cognitive) (Gold-
man, 2011). In a similar way, Kristie Fleckenstein argues that the thinking and
feeling aspects of empathy uniquely situate empathy for reflective and rhetorical
work. Fleckenstein writes, "As a complicated mixture of affect and rationality,
empathy lends itself to deliberative discourse--to negotiation, debate, and per-
suasion--in the public sphere and serves as the foundation for social justice"
(2007, p. 707). Fleckenstein is responding here to Matthew Newcomb's essay on
compassion in the rhetoric of Hannah Arendt, who defines compassion as pure-
ly affective and as creating silences and impeding discourse. Newcomb argues
against Arendt that a "Critical compassion can note the issues of appropriating
the stories of others and question the need to actually feel like the other" (2007,
p. 128). Fleckenstein supports this position in her argument for empathy as
already involving thinking; we do not have to rely upon a critical compassion
in order to open that rhetorical and evaluative space in empathy. She cites ideas
of "realistic empathy" and "critical affirmation" as illustrating the feeling and
thinking elements of empathy and the critical roles empathy plays in deliberative
discourse. As Fleckenstein writes, "Whether we call it empathy, compassion,
realistic empathy, critical affirmation, or critical empathy, the experience of shar-
ing another's suffering is essential to deliberative discourse, to negotiation, and
to persuasion in the public sphere" (2007, p. 714). Critical expressivism would
be in good company here. A definition of critical empathy such as provided by
Fleckenstein better allows one to acknowledge the interplay and tensions that
always exist in thinking and feeling with others and the ways those may be used
to arrive at judgments and actions.

    Employing critical empathy also enables one to better question and acknowl-
edge differences in economic, political, social, and cultural positions. These are
elements of the "complicated sociohistorical forces" that DeStigter mentions.
Among the greatest liabilities of processes of empathy is how it can enable the
elision of these differences as one individual empathizes with another. Kulbaga
already has pointed to this problem in rhetorics of empathy in the case of rel-
atively more privileged Western readers enjoying identification with less privi-
leged others without also reflecting upon the significant differences in experi-
ences and positions. Min-Zhan Lu proposes "critical affirmation," a term she
borrows from Cornel West, as a form of literacy in which reading and writing
are employed for the following goals:

         (1) To end oppression rather than to empower a particular

                                                                                                 157
Leake

         form of self, group, or culture; (2) To grapple with one's
         privileges as well as one's experience of exclusion; (3) To
         approach more respectfully and responsibly those histo-
         ries and experiences which appear different from what one
         calls one's own; and (4) To affirm a yearning for individual
         agency shared by individuals across social divisions without
         losing sight of the different material circumstances which
         shape this shared yearning and the different circumstances
         against which each of us must struggle when enacting such a
         yearning. (1999, p. 173)

    Lu proposes these critical affirmation practices in response to how the per-
sonal is abused politically. Hers is a reflective approach that allows acknowl-
edgment and revision of one's own affective responses. Critical affirmation is
affirmative, hopeful, and politically progressive in the ways in which it allows
the building of coalitions based upon the shared yearning for individual agency.
And, crucially, Lu's critical affirmation is critical because it is always keeping
affirmation--or empathy--from overreaching by foregrounding historical, ma-
terial, and situational differences. Critical affirmation is most applicable to how
we read and write one another's stories, which serve as our sites for empathy and
as exercises in critical expressivism. Perhaps it is most critical in how we read and
write our own stories. As Lu writes, "I join others to mark writing, especially
personal narratives, as a site for reflecting on and revising one's sense of self,
one's relations with others, and the conditions of one's life" (1999, p. 173). Lu
is arguing for critical affirmation as literate and rhetorical practices that bring
one's life and relationships continually into reflection and potential revision.
This reads to me as the best possible critical expressivist work, similar to that
proposed in this collection by Nancy Mack in her idea of the "critical memoir."
I add to these practices rhetorical questions, posed by Kulbaga and Shuman,
best represented by the question of empathy to what ends? Likewise, we might
ask in the practice of critical expressivism, expressivism to what ends? By fore-
grounding questions of social positions, differences, and the ends of empathy, a
critical empathy guards against risks of appropriating the experiences of others,
especially to validate or serve one's own interests.

    The tensions in empathy and expressivism require critical practice because of
the inherent instability of any moves to empathy or understanding and expres-
sion of self. Critical practices necessitate questions about the limits of knowledge
and differences in experiences and situations; how empathy and personal writing,
often in the form of stories, are positioned, how they function, and what their
results are; how emotions, reflections, and evaluations interact; and what the

158
                                                                       The (Un)Knowable Self and Others

personal and social effects of these processes are. These are fundamentally epis-
temological and rhetorical questions that deal with our relations to one another.
Because critical empathy demands such questions, these inherent liabilities can
be seen as an asset. Critical empathy and critical expressivism push us to ask the
questions that we already should be asking. I draw here from the argument of
Dennis Lynch, who contends that the necessary move to a critical reflection is
among the best reasons to return to the study of rhetorics of empathy. As Lynch
writes, "I do not wish to treat empathy as the master concept of rhetoric, nor
will I defend empathy against the serious questions that have been raised about
it as a practice. I will argue instead that empathy is rhetorically productive not
in spite of but because of the dangers to which it is prone" (1998, p. 7). Those
dangers push us toward employing a critical empathy that in turns requires us to
be more reflective generally of personal questions of epistemology, differences,
and relations. A critical empathy continually reminds us that any knowledge of
self and others is always at best a careful and purposeful approximation of per-
spectives, situations, and experiences through the lens of the self.

REFERENCES

Berlin, J. (1987). Rhetoric and reality: Writing instruction in American colleges,
   1900-1985. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Coplan, A. (2011). Understanding empathy: Its features and effects. In A. Co-
   plan, & P. Goldie (Eds.), Empathy: Philosophical and psychological perspectives
   (pp. 3-18). New York: Oxford University Press.

DeStigter, T. (1999). Public displays of affection: Political community through
   critical empathy. Research in the Teaching of English, 33, 235-244.

Elbow, P (2009). The believing game ormethodological believing. The Select-
   ed Works of Peter Elbow. Retrieved from http://works.bepress.com/peter_el-
   bow/41/

Fitzgerald, F. S. (1994). The crack-up. In P. Lopate (Ed.), The art of the personal
   essay (pp. 520-532). New York: Anchor. (Original work published 1945)

Fleckenstein, K. (2007). Once again with feeling: Empathy in deliberative dis-
   course. JAC, 27(3/4), 701-716.

Goldman, A. I. (2011). Two routes to empathy: Insights from cognitive neuro-
   science. In A. Coplan & P. Goldie (Eds.), Empathy: Philosophical and psycho-
   logical perspectives (pp. 31-44). New York: Oxford University Press.

Hoffman, M. L. (2001). Empathy and moral development: Implications for caring
   and justice. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kulbaga, T. A. (2008). Pleasurable pedagogies: Reading Lolita in Tehran and the
   rhetoric of empathy. College English, 70(5), 506-21.

                                                                                                 159
Leake

Lu, M.-Z. (1999). Redefining the literate self: The politics of critical affirmation.
   College Composition and Communication, 51(2), 172-194.

Lynch, D. A. (1998). Rhetorics of proximity: Empathy in Temple Grandin and
   Cornel West. Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 28(1), 5-23.

Matravers, D. (2011). Empathy as a route to knowledge. In A. Coplan, & P.
   Goldie (Eds.), Empathy: Philosophical and psychological perspectives (19-30).
   New York: Oxford University Press.

Newcomb, M. (2007). Totalized compassion: The (im)possibilities for acting
   out of compassion and the rhetoric of Hannah Arendt. JAC, 27(1/2), 105-
   133.

Nussbaum, M. (2003). Upheavals of thought: The intelligence of emotions. New
   York: Cambridge University Press.

Rogers, C. (1961). On becoming a person. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Shuman, A. (2005). Other people's stories: Entitlement caims and the critique of

   empathy. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.

160
SECTION 3:
HISTORIES
JOHN WATSON IS TO
INTROSPECTIONISM AS
JAMES BERLIN IS TO EXPRESSIVISM
(AND OTHER ANALOGIES YOU
WON'T FIND ON THE SAT)

Maja Wilson

    I was in the Yale archives for the first time, reading the correspondence of
early behaviorists John B. Watson and Robert M. Yerkes, and I couldn't stop
sneezing. A venerable looking scholar next to me, inspecting ancient manu-
scripts with a magnifying glass, moved to the back of the room. Apparently, I
was allergic to history.

    My very present problems had brought me to the archives: as a high school
teacher, I had felt oppressed by the system of high stakes standardized testing
mandated by No Child Left Behind (NCLB). The stated intent of NCLB was
to promote equity, but the effects of testing seemed to be quite the opposite.
Despite the modern rhetoric of equity associated with testing, I wondered if
the original intent behind the creation of standardized tests foreshadowed the
disastrous effects I saw playing out in schools.

    I knew that the first large scale standardized test in the United States--the
Army Alpha Test (AAT)--had been created by eugenicists and used to promote
their causes. Robert M. Yerkes, an avowed eugenicist, had helped create and
administer the AAT during both World Wars. His assistant, Carl Brigham, pub-
lished A Study of American Intelligence in 1923, in which he argued for "selective
breeding" to preserve the integrity of the "Nordic race." The AAT had revealed,
according to Brigham, that southern and eastern Europeans had scored lowest
on the test.

    Brigham's book fueled growing anti-immigrant sentiment in the United
States, and was used by Harry Laughlin, appointed by a House committee as
an "expert eugenics agent," to propose and pass the Immigration Restriction
Act of 1924, which targeted eastern and southern Europeans. While Brigham
renounced his position in the 1930s, he helped to transform the AAT into the
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT).

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.11  163
Wilson

    The troubling origins of standardized testing were well known. I was at the
Yale archives because I suspected there was more dirt to be dug up. I had a hunch:
Besides creating inequity, it seemed to me that standardized tests were oblivious
to (or disrespectful of ) the experience of teachers and students. I had seen that
dismissal of teachers' experience in the rationale for the "research-based" ed-
ucational agenda that went along with the tests (see Institution of Education
Sciences) and I wondered if I would see evidence of this dismissal of individual
experience in Yerkes' theoretical orientation toward his work.

    There were over 200 boxes of Yerkes' papers, manuscripts, and notes, so I
thought I'd look first in the correspondence between Yerkes and his friend and
colleague Robert B. Watson, the father of behaviorism. In my view, Watson's
work with infants couldn't have been undertaken if he took infants' experiences
seriously.

    Watson was famous for his research on primates but also for his popular
child-rearing book, The Psychological Care of Infant and Child, in which he ar-
gued that, "mother love is a dangerous instrument" (1928, p. 87). The book,
written in 1928 "with the assistance" of his wife, Rosalie (she was not given a
proper byline), was based on Watson's infant experiments. Watson was inter-
ested, among other things, in knowing if he could condition fear in infants.
He systematically conditioned his young test subject, an eight-month-old boy
("Little Albert") naturally unafraid of any animal, to be afraid of a fuzzy bunny,
and, by association, a fur muff and a furry-faced Santa Claus (1928, pp. 23-30).
He proudly presented this research in The Psychological Care of Infant and Child
as proof that parents (and, specifically, mothers) are to blame for children's fears,
laziness, and neurosis; furthermore, in Watson's estimation, no parent knows
how to be a good parent, and his work in behaviorism was the answer.

    How could Watson live with himself as he systematically instilled fear in
Little Albert? Was this simply the case of a researcher's natural enthusiasm in
the days before International Review Boards? Or was there something partic-
ular about Watson's mindset, assumptions, or theoretical orientation that en-
gendered callousness? Had Watson spoken of these experiments to Yerkes? Did
Yerkes share Watson's mindset or assumptions? I felt that Yerkes, imposing stan-
dardized testing on hundreds of thousands of soldiers and then generations of
schoolchildren, was somehow akin to Watson, instilling fear in a baby--at least
in the sense that I suspected each man of a certain blindness to his test subjects'
experiences.

    As I paged through letter after letter, I found myself slipping--like a trau-
matized infant myself--into the world of early twentieth century American psy-
chology, a world of artifacts and conversations that bewildered me: descriptions
of rat mazes; blueprints for a stimulus boxes large enough for dogs and monkeys

164
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

(Letter to Robert Yerkes, October 17, 1912); Watson's description of his exper-
imental work with babies (Letter to Robert Yerkes, October 12, 1916); Yerkes'
repeated attempts to get Watson to leave the advertising work he did at J. Walter
Thompson Company in the 30's and return to the laboratory; Watson's request
in 1919 for Yerkes to send three hundred blank Army Alpha test booklets and
blanks to The Gilman School, at which his youngest son was a student (Letter
to Robert Yerkes, March 29, 1919); Watson's objection to Yerkes' use of the
multiple choice test in his primate research (Letter to Robert Yerkes, May 12,
1916); and a debate about the battle between the behaviorists and introspec-
tionists (Watson, J., Letters to Robert Yerkes, April 7, 1913; October 27, 1915;
November 1, 1915; October 24, 1916). I suspected that my sneezes weren't just
a physiological reaction to the dusty pages I was leafing through, but a fear of
becoming lost in this historical rat maze.

    I knew nothing of primate research, nothing of introspectionism, and I was
beginning to forget why I had come to the archives in the first place. Finally,
it was Watson's mention of Edward Titchener that reoriented me. But instead
of returning me to the problems that had sent me to the archives in the first
place,1 Watson's full-fledged behavioristic ire at Titchener and the introspec-
tionists led me to a problem that had plagued me as a student of composition
studies: James Berlin's full-fledged social epistemic ire at Peter Elbow and the
"expressionists."

JOHN B. WATSON'S BATTLE AGAINST TITCHENER
AND INTROSPECTIONISM

    I first caught on to Watson's battle against Titchener in a letter from Wat-
son to Yerkes in 1916. In this letter, Watson refers to a slight disagreement he
is having with Yerkes regarding the future of behaviorism. Watson summarizes
Yerkes' position: that psychology should continue on its current track, as defined
by Titchener and the introspectionists, and Yerkes and Watson's shared interest
in behavior should be absorbed into physiology or biology. Watson strenuous-
ly objects to this separation, asserting his unwillingness to leave psychology in
Titchener's hands.

    To understand these disagreements--between Watson and Yerkes and be-
tween Watson and Titchener--I needed to understand Titchener's view of psy-
chology, which had preceded Watson's. I turned to Titchener's 1898 A Primer of
Psychology, which begins with a definition of psychology.

         The Meaning of `Psychology.'--The word `psychology ` comes
         from the two Greek words psyche, `mind,' and logos, `word.'

                                                                                                 165
Wilson

         Psychology therefore means, by derivation, `words' or `talk
         about mind.' (1898, p. 1)

    Titchener defined mind not as an object inside the body that either holds or
does things to thoughts and feelings, but as "the sum" (1898, p. 5) of thoughts
and feelings. In Titchener's view, "we must not say that mind `has' thoughts
and feelings; but that mind is thoughts and feelings" (1898, p. 6). If mind is
thoughts and feelings, not an object, then the only way to study mind, the only
method of the psychologist, is to look inward and talk about thoughts and feel-
ings--introspection. To Titchener, then, psychology's subject was mind and its
method was introspection.

    The method of introspection had been used by Titchener's teacher, the Ger-
man philosopher Willhelm Wundt, who had had created one of the world's first
psychology laboratories in 1879. Because Titchener himself was interested in
distinguishing psychology from philosophy and from the work of his teacher, he
went to great lengths to make introspection an objective process that took sev-
eral years of training: "only by looking inward can we gain knowledge of mental
processes; only by looking inward under standard conditions can we make our
knowledge scientific" (1898, p. 32).

    But introspective psychology still depended on an individual's description of
his private experience, an admittedly subjective basis for a field that Titchener
claimed should be more objective and scientific. Titchener's approach to this
problem began with implementing rigorous training for each introspector--he
called them "Observers"--consisting of a series of standardized introspection ex-
ercises: For example, observers in training were instructed to describe what they
experienced when listening to certain tones or when exposed to various lights.
Titchener invented several instruments for standardizing these exercises himself,
including a "sound cage," a mesh of wires surrounding the head connected to
a telephone receiver designed to give each Observer practice in pinpointing the
exact location of an auditory stimuli. In Class Experiments and Demonstration
Apparatus, Titchener proposed a standard set of instruments for all psychology
classrooms:

         whenever possible, we should call on the class to do psycholo-
         gy for themselves. The demonstration apparatus which I have
         in mind are, then, apparatus which shall subserve this latter
         purpose: apparatus that shall standardise the conditions for
         such introspections as the lecture-room and the lecture-hour
         allow. (1903, p. 440)

    Titchener considered Observers themselves to be highly trained scientific
instruments, and he bemoaned psychology's great disadvantage in its ability to

166
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

share results and instruments across space and time. In the external sciences,
scientists could easily ship specimens and the conclusions of their experiments to
other interested scientists. But to facilitate the sharing of results and specimens
in psychology, the inner science, Observers themselves would have to be shipped
at great expense and inconvenience (1909, p. 278).

    Still, the knowledge gained by Titchener's Observers was not scientific, ob-
jective, or standard enough for John Watson. Other philosophers and psychol-
ogists had critiqued Titchener's methods and aims--including the philosopher
John Dewey, under whom Watson had studied at the University of Chicago
at the turn of the century--but on far different grounds than Watson would.
In his 1891 textbook, Psychology, Dewey outlined a transactional objection to
introspection:

         When introspective analysis begins, the anger ceases. It is well
         understood that external observation is not a passive process
         ... We shall see hereafter that there is no such thing as pure
         observation in the sense of a fact being known without assimi-
         lation and interpretation through ideas, already in the mind.
         This is as true of the observation of the facts of consciousness
         as of perceiving physical facts. (1891, pp. 8-9)

    Dewey took no issue with introspection as a psychological method, but sim-
ply pointed out that observation is never objective. Watson, however, claimed
to find Dewey's ideas altogether incomprehensible, proclaiming in 1936 that,
"`I never knew what he was talking about then, and unfortunately for me, I
still don't know'" (Watson, quotedin Cheney & Pierce, 2004, p. 14). We can
imagine Watson pausing and winking at his audience--unfortunately for me.
After living with almost a century's accumulation of behaviorist influence in ev-
erything from advertising to educational policy, we can, of course, wink back--
unfortunately for us.

    Dewey's colleague, the psychologist William James, also took issue with some
of Titchener's ideas. He didn't discredit introspection as an appropriate method
for accumulating psychological knowledge, but he disagreed with Titchener's as-
sumption that mind was composed of elementary mental processes and that the
goal of introspection was to discover and describe them. In "On Some Omis-
sions of Introspective Psychology," James objects to "mental atomism," which he
refers to here as "the traditional psychology":

         The traditional psychology talks like one who should say a
         river consists of nothing but pailsful, spoonsful, quartpotsful,
         barrelsful and other moulded forms of water. Even were the
         pails and pots all actually standing in the stream, still between

                                                                                                 167
Wilson

         them the free water would continue to flow. It is just this free
         water of consciousness that psychologists resolutely overlook.
         Every definite image in the mind is steeped and dyed in the
         free water that flows around it. With it goes the sense of its
         relations, near and remote, the dying echo of whence it came
         to us, the dawning sense of whither it is to lead. (1884, pp.
         16-17)

    But Watson wasn't interested in Dewey's inherently subjective observations
or James' "free water of consciousness." While James' objection to Titchener's
mental atomism led to a conception of experience that influenced Husserl and
other phenomenologists (Schuetz, 1941, p. 442), Watson's objections would ex-
tend to the very concept of consciousness itself--along with purpose, value, and
meaning.

    Watson had come to believe that mind or consciousness was a religious,
medieval construct, unworthy of scientific inquiry. In a private disagreement
about the topic with Watson in 1915, Yerkes suggests that perhaps "there should
be encouragement given those who are willing to make use of it [introspection-
ism]" even as they continued their own behaviorist project. Watson counters
two days later with what at first seems like a mild, conciliatory reply, suggesting
that the two men, in fact, disagreed about very little (Letter to Robert Yerkes,
November 1, 1915). But, as Watson points out in his next breath, the small area
of disagreement that remains is actually the crux of the matter: introspection
depends on the concept of consciousness, which is no more a scientific concept
than the soul.

    In other words, Watson didn't just disagree with the method of introspec-
tion, but with the very construct on which the method was based--conscious-
ness itself. He thought it best to leave the soul and its secular counterpoint,
consciousness, to religion; if philosophy wanted to take it up, then psychology
must separate wholly from philosophy and study behavior alone. In fact, "re-
ligion," along with "mediaeval tradition" and "philosophy," headed the list of
insults that Watson was most likely to employ in putting down Titchener and
his introspective philosophy. Consider how he uses these terms in the opening
four sentences of Psychology from the Standpoint of the Behaviorist, published nine
years after Watson's small disagreement with Yerkes:

         Mediaeval Tradition Has Kept Psychology From Becoming a
         Science.--Psychology, up to very recent times, has been held
         so rigidly under the dominance both of traditional religion
         and of philosophy--the two great bulwarks of mediaeval-
         ism--that it has never been able to free itself and become a

168
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

         natural science. Chemistry and physics have freed themselves.
         Zoology and physiology are now in the process of becoming
         emancipated. (1924b, p. 1)

    In the following six pages of the book, Watson characterizes psychology's
concern with mind and consciousness with these phrases:

         The Old Psychology of Mind and Consciousness

         ... deistic idol already fashioned and worshipped (vii) ...
         crude dualism ... theological mysticism ... mediaeval tradi-
         tion ... religion ... philosophy ... mediaevalism ... soul ...
         so-called states of consciousness ... phenomena of spiritual-
         ism ... not objectively verifiable ... no community of data ...
         mental curiosities ... introspection ... serious bar to progress
         ... failed to become a science ... deplorably failed ... it would
         not bury its past ... hang onto tradition ... will not bury their
         `medicine men' ... subjective subject matter ... (1898, pp.
         vii-3)

    For all of his emphasis on objectivity, Watson presented his own ideas in an
emotionally charged narrative. In Watson's story, psychological medicine men
such as Titchener had been sacrificing science and truth on the altar of mediaeval
philosophers. His stimulus-response experiments would arm psychologists with
objectively verifiable data that would bury these psychological medicine men,
emancipating psychology once and for all. Freed from the hocus pocus of mind
and consciousness, Watson would help Man--including the military, parents,
advertisers, and teachers--finally get control of his actions. (Or, rather, the ac-
tions of others.)

    For those who cut their teeth on Freudian psychology, it might be tempting
to note here that Watson had chafed under the rearing of a strict fundamental-
ist mother who expected him to become a southern Baptist minister (Buckley,
1989, p. 5). We might see his string of associations--from mind ("a concept as
unscientific as the soul") to religion (a "serious bar to progress") to mother love
("a dangerous instrument")--and understand his disposal of the first two as his
own attempt to "become emancipated" from his mother. But that would be to
put Watson on Freud's couch, a place he would never voluntarily lay his own
head (not to be confused with his mind!).

    Instead, Watson's definition of psychology--its subject, its methods, and its
goals--is inextricable from his rejection of Titchener's. In the first lines of the
article in Psychological Review (which would later be referred to as the Behav-
iorist Manifesto) Watson sets his definition directly in opposition to Titchener's:

                                                                                                 169
Wilson

         Psychology as the behaviorist views it is a purely objective ex-
         perimental branch of natural science. Its theoretical goal is the
         prediction and control of behavior. Introspection forms no es-
         sential part of its methods ... the behaviorist ... recognizes no
         dividing line between man and brute. The behavior of man,
         with all of its refinement and complexity, forms only a part of
         the behaviorists' total scheme of investigation. (1913, p. 158)

    Everything about Titchner's psychology is dismissed here in one fell para-
graph: introspection has no place; behavior is all that matters; and since both
man and beast exhibit behavior, the study of animal behavior belongs with the
study of human behavior.

    To psychologists who believed in the study of mind or consciousness, two
major assumptions made the study of animals irrelevant to the study of humans.
First, animal mind or consciousness, if it existed at all, was too different from
human consciousness to be of use. Second, introspection was the only meth-
od of studying mind; introspection involved speaking or writing, and animals
couldn't speak or write. (They could, however, as Yerkes would try to prove, take
multiple-choice tests!) But in rejecting consciousness, Watson disposes of the
first major assumption separating human and animal study. In rejecting intro-
spection as a method, he disposes of the second: animals (or humans, for that
matter!) need not talk at all to be of interest to psychologists, who should only
be concerned with behavior.

    In redirecting psychology's gaze from mind to behavior, Watson didn't just
open the door to animal studies--which is why he met Yerkes, who studied pri-
mates--but he also redefined psychology's application and goals. In Titchener's
psychology, an understanding of an individual's thoughts and feelings had a
crucial role to play in ethics, and he went so far as to assert, "Psychology is the
foundation of ethics" (1898, p. 296). Titchener saw ethics as general laws that
must be determined from the particular "facts of life" (1898, p. 296). He rec-
ognized that these facts of life are different in different societies, not to mention
different for different individuals, so ethics must be sensitive to these differences.
One way to assure such sensitivity was to use the insights of psychology--drawn
from the experience of individuals--as an ethical check on the laws of ethics.

    The same concern for individual differences in relation to generalizable laws
is evident in Titchener's discussion of the application of psychology to pedagogy:

         The problem of pedagogy is to lay down rules or norms of
         education ... the abstract "child" of psychology does not exist
         for education, not "the child," but real children, Katie Jones
         and Tommy Smith. Psychology cannot deal with Jones-ness

170
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

         and Smith-ness, but only with child-ness. Science, indeed, can
         never be "applied" offhand. (1898, pp. 298-299)

    While Titchener acknowledged that psychology is a science that generalizes,
the method of his science--the description of an individual's thoughts or feel-
ings--led to his concern for the interaction of generalizations and individual
experience. In other words, a science that made experience its special province
had a special interest in how the application of that science affected individual
experience.

    The reverse was true in Watson's science: a psychology that dismisses mind,
thoughts, feelings, and consciousness as central constructs showed little interest
in the effects of its application on individual (human) experience. Watson's views
on the application of psychology to education show none of the caution and
respect for individual experience we see in Titchner's discussion of "Smith-ness"
and "Jones-ness." To Watson, learning was a change in behavior in response to a
stimulus, a process that is the same for Katie Jones as it would be for John Smith
as it would be for a rat. Later, B. F. Skinner would take Watson's position on the
connection between rats and humans even further, leading Arthur Koestler to
write in 1964 that, "for the anthropomorphic view of the rat, American psychol-
ogy has substituted the rattomorphic view of man" (pp. 560).

    Without an introspectionist's grounding in the experience of the individual,
Watson had no qualms about proclaiming the goal and application of psychol-
ogy as the "control of behavior," which very quickly came to mean, in practice,
the control of individuals. While early critics of behaviorism attacked Watson's
lack of attention to states of mind or consciousness on moral grounds, they per-
haps underestimated the potential power of behaviorism to do what Watson says
it would: to control behavior.

    In 1929, Watson and William MacDougall, a British psychologist, published
their debate about behaviorism in The Battle of Behaviorism. MacDougall wasn't
opposed to behavioral studies: As he reminded Watson at the outset of their
debate, MacDougall himself had been calling for psychologists to attend to be-
havior a full ten years before Watson began his first behavioral studies of infants.
In fact, MacDougall called himself "The Arch-Behaviorist." But MacDougall
objected to Watson's focus on behavior to the exclusion of concepts such as
"`incentive,' `motive,' `purpose,' `intention,' `goal,' `desire,' `valuing,' `striving,'
`willing,' `hoping,' and `responsibility'" (1929, p. 69). He worried about the
effects of a psychology that ignored such terms:

         I submit to you the proposition that any psychology which
         accepts this mechanistic dogma and shapes itself accordingly
         is useless, save for certain very limited purposes, because it

                                                                                                 171
Wilson

         is incapable of recognizing and of taking into account of the
         most fundamental facts of human behavior ... If all men
         believed the teaching of the mechanical psychology (and only
         beliefs that govern action are real beliefs) no man would raise
         a finger in the effort to prevent war, to achieve peace or to
         realize any other idea. So I say that the mechanical psychology
         is useless and far worse than useless; it is paralyzing to human
         effort. (1929, pp. 69-72)

    On one level, MacDougall was strikingly wrong: the application of behav-
iorism (the control of behavior through the use of conditioning was immediate
and widespread. On another level he was strikingly right: behaviorism was most
famously used to not to further individual human interests, but to control indi-
vidual humans in the interests of political and economic power.

    The application of behaviorism for the purpose of controlling individuals to
further the interests of political and economic power played out most distress-
ingly through Yerkes' involvement in the war effort and Watson's involvement
in advertising.

    In April of 1918, Yerkes was called to an "Informal Conference on Morale"
with the Assistant Secretary of War and the Chief of Intelligence to apply the
work of psychology in creating a "systematic plan for stimulating and sustain-
ing morale of troops" (Report of Informal Conference on Morale, 1918). It is
worth noting that, in general contemporary usage, morale connotes a happy (or
unhappy) individual emotional state. But in the first half of the twentieth cen-
tury, the military definition of morale emphasized collective action (behavior):
"the psychological forces within a combat group that compel its members to get
into the fight" (Grinker & Spiegel, quoted in Manning, 1994). In this formula-
tion, "psychological forces" may or may not have anything to do with emotions,
much less happiness. What matters is group behavior: if the group is compelled
to action, its morale, by definition is high. If it hesitates or refuses to get into the
fight, its morale is low.

    Of course, as MacDougall might point out, the experience of the soldier whose
morale is in question matters greatly. MacDougall had treated victims of "shell
shock" in the British army during World War I. Unlike some of his colleagues
who used "disciplinary" treatments, which were "behavioural"--"electric shocks,
shouted commands, isolation and restricted diet"--MacDougall's treatments fol-
lowed "psychotherapeutic lines," emphasizing recalling the traumatic experience
and discovering its individual meaning to the patient (Howorth, 2000, p. 226).
This treatment wouldn't just help the soldier get "back into the fight," but would
also help society figure out if the war is worth its experiential and psychological
toll. But that toll--for instance, the years of depression, anxiety, and nightmares

172
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

that my grandfather suffered after serving in WWII--would mean nothing in the
behaviorist's schema of morale, since my grandfather was able to "get back into
the fight" shortly following several injuries and a Purple Heart.

    Yerkes' behaviorist influence on the American military's discussion of morale
could be seen a month after the first meeting of the Conference on Morale when
the group met a second time. The title of the group changed slightly: "Confer-
ence on Control of Morale" (emphasis added). Yerkes' report on the "Scope of
the Problem," frames the problem in behaviorist terms, citing a "great variety
and complications of conditions affecting morale" (emphasis added), asserting
that "the problems are in the main those of human behavior" and so the appro-
priate person to study such problems is one "who has the ability alike to predict
reactions and to properly relate methods of control to military requirements and
needs" (emphasis added). In other words, Yerkes framed the problem of morale
as a behavioral one, offering the behaviorist psychologist as its solution.

    The group consciously drew on the German system of propaganda as a mod-
el for their recommendations, viewing morale as a lifelong process of patriotic
conditioning. Approvingly reporting the Germans' use of school as a tool of
propaganda and their use of "furloughs and rewards" (positive reinforcements)
with soldiers, the group began to plot a comprehensive system to control of
morale from the ground up. Yerkes credited his work with this group, and the
multiple-choice test he devised to sort and reward recruits with promotion, with
helping to win the war (Gould, 1981, p. 224).

    Yerkes' application of behaviorism to the military may have helped to win the
war, but MacDougall implied that "human effort" would involve the effort to
end war. Even if the majority agrees that the war is a good cause, the experiences
of those actually participating in the war cannot be dismissed unless, as Watson's
behaviorists held, their behavior is all that matters. If it can actually be attributed
to him, Yerkes' success in controlling soldiers' morale by focusing solely on their
behavior and the conditions shaping that behavior likely confirmed MacDou-
gall's fear: behaviorism at the expense of mind and consciousness is paralyzing
to human effort.

    Ten years later, Watson would leave the imprint of behavioral psychology on
advertising (and generations of consumers) through his work for the J. Walter
Thompson Company. In Mechanical Man: John Broadus Watson and the Begin-
nings of Behaviorism, Kerry Buckley argues that before 1910, advertisements em-
phasized rational appeals to consumers (1989, p. 138). Watson used his behav-
iorist techniques to condition consumers to associate products with emotions:

         Advertisers, [Watson] cautioned, must always keep in mind
         that they are selling "more than a product." There are "idea[s]

                                                                                                 173
Wilson

         to sell--prestige to sell--economy to sell ... It is never so
         much as dry, solid, or liquid matter" ... in one carefully con-
         trolled experiment funded by the J. Walter Thompson agency,
         Watson found that smokers with definite brand preferences
         could not distinguish one brand of cigarettes from another.
         This reinforced Watson's conviction that the marketing of
         goods depended not on an appeal to reason but upon the
         stimulation of desire. (139-41)

    Watson's large-scale experimental test on consumers (i.e. advertising cam-
paigns) was just an extension of his test on eight-month old "Little Albert."
Just as he conditioned Albert to associate the rabbit with a loud noise, Watson
encouraged advertisers to condition consumers to associate the product with
prestige and love, or to associate the lack of a product with fear and rage. While
Watson claimed to have been capable of reconditioning Little Albert back to a
state of fearlessness (his mother removed him from the study before he could do
so), there would be no attempt to "recondition" the public back to their senses.
The application of behaviorism to advertising, which took place after MacDou-
gall's debate with Watson, would confirm MacDougall's fears that the applica-
tion of behaviorism would be useless in terms of serving "human purposes."

THE RESEARCHER PAUSES TO DAYDREAM ...

    Several battles had indeed been fought in those archived letters and texts,
and the corpses of human purpose, mind, and consciousness littered the dusty
pages. It was a heartbreaking spectacle to witness, and my vantage point of near-
ly a century didn't make it much easier to bear. I began seeing the behaviorists'
initials on everything about my life I felt to be lonely or controlling. Standard-
ized tests? R. M. Yerkes. Consumer culture? J. B. Watson. Computer grading
programs? R.M.Yerkes + J.B.Watson 4-Ever.

    Though I had found some of Titchner's work amusing, and agreed with Dew-
ey's point that introspection changed the emotional state under observation, I
felt a kinship with the introspectionists. I mourned the loss of Titchner's respect
for "Smith-ness" and "Jones-ness" and the influence of behavioristic systems of
standardized testing and educational research that had come to shape schools. I
had a new explanation for my sense of alienation as a teacher; I had descended
from the losers of Watson's war.

    A lost cause always drives me to desperate mental (if not behavioral) mea-
sures. I imagined calling for a National Day of Introspection. Individuals all over
the country would stand up and introspect--rising from wheelchairs in nursing

174
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

homes, climbing on top of desks in schoolrooms, walking out of cubicles in
office buildings, stepping from cars in the rat maze of suburban sprawl--all of
us standing to boldly speaking the sum of our thoughts and feelings, our con-
sciousness, our mind. The fact that no one would listen would be irrelevant. We
would be rising from the carnage, asserting that Watson had won the battle but
not the war, that we would not be controlled, that mind mattered.

    I knew the image teetered on the edge of insanity, but it made me feel better,
so I let it linger. I was looking around me, wondering if the gentleman at the
table next to me, texting with one hand and tapping the mouse of his computer
with the other hand, would be willing to introspect as a subversive act. I sus-
pected not. Who would join me? I ran through my list of family and friends.
As a graduate student, I had so few friends left that I skipped directly to leading
figures in the field of composition studies I'd been living with for the past years.
Peter Elbow? Definitely. Donald Murray? To be sure. Jane Emig? Hell, yeah!
James Berlin? Pshaw. Never in a million years.

    That's when it hit me--my thesis, the result of my hours of scholarly re-
search: James Berlin was a behaviorist. James Berlin was a behaviorist? The words
were so entirely absurd that they couldn't possibly have come from me. They
must have infected me from without, and the only way to rid myself of them was
to figure out what they meant. It was either that, or start embroidering National
Day of Introspection t-shirts.

THE "EXPRESSIONISTS" AS INTROSPECTIONISTS

    I was proceeding with a working thesis--James Berlin was a behaviorist--
which I almost completely rejected. Without a doubt, James Berlin would have
shared Professor MacDougall's distress at the exercise of power at the expense
of human interest. Ira Shor's pedagogy, which Berlin admiringly describes in
"Rhetoric and Ideology in the Writing Class" (1988), is based in a rejection of
the consumerist culture that Watson helped create through his work in advertis-
ing. Berlin's work is suffused with an ethical sensibility completely lacking from
Watson's.

    Still, something felt true about my fantastical thesis. I backed up to the most
reasonable image in my research-induced fantasy: the picture of Elbow, Murray,
and Emig, publicly and subversively introspecting with me. This part of my
daydream proved both simple and supportable: Elbow, Murray, and Emig were,
in some important way, like Titchener. The comparison held up when I placed a
passage from Titchener's psychologoy textbook next to a passage from Murray's
1970 article, "The Interior View: One Writer's View of Composition":

                                                                                                 175
Wilson

         A mental process is a process which can form part of the
         experience of one

         person only ... Not only does the mental process go on inside
         of you, it is so entirely inside of you that you are the only
         person who can ever get at it and observe it. (Titchener, 1989,
         pp. 9-10)

And,

         At the moment of writing the writer has a fundamental alone-
         ness ... I have found that at the center of the process I am
         alone with the blank page, struggling to discover what I know
         so that I can know what to say" (Murray, 1970, p. 22)

    Each man put the experiences of an individual at the center of his work. In
fact, as I re-examined the works of Murray and Elbow, I realized that they, along
with other leaders of the writing process movement, had built an entire theory
and practice around introspection--their own, and their students'.

    The fact that Murray, a columnist for the Boston Globe, would write about
his writing in 1970 was not entirely remarkable. Writers had written about their
experiences of writing long before he did, and his published work is peppered
with their insights: in The Interior View alone, Murray quotes no less than 10
authors who write about their writing, including Goethe, Spender, and William
Carlos Williams. What was remarkable, perhaps, was that Murray was not just
writing as a writer, but as a writing teacher, and he was beginning to construct a
theory of how we compose and how we could teach composition from his intro-
spection and the collected introspection of generations of great writers.

    Surely, as Tom Newkirk points out, some of the practices Murray advocat-
ed--conferencing, regular discussion of student writing, daily writing--had
been practiced by Barrett Wendell in the late 1800's (Newkirk, 1994, pp. 88-
89). But Wendell's theory of composition was not grounded in his observations
of his own writing practice; instead, he describes "elastic general principles" that
are "observed by thoroughly effective writers" (Wendell, 1891, pp. 2-3). While
he does focus on thought and emotion, asserting that they are "the substance of
what style expresses" (1891, p. 4), he never describes how a writer manages to
compose from those thoughts and emotions.

    Wendell is perhaps more comfortable introspecting--observing and narrat-
ing his thoughts and feelings--as he reads an example of good style; his discus-
sion of style includes a lengthy (and quite moving) description of how Robert
Browning's style in "Grammarian's Funeral" (1891, pp. 8-11) affects him. He
builds a theory of composition, in a sense, around his observations of himself

176
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

as a reader: I observe coherence when I read x, a great poem, and therefore, that
poet must have observed the principle of coherence. His advice to writers, then,
is to observe the principle of coherence, and his job as a writing teacher is, in
part, to describe the principle of coherence and its effects on a reader.

    Murray calls this approach the "exterior view of writing, principally exam-
ining what has been written or studying patterns which have evolved by the
analysis of what has been published" (1970, p. 21). He doesn't dismiss this view
as useless, but explains his own view differently: "I do not see writing from the
exterior view but from within my own mind and my own emotions as I try to
write every single day of my life" (1970, p. 21). Murray's attention to his own
experience--like Titchener's almost a century earlier--leads him for a concern
of the experiences of his students as individuals:

         There is no one way to write and there is no one way for
         the student to learn to write. We must accept the individual
         student and appreciate his individualness .... ultimately he
         [the student] has to learn the process for himself. (1970, pp.
         24-25)

    Three years later, Peter Elbow would publish Writing Without Teachers, in
which he warned readers that his advice to writers is based on his own experience:

         Though much or all of this may be in other books--some of
         which I have probably read--it seems to me my main source
         is my own experience. I admit to making universal generaliza-
         tions upon a sample of one. Consider yourself warned. (1973,
         p. 16)

    Elbow's generalizations are the product of his introspection about his writing
process. He describes how he came to the practice of freewriting: when he got
stuck while writing, he would,

         ... take out a fresh sheet of paper and simply try to collect
         evidence: babble everything I felt, when it started, and what
         kind of writing and mood and weather had been going on.
         (1973, p. 18)

Similarly, when Elbow successfully broke through his writing block,

         I would often stop and try to say afterwards what I thought
         happened. I recommend this practice. If you keep your own
         data, you may be able to build your own theory of how you
         can succeed in writing since my theory of how I can succeed
         may not work for you. (1973, p. 18)

                                                                                                 177
Wilson

    Elbow didn't just introspect in order to arrive at the principles that student
writers must observe: he proposed a form of introspection as the means by which
each individual student writer might "learn the process for himself " (1973, p.
15).

    Ten years after Elbow's Writing Without Teachers, Murray would suggest in
Teaching the Other Self: The Writer's First Reader that the point of the writing
conference was not to examine the student text, but to interact with the intro-
specting student--the "other self " created by the student's introspection. Mur-
ray claimed that the writer must be his own reader, and that in reading his own
writing, he forms two distinct selves: the first self who writes; and the "other
self " who reads, counsels, advises, and navigates the territory mapped out by the
writing for the first self. The other self also introspects: "the other self articulates
the process of writing" (Murray, 1982, p. 142).

    Lest we confuse an articulation of the process of writing with a purely be-
havioral description of what the writer does, Murray assured us that the teacher
must first acknowledge and respond to the writer's descriptions of his feelings as
he writes (1982, p. 145). The writer needs this other self to develop and grow,
and the teacher can help make this growth possible simply by encouraging, ex-
pecting, and listening to the other self speak.

FROM INTROSPECTION TO FREUD: LAYERS OF SELF

    Despite my fear that Watson had littered the pages of history with the corps-
es of mind and consciousness, introspection was clearly alive and well in the
1970s and 1980s, at least in composition studies. Introspection might have fall-
en out of vogue in the wake of behaviorism, but the "interior view" of the intro-
spectionists had survived and been nurtured elsewhere while it waited for Elbow
and Murray to surface anew as spokespersons. While writing process movement
founders such as Murray, Elbow, and Emig never drew directly on Titchener's
work or mention the method of introspection, they drew consciously on Freud's
work. Three years after Murray proposed nurturing the student writer's "other
self," Janet Emig described the multiple selves--or multiple layers of self--that
must be attended to by the writing teacher. Her version of Murray's "other self "
had a Freudian twist: the writing teacher must nurture the student's unconscious
self.

    Rather than dividing the writer into two separate selves as Murray did, she
divided the self into layers. These layers first take the form of skin in her opening
startling and wonderful image of the writer who has dutifully produced "the
conscious student theme" (1983, p. 46):

178
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

         the theme seems to have been written from one layer of the
         self--the ectoderm only, with student involvement with his
         own thought and language moving down an unhappy scale
         from sporadic engagement to abject diffidence. (Emig, 1983,
         p. 46)

    Emig quickly drops the skin analogy--we hear nothing further about the ec-
toderm or endoderm--but in this line, she vividly plants the idea of the layered
self, some of the layers exposed on the surface, and some submerged underneath.
It was a small leap to Freud's concept of the conscious and unconscious self, and
the related (though not strictly interchangeable) constructs: the id, ego, and
super-ego.

    Freud never viewed the conscious or unconscious as having different loca-
tions within the body in any literal sense. But popular imagination did. Even
now we talk of "uncovering" our unconscious thoughts, of "peeling the onion"
of our selves in therapy, of repressed or recovered memories which implies a
place where the forgotten memories have been stored, held under the surface,
hidden from our conscious self, which lies at the surface. Emig was not a Freud-
ian scholar, and did not cite Freud in "The Uses of the Unconscious in Compos-
ing" (1964) so she was likely working with this popular understanding of the
spatial division of the conscious and unconscious selves.

    Like Murray, who wanted to see a shift from the "exterior view" of compo-
sition to the "interior view," Emig argued that traditional writing instruction
doesn't allow the student to "consult this [unconscious] part of the self " and
"conspires against his inwardly attending" (1983, p. 46). She discusses how au-
thor Rudyard Kipling personified the "unconscious part of the writing self into
daemons" (1983, p. 49) and how Amy Lowell described dropping a simple topic
for a poem "into the subconscious much as one drops a letter into the mailbox.
Six months later ... the poem ... was `there''" (Lowell quoted in Emig, 1983, p.
52). Writing teachers needed to encourage inward attending--journeys to the
unconscious--if students were to write papers that went beyond (or below) the
"surface scrapings" produced by a traditional overemphasis on the surface of the
self--the control of the conscious mind.

    Five years after Emig's "The Uses of the Unconscious in Composing," Mur-
ray would make his plea for the role of procrastination in composing on the
grounds that procrastination allowed the subconscious to do its work. In Write
Before Writing, he describes why writers procrastinate:

         They sharpen well-pointed pencils and go out to buy more
         blank paper, rearrange offices, wander through libraries and
         bookstores, chop wood, walk, drive, make unnecessary calls,

                                                                                                 179
Wilson

         nap, daydream, and try not `consciously' to think about what
         they are going to write so they can think subconsciously about
         it. (1978, p. 376)

    To Murray, Elbow, and Emig, one legitimate subject of composition studies
was the writing self, and that self was divided: into the writing self and the other
self; into the unconscious or subconscious and conscious; or into the id, ego,
and super-ego. Emig and Murray emphasized the subconscious mind, uncon-
scious mind, or the id as a corrective to the overemphasis in traditional writing
instruction on the conscious mind. Just as the concept of self (or "selves," or
"layers of the self ") was central to the work of early writing process pioneers
such as Murray, Elbow and Emig, consciousness (not in the Freudian sense),
or mind had been central to the work of introspectionists such as Titchener.
And this comparison provided me the bridge to my otherwise absurd claim that
James Berlin was a behaviorist. To use an analogy that would never show up on
the SAT: John B. Waston is to Titchener as James Berlin is to Murray, Elbow,
and Emig.

    Like Watson, who rejected the concept of consciousness and thus the central
concepts of introspectionists like Titchener, James Berlin would reject the self at
the center of Murray, Elbow, and Emig's version of composition studies. Berlin's
criticism of the self in the late 1980s boils down to his view that the self--as a
private space--does not exist, and the self that does exist cannot be trusted in
the way that Elbow, Murray, and Emig trust it.

    Berlin's critique of this private self begins with a discussion of the concept
that Berlin would put at the center of his composition theory and practice:
ideology. Drawing from Theborn's interpretation of Althusser's definition of ide-
ology, Berlin establishes his working definition of ideology as "economic, social,
and political arrangements" (1987, p. 667), which privilege certain groups and
their interactions with each other and the material world. He "situates rhetoric
within ideology" (1987, p. 667), which means that he sees rhetoric as advancing
instead of mediating various ideologies.

    Berlin labels the rhetoric of Elbow and Murray as "subjective" or "expres-
sionistic." He labels Emig's work in The Composing Process of Twelfth Graders as
"cognitive rhetoric," but ignores her "Uses of the Unconscious in Composing,"
which would probably have qualified her for membership as an expressionist. In
Rhetoric and Reality, he identifies the focus of Elbow's expressionistic rhetoric:

         His emphasis, like that of all the expressionists considered in
         this section, is on the "I," on defining the self so as to secure
         an authentic identity and voice. This type of expressionistic
         rhetoric focuses on a dialectic between the individual and

180
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

         analogy as a means of getting in touch with the self. (1987, p.
         153)

    While Berlin acknowledges that Elbow and Murray's version of expressionis-
tic rhetoric was actually a protest against the dominant political and pedagogical
ideology and practice of the mid-twentieth century, he asserts that their focus
on the individual perpetuates a naïve understanding of the self that undermines
its own potential for changing dominant political and economic inequalities.

    Berlin claims that expressivism's focus on discovery of the self is problematic
in two ways: it doesn't acknowledge the ways in which the self has been formed
by ideological forces, so it often replicates dominant oppressive ideologies; and
a focus on individual self-expression can be appropriated by the dominant ide-
ology because it leads to only individual resistance (1987, p. 676). Individual
resistance is impotent; a rhetoric that doesn't lead to collective action, in Berlin's
mind, supports hegemony.

    Here to save the day is social epistemic rhetoric. In Berlin's description of
social epistemic rhetoric, knowledge results from the dialectic between a person,
the social group in which the person is acting, and the "material conditions of
existence," all of which depend on language because they are "verbal constructs"
(1987, p. 678). Furthermore, language--in which all three elements of this dia-
lectic are grounded--is itself the result of social construction in discourse com-
munities, so the individual is never really an individual. In essence, the "self " or
knowledge or idea that the student in an expressivist classroom is discovering
and expressing is actually the product of social construction and ideology. Ac-
cording to Berlin, ideology is inescapable but "must be continually challenged"
so as to reveal its economic and political consequences for individuals ... (1987,
p. 679). In Berlin's opinion, the only rhetoric prepared to continually challenge
and reveal ideology is the social epistemic.

    Pedagogy based in a social epistemic rhetoric, then, starts by showing stu-
dents the ways in which they have been constructed by their social, economic,
and political realities in ways that make them feel powerless. Then, it attempts
to help them work towards "a social order supporting the student's "full human-
ity" (Berlin, 1987, p. 680). Berlin describes Ira Shor's interdisciplinary study
of the hamburger as an example of social epistemic pedagogy. Shor's class used
economics, history, health sciences, sociology, English, and philosophy in order
to analyze the modern rise of the hamburger and its effects on students' lives.
According to Shor, the only goal worth considering in a classroom is the goal of
"liberated consciousness" (Berlin, 1987, p. 682).

    Berlin's critique of expressivism is curious, on many levels. None of the ex-
pressivists he critiques would oppose several of his main assertions: that language

                                                                                                 181
Wilson

is social; that different teaching practices express different ideologies; that one
of the goals of writing instruction is liberation. But despite these major areas
of agreement, there is something incredibly aggressive about Berlin's treatment
of the expressivists. Like Watson's Battle of Behaviorism, in which Watson is
determined to advance behaviorism at the expense of introspectionism, Berlin
is engaging in an act of warfare against the expressionists. This is hard to see, at
first, since Berlin's writing comes across as completely rational, academic, and
disinterested.

    But his attitude is revealed in the one metaphor that manages to invade his
otherwise sterile prose. Held up next to the writing of the expressionists, Berlin's
writing is almost completely stripped of metaphor and analogy--no surprise,
since he associates metaphor and analogy with the expressionists. But one re-
current metaphor stretches throughout Berlin's Rhetoric and Ideology, a more
polemic essay than his (relatively) descriptive categorization of various influ-
ences on writing instruction in Rhetoric and Reality. The metaphor, embedded
in the word "camp," is undeveloped in the text but central to Berlin's attitude
in the text: the image of a battle between Berlin and the expressionists belies
Berlin's academic, rational, reasonable tone. Berlin's "camps" are not separate
but happily co-existing summer camps on opposite sides of the same lake, with
expressionists sunbathing on one shore and social epistemics drinking bug juice
on the other. Instead, they are the camps of opposing armies, bunkered down
and strategizing against one another. Or, at least, Berlin is bunkered down and
strategizing against the expressionists; he is looking to defeat them.

    Berlin's aggression seems contraindicated. In an ethnographic study of ex-
pressivist writing classrooms conducted in 1994 at Boston College, Karen Sur-
man Paley (2001) found how the writing in these classes resists the divisive cat-
egories imposed by Berlin. The "expressivist" instructors she studied invariably
moved students beyond the personal in ways envisioned by the social epistemics.
Furthermore, Paley visited the class of Patricia Bizzell, whom Berlin labels a so-
cial epistemic, and describes the ways in which Bizzell's focus on the social led
to personal, autobiographical writing (2001). In other words, the focus on the
individual Berlin ascribes to the expressivists and the focus on the social that
Berlin ascribes to the social epistemics do not work against each other in prac-
tice, although he set them apart in theory.

    Furthermore, Emig, Murray, Elbow, and Berlin ultimately have the same
goal--to escape manipulation of the dominant ideology when that ideolo-
gy works against the "human purposes" MacDougall so eloquently defended
against Watson's focus on behavior. But Berlin's ire at the expressionist is perhaps
not rational, and may be rooted in an unconscious reaction to the unconscious
self, the very construct he derides in the expressionists' work. Thus, my absurd

182
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

sub-thesis: Berlin is a man uncomfortable with the unconscious. Yet, for all his
attempts at consciousness and control, he cannot escape the unconscious: his
ire at the expressionists is as much a gut reaction against their embrace of the
unconscious as a conscious criticism of their theory or pedagogy.

    While Emig never cited Freud, it may be useful to examine his description of
the id in New Introductory Lectures in Psychoanalysis when trying to understand
Berlin's response to the unconscious:

         we call it a chaos, a cauldron full of seething excitations ....
         It is filled with energy reaching it from the instincts, but it
         has no organisation, produces no collective will, but only a
         striving to bring about the satisfaction of the instinctual needs
         subject to the observance of the pleasure principle. (1989, p.
         91)

    The beginning of Berlin's discomfort is the preverbal nature of the uncon-
scious. The unconscious is beyond and before language, in Freud's formulation,
and we can describe it only by analogy. We know it only through its metaphoric
manifestation through our dreams and in our feelings--our non-verbal reac-
tions to events and people. But Berlin wants to believe that knowledge doesn't
exist without rhetoric--"there is no knowledge without language."

    In Emig's view, the unconscious, or id, knows things, not necessarily knowl-
edge that comes through or from language, and in using the unconscious in
composing, students can find a site of invention--a place to generate or discov-
er knowledge. For example, my daydream--the image of Elbow, Murray, and
Emig's participation in my National Day of Introspection--was an example of
my subconscious invention. To mix Amy Lowell's unconscious mailbox analogy
with Elbow's cooking metaphor, I dropped my research on Watson and the in-
trospectionists into the mailslot, let it mix around and simmer with my previous
discomfort about Berlin's attitude toward the expressionists, presto! Out came
my daydream, the image of Murray introspecting and Berlin refusing, which was
a preverbal thesis of sorts. That preverbal knowing, or image-knowledge, quickly
turned to words when I meditated on it.

    But Berlin's second, more urgent point of contention is with the idea that
the id "produces no collective will" (1987). The collective will that interests
Berlin, of course, is a collective resistance to the dominant ideology. However,
Berlin forgets that Freud's complementary concept--the super-ego--could be
viewed as the individual's internalization of the dominant ideology. Emig is just
as interested as Berlin in overcoming the damaging aspects of the super-ego, or
dominant ideology, but, unlike Berlin, she sees the id as immensely useful in
this quest.

                                                                                                 183
Wilson

    In Emig's view, the super-ego does damage on two fronts, and the use of
the id can be used to correct both. First, the super-ego speaks in stale, flat,
cliché. The id can provide fresh image and language to counteract these dead
expressions. Secondly, and more to Berlin's point, access of the id can point
to differences between the values of the dominant ideology internalized by the
super-ego and the needs of an individual human being which are contained in
the id. Let's consider an example from the Vietnam War, which played a major
role in shaping Murray, Emig, and Elbow's views of on the role of authority in
the classroom. A male student's super-ego may have internalized all forms of
societal authority, including the authority of the draft. But, in an expressionist
classroom, that student might be invited to listen to his unconscious, in a jour-
nal, or through freewriting, perhaps. He might find that his id is uncomfortable
with the war. He might move to Canada or become a Quaker or even become an
activist. Listening to your unconscious, then, for the expressionists, can be the
first step in political action--individual or collective action.

    But Emig's use of the id to escape ideology is frightening to Berlin, who views
the presence of "desire" in the id as problematic. In Althusser's work, which
Berlin relies on quite a bit, desire cannot be trusted, since ideology creates and
structures desire. Thus, desire itself and all inner life is unreliable and cannot be
trusted. While the expressionists and Berlin both want to escape manipulation
of the ideological forces that abuse power, Berlin's distrust of the unconscious
makes him suspicious of the expressivists. Emig sees the unconscious as a means
of escaping the dominant ideology, but Berlin actually sees Emig's means of es-
cape as a trap door. The only alternative, then, is for Berlin to consciously escape
manipulation. There is nothing to trust, in Berlin's world, except social epistemic
rhetoric, which helps him escape himself. He has consciously divorced himself
from his id, and divorces himself from anyone who hasn't. The expressivists' ac-
ceptance and use of the id is not only naive, but dangerous, a trap door.

    Berlin's criticism of the expressivists for failing to privilege collective over
private action is the most distressing part of his critique. Elbow, Emig, and oth-
ers protested Berlin's critique on the grounds that they are, quite obviously, in-
terested in political action. But what concerns me most in Berlin's emphasis on
collective action is what it reveals about his own attitude toward individual ex-
perience: in dismissing the value of an individual act of conscience, he expresses
a disregard for the value of that individual's experience.

    Berlin's dismissal of private acts of conscience points to a similarity between
Berlin and Watson. Watson rejected consciousness, mind, and individual ex-
perience, and his dismissal of experience as a theoretical construct made him
callous to the experience of the people whose behavior he would try to con-
trol--including Little Albert and generations of consumers. In a surprisingly

184
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

similar way, Berlin's dismissal of the value of the private self on theoretical
grounds makes him callous to the experiences of those who take private stands
against the dominant ideology. While the conscientious objector who moves
to Canada instead of organizing a protest on Washington doesn't make any
discernable difference in the dominant ideology, his private act of conscience
certainly makes a difference in his own experience of his life, and this difference
matters--to him, and to the people who love him. Berlin's inability to concede
that private experience matters is disturbing, given his ethical stand on matters
of ideology.

    In the end, my absurd, unconsciously constructed thesis both collapses and
stands. Berlin was never a behaviorist. But there are startling similarities between
his battle with the expressivists and Watson's battle with the introspectionists.
Berlin's ideological critique of the expressivists, for all its ethical posturing, suf-
fers from the same problem that plagues Watson's critique of the introspection-
ists: his dismissal of the value of an individual's private experience--perhaps
grounded in his own unconscious discomfort with the unconscious--leads him
to dubious ethical territory. As Titchener reminded us, ethics must be based in
a concern for the experience of an individual. Berlin's social epistemic theory
cannot be ethically grounded if it wages war on expressivism; the two "camps"
need to make love, not war.

NOTES

1. I eventually returned to this dismissal of experience in my dissertation: Writing
Assessment's "Debilitating Inheritance": Behaviorism's Dismissal of Experience. (Doctor-
al dissertation). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses.

REFERENCES

Berlin, J. A. (1987). Rhetoric and reality: Writing instruction in American colleges,
   1900-1985. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Berlin, J. A. (1988). Rhetoric and ideology in the writing class. College English
   50(5), 477-494.

Brigham, C. (1923). A study of American intelligence. Princeton University Press.
   Retrieved from http://archive.org/stream/studyofamericani00briguoft/study-
   ofamericani00briguoft_djvu.txt

Buckley, K. (1989). Mechanical man: John B. Watson and the beginnings of behav-
   iorism. New York: The Guilford Press.

Cheney, C., & Pierce, D. (2004). Behavior analysis and learning. Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                                                                                                 185
Wilson

Dewey, J. (1891). Psychology. New York: American Book Company. Retrieved
   from http://books.google.com/books?id=3mJ9AAAAMAAJ&pg=PR1&d-
   q=Dewey+Psychology+1891&hl=en&sa=X&ei=9MrrU56wOqvgsA-
   SU0IDgCQ&ved=0CDcQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=Dewey%20Psycholo-
   gy%201891&f=false

Elbow, P. (1973). Writing without teachers. New York: Oxford University Press.
Emig, J. (1964). The uses of the unconscious in composing. College Composition

   and Communication, 15, 6-11.
Emig, J. (1983). The web of meaning: Essays on writing, teaching, learning, and

   thinking. Upper Montclair, NJ: Boynton Cook.
Freud, S. (1989). New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis. New York: W. W.

   Norton.
Gould, S. J. (1981). The mismeasure of man. New York: W. W. Norton and

   Company.
Howorth, P. (2000). The treatment of shell-shock: Cognitive therapy before its

   time. Psychiatrist Bulletin, 24, 225-227.
Institute of Education Sciences. (2008). Funding opportunities. Retrieved from

   National Center for Education Research, U.S. Department of Education
   Web site: http://ies.ed.gov/funding/overview.asp
James, W. (1884). On some omissions of introspective psychology. Oxford Uni-
   versity Press.
Koestler, A. (1964). The act of creation. New York: Arkana.
Manning, F. (1994). Morale and cohesion in military psychiatry." In F. D.
   Jones (Ed.), Military psychiatry: Preparing for peace in war. Retrieved from
   Washington, DC: Office of the Surgeon General Borden Institute Web site:
   https://ke.army.mil/bordeninstitute/published_volumes/military_psychia-
   try/MPch1.pdf
Murray, D. (1970). The interior view of composing: One writer's philosophy of
   composition. College Composition and Communication, 21, 21-26.
Murray, D. (1982). Teaching the other self: The writer's first reader. College Com-
   position and Communication, 33, 140-147.
Murray, D. (1978). Write before writing. College Composition and Communica-
   tion, 29, 375-381.
Newkirk, T. (1994). The politics of intimacy: The defeat of Barrett Wendell at
   Harvard. In T. Newkirk, & L. Tobin (Eds.), Taking stock: The writing process
   movement in the '90s (pp. 115-132). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Paley, K.S. (2001). I-Writing: The politics and practice of teaching first-person writ-
   ing. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University.
Report of Informal Conference on Morale. (1918, April 13). Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 92, Folder 1752), New Haven, CT.

186
                               John Watson Is to Introspectionism as James Berlin Is to Expressivism

Report of Second Conference on Control of Morale. (1918, May 15). Yale Uni-
   versity Archives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 92, Folder 1752), New
   Haven, CT.

Schuetz, A. (1941). "William James's concept of the stream of consciousness."
   Philosphy and Phenomenological Research, 1, 442-452.

Titchener, E. (1898). A primer of psychology. Norwood, MA: Norwood Press.
Titchener, E. (1903). Class experiments and demonstration apparatus. American

   Journal of Psychology, 24, 439-455.
Titchener, E. (1909). Lectures on the experimental psychology of the thought-pro-

   cesses. New York: Macmillan. Retrieved from https://archive.org/details/lec-
   turesonexper00goog.
Watson, J. (1912, October 17). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 982), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1912, February 21). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 982), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1912, May 21). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Archives
   (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 982), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1913, April 7). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Archives
   (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 984, New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review,
   20, 158-177.
Watson, J. (1915, October 27). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 986), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1915, November 1). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 986), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1915, November 9). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 986), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1916, October 12). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Means Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 987), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1916, October 24). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Ar-
   chives (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 987), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1916, March 31). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Archives
   (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 987), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1916, May 12). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Archives
   (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 987), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1919,March 29). [Letter to Robert Yerkes]. Yale University Archives
   (Robert Mearns Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 988), New Haven, CT.
Watson, J. (1924a). Behaviorism. New York: W.W. Norton and Company.
Watson, J. (1924b). Psychology from the standpoint of a behaviorist (2nd ed.). Phil-
   adelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company.

                                                                                                 187
Wilson

Watson, J. (I) (1928). The psychological care of infant and child. New York: W.W.
   Norton.

Watson, J, & MacDougall, W. (1929). The battle of behaviorism. New York:
   W.W. Norton.

Wendell, B. (1891). English composition: Eight lectures given at the Lowell Insti-
   tute. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

Yerkes, R. [Letter to John. B. Watson.] Yale University Archives (Robert Mearns
   Yerkes papers, Box 51, Folder 986), New Haven, CT.

188
EXPRESSIVE PEDAGOGIES IN
THE UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH'S
ALTERNATIVE CURRICULUM
PROGRAM, 1973-1979

      Chris Warnick
      College of Charleston

    James Berlin's account of 1960s-era expressive pedagogy is over twenty years
old, but it continues to inform scholarship in composition and rhetoric. Despite
the critical reappraisal of Berlin's histories in the wake of the field's archival turn,
some scholars continue to cite Berlin's taxonomy of rhetoric and pedagogy, and
the place of expressive pedagogy within it, to analyze the field's history and fu-
ture. In describing what he sees as a dearth of archival histories on twentieth cen-
tury writing instruction, David R. Russell observes that Berlin's "book remains
the most-cited treatment of the 20th century" (2006, p. 258). Richard Fulkerson
draws extensively on Berlin's tripartite classification of the field in "Composition
at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Using overblown rhetoric similar to
that Maja Wilson observes in Berlin's critique of expressivism (see her contribu-
tion in this volume), Fulkerson concludes "that expressivism, despite numerous
poundings by the cannons of postmodernism and resulting eulogies, is, in fact,
quietly expanding its region of command" (2005, p. 655). But as Karen Surman
Paley and others have pointed out, Berlin's conclusions about expressivism rest
on evidence found in textbooks and published research and ignore actual class-
room practice. According to Paley

         it is unfortunate that Berlin ... does not seem to have test-
         ed his theoretical conclusions against actual "expressionist"
         classroom practice. If he had, he might have seen a range of
         pedagogies, some more overtly sociopolitical than others, de-
         pending on the comfort level and belief system of the teacher.
         (2001, p. 22)

    This essay takes up Paley's call to research "actual `expressionist' classroom
practice" by examining materials from an experimental first-year program at
the University of Pittsburgh known as the Alternative Curriculum, which ran
from 1973 to 1979.1 While the Alternative Curriculum archive provides an

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.12  189
Warnick

incomplete picture of classroom practices, syllabi, student papers, newslet-
ters, and other program documents upset the generalizations of expressivism
made by Berlin and others. Specifically, program documents reveal that teach-
ers and students adopted personal writing strategies for purposes other than
self-knowledge. Students, for example, engaged in personal writing activities to
experiment with alternative writing styles, to build a group identity as members
of the program, and to critique American higher education and its marginal-
ization of alternative learning programs such as the Alternative Curriculum.
The purpose of journal writing within the program was not always "to capture
one's unique, personal response to experience," as Berlin contends (1987, p.
152); instead, students practiced journaling to complete writing activities that
stressed audience, revision, and genre. Perhaps most importantly, teachers in
the program who drew from expressivist theory--especially economist David
Bramhall, who taught a journal writing course that used a chapter from Ken
Macrorie's telling writing--led courses that in practice challenged expressivist
assumptions about personal writing.

THE ALTERNATIVE CURRICULUM PROGRAM

    The Alternative Curriculum, a first-year program that eventually accepted
sophomores as well, was part of a larger general education reform package at
Pitt that itself was a response to student and faculty unrest (see "Arts"; Levenson;
Marbury; Tiernan). A letter sent to new students in 1975, signed by AC core
faculty as well as graduate and undergraduate assistants, identifies ten objectives
of the program, among which are a "self-designed curriculum," "learning from
the inside-out and by practice," an "open environment; learning outside the
classroom," and "finding one's own purpose for learning." After several failed
attempts to start the program, the AC opened its doors in 1973, enrolling 150
students, 130 of whom were selected through a lottery process with another 20
selected based on interviews with faculty (Kambic, 1974, p. 2). Program an-
nouncements indicate that students were assigned to "core groups" consisting of
fifteen students and one faculty member. During the first weeks of the semester,
groups met to reflect on the nature of education and to discuss their learning
goals. According to letters sent to prospective students, there were assigned read-
ings for these group meetings, which included popular texts on alternative ed-
ucation--including How Children Fail and Freedom and Beyond, by John Holt,
and Summerhill, by A.S. Neill. Students were also expected to attend what were
called "offerings," lectures given by faculty and community members who spoke
on their area of interest or expertise. These offerings, which covered such topics
as "Black Autobiography and the Liberal Experience," "The Physics of Music,"

190
                                                                                       Expressive Pedagogies

"A Revolution in Catholicism," and "Change in Education and the Social Or-
der," were intended to raise questions, issues, and methods that students could
pursue in their work throughout the term.

    After this initial period, students were responsible for completing four "learn-
ing projects" each semester, and these projects could take the form of a group
workshop (led by either a faculty member or another student), an independent
study, or fieldwork. Students did fieldwork at local public radio stations, area
hospitals, and daycare centers; they conducted independent studies on "Labor
History," "Basic Calculus," and "Drawing and Design;" they undertook work-
shops addressing prison reform, children's literature, and writing. Students did
not receive letter grades for these learning projects; instead, by enrolling in the
program students agreed to take a block of up to fifteen credits each semester
on a "credit/no entry" basis. In consultation with a faculty member, students
drew up a learning contract in which they outlined the purpose and shape of
their particular learning project, and the corresponding faculty member would
comment on the strengths and weaknesses of the project.

    Former AC faculty member Dan Tannacito characterized the program's
overall goal this way: "one could say that the program set out to let students
define how to envision an alternative way of life within but opposed to the
dominant cultural and educational model." Writing played a vital role in stu-
dents' attempts to imagine the "alternative way of life" spoken of by Tannacito.
According to Tannacito, "students wanted to learn how literature and writing
were an asset in their lives. They had experienced them as an imposition, via
schooling." Students in the program did not write themes, as they might be
expected to do in other first-year writing courses, but they did learn traditional
genres of academic writing, such as lab reports, research papers and literary crit-
icism. However, faculty in the program also allowed students room to explore
alternative forms of writing. Tannactio explained, for instance, how he regularly
assigned forms of writing other than the essay. "The main forms of writing that
I asked of students," he told me, "were journaling, note-taking, and creative
writing. Sometimes, we asked people to write letters and arguments related to
public issues that were being debated or in the local news. There were also com-
munity-based writing tasks."

    Tannacito's comments suggest that at least some AC faculty had a lot in com-
mon with expressivists. They, too, wanted students to learn how writing could
play a meaningful role in their lives as thinkers and citizens, and they imagined
that one way to reach this goal was to teach personal, reflective forms of writing.
More importantly, though, Tannacito's comments reveal that expressive prac-
tices such as journaling and creative writing assignments sometimes took place
alongside or as part of public and politically-oriented writing projects, which

                                                                                                 191
Warnick

runs counter to Berlin's claim that expressivist classrooms encourage students
to find their voice "not through the happening or the political confrontation"
(1987, p. 152), but through private reflection.

EXPRESSIVIST PRACTICES IN THE ALTERNATIVE
CURRICULUM

    Expressive practices and values surfaced in the AC in a variety of ways that
both uphold and resist common generalizations made about expressivist theory.
Syllabi, workshop announcements, evaluations, and other documents illustrate
that students practiced journaling, freewriting, drafting, and revision. Writing
courses were run as workshops, with students sharing and evaluating one an-
other's writing. Students compiled portfolios to document the work they did to
complete a workshop or fieldwork project and wrote reflective papers describ-
ing what they learned from this process. Some of the program's writing courses
taught texts and methods directly associated with expressivism. For example, a
fall 1976 program newsletter advertises a workshop based on Peter Elbow's Writ-
ing Without Teachers. According to the advertisement, the workshop

         is geared towards strengthening the ability to write, even
         when you're "not in the mood," and learning to constructively
         criticize the works of others and hopefully your own. Writing
         Without Teachers by Peter Elbow is used as a guideline. Each
         workshop session is started off with ten minutes of free writ-
         ing, after which the group is broken into smaller groups to
         read and discuss what people have written that week. All types
         of writing are encouraged.

    As the text of this advertisement illustrates, students were encouraged to
approach peer review, an important aspect of expressive pedagogy, as a critical
and rhetorical practice. Students are prompted to "constructively criticize" each
others' work, not simply "check for the inauthentic in the writer's response,"
which Berlin describes as the purpose peer review serves in expressivist class-
rooms (1987, p. 152).

    While it remains unclear how important peer review was in the program
as a whole, journaling appears to have been a widespread practice. Documents
in the archive suggest that the purpose of journaling wasn't always "to capture
one's unique, personal response to experience," as Berlin argues was the case in
expressivist classrooms (1987, p. 152)--although this type of writing did take
place. For example, a September 1974 handout written by physics professor
John Townsend titled "Learning Strategies and Tactics: A guide and discussion

192
                                                                                       Expressive Pedagogies

promoter for students in the Alternative Curriculum" recommends journal writ-
ing as an effective learning strategy: "Keep a journal. Because the AC is not
tied to specific courses, keeping a journal helped students last year to provide a
continuity and a record of events that was valuable to have at year's end. It also
gives you practice in expressing yourself by writing." A document listing proj-
ects completed during the 1973-1974 academic year corroborates Townsend's
comment. Among the projects listed are "Self-evaluation; discussions, journals
and essay," "Working for the University Times; a journal and essay," "Apprentice
movie projectionist; a journal," and "Becoming a volunteer fireman; a journal
and essay." Townsend's advice and projects such as these suggest that one func-
tion journals served in the program was for students to document their experi-
ences and to generate ideas for more finalized projects that weren't necessarily
personal in nature.

    Instead of earning letter grades, students received descriptive comments from
an AC faculty member who was responsible for overseeing the project. As part
of the evaluation process, students wrote brief descriptions of the projects they
completed. These descriptions sometimes took on the shape of reflective per-
sonal essays in which the student described what they learned from this project.
One such example is an activity description by an unnamed student discussing
her writing workshop. Stating that she "found a number of outlets for exploring
the uses of writing," the student lists the different writing activities she complet-
ed, which included "a description of AC for the University Course Selection
Bulletin," "an introductory letter to AC for high school seniors," and "articles
for the AC newsletter." She goes on to describe how, alongside these projects,
she also wrote a journal:

         I've been keeping a journal, for no one but myself to "get
         at" my confusions, to clarify my idea(L)s, and to record the
         changes within me in an outward form. I read Dave Bram-
         hall's packet on "Keeping a Journal" with great fervor. Re-
         reading excerpts from my journal I now realize that my life
         is disintegrated; the experiences each day, the forces which
         are playing important roles in my life, and my real-imaginary
         wishes all blend into one whole. Writing is becoming more of
         a natural expression for me. I am choosing it and using it in
         many ways and I now see why I always will.

    The type of journal writing the student describes here is intensely personal.
According to her, the journal is "for no one but myself " and it serves to capture
the writer's complex self, its contradictions, beliefs, and changes. At the same
time, though, the student claims the process of keeping a journal was among

                                                                                                 193
Warnick

a set of writing activities that helped her understand the rhetorical nature of
writing. By stating that "I am choosing it [writing] and using it in many ways,"
this student seems to have an emerging awareness of "how meaning is shaped by
discourse communities," knowledge Berlin claims expressive pedagogy ignores
(1987, p. 153).

    There were occasions where journal writing within the program took on
more of a social dimension. An article in the October 1974 issue of the pro-
gram's newsletter, which was designed and written by students, discusses stu-
dents' plans for an Alternative Curriculum magazine. The article indicates that
there was some debate about what shape this magazine should take and one
"idea calls for a community journal in which people, workshops, offering pre-
senters can contribute on a day to day level. We may choose to keep the journal
in epic form (a continuous "poem" or story of experiences)." The author of the
article appears to prefer this option because she argues that a collective journal
would enable students to better process their coursework: "We would begin to
use retrospection. So very much is happening all the time. If we take some time
out to write/think about it, somehow it all begins to make sense."

    It's unclear how this debate was resolved or whether a magazine was ever
produced; no copies exist in the archive and individuals I interviewed didn't
recall it. However, students and faculty who participated in a field trip to New
England-area experimental learning programs in the spring of 1975 did com-
pose a collective journal that sounds similar to the one described in the program
newsletter. According to a memo written that same year to Robert Marshall, the
Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Tannacito and Bramhall proposed
that interested faculty and students visit the Inner College at the University of
Connecticut, Goddard College in Vermont, and other institutions. They hoped
to consult with John Holt, Jonathan Kozol, and other educational activists. Esti-
mating a total budget of roughly $3,000, Tannacito and Bramhall state the trip
would result in a 30-minute film and journal recording the fieldwork. No record
of the film exists, but a copy of the journal, titled Total Bus, does survive. The
journal includes over thirty anonymous entries that range from one-paragraph
personal reflections to three-page reports that explain the history, structure, and
purposes of organizations the group visited. An example of the latter is this ex-
cerpt from an entry on the New Haven Women's Liberation Center:

         The center has been in existence for about 5 years. It is not a
         Yale organization and most women that come to the center
         now are not Yale students. "The New Haven Women's Libera-
         tion Center developed out of small meetings between friends
         working on political issues in New Haven in 1968-69. These

194
                                                                                       Expressive Pedagogies

         meetings soon grew and attracted 30-60 women every Sunday
         evening, including a number of Yale graduate and undergrad-
         uate women." (NHWLC) The center is funded by donations
         monthly pledges [sic], $5.00 fees from women joining the
         Connecticut Feminist Federal Credit Union and a current
         $2,000 NIMH grant.

    Passages like this one, which cites the group's research, suggest the group
imagined the journal to serve public, as well as private, needs. The research trip
members conducted and wrote about in the journal could be used by leaders in
the Alternative Curriculum and other institutions across the campus, especially
Pitt's Women's Center, to evaluate their organizations and generate new ideas.
Journal entries such as this one further complicate the characterization of expres-
sive writing as merely personal or at best quasi-public.

AN ECONOMIST TEACHES KEN MACRORIE

    The course documents I examine in this section dramatize what happens
when any set of pedagogical theories--be they expressivist, current-tradition-
al, or social-epistemic--gets deployed by specific teachers in specific classrooms
with specific students: elements of these theories are accepted and followed
while others are ignored, misread, challenged, or revised. David Bramhall, a
political economist who helped found the AC and often served as the public
face of the program, led a workshop in the first two years of the program enti-
tled "On Keeping a Journal," which included among its readings a chapter on
journal writing from Macrorie's telling writing.2 Bramhall's course is concrete
evidence that expressivism influenced the work of faculty across the curriculum.
This influence can't be described in simple terms, however. The course syllabus
and sample student journals suggest that Bramhall appropriated certain aspects
of Macrorie's pedagogy while disagreeing with or misreading others. Specifically,
Bramhall's advice to students about journal writing echoes what Macrorie states
about the importance of "oppositions," but Bramhall, who imagines the purpose
of journaling differently than Macrorie does, also seems to misread Macrorie's
point about "telling facts."

    The course syllabus contains only one sentence that references Macrorie di-
rectly, but other passages in the document allude to points Macrorie makes in
telling writing. For example, the course description ends with this paragraph
that touches on, without naming specifically, Macrorie's idea of "oppositions:"

         So, try it. Don't feel you have to write every day, but when
         you have an idea, an impression, an experience, a new way of

                                                                                                 195
Warnick

         seeing something (or yourself ), write it down in a real para-
         graph so you can recapture it later. Argue with yourself when
         you feel yourself divided about something. You can always
         rethink and write new feelings about a past entry--you're not
         committed forever to a first impression. But let go some, be
         honest with yourself, and have fun with it!

         Macrorie begins an earlier chapter on "oppositions" with this
         definition:

         Strong writers bring together oppositions of one kind or
         another. Kitchen language and elevated language, long and
         short sentences, fast and slow rhythms. And what they choose
         to present from life--whether it be object, act, or idea--is
         frequently the negative and the positive, one thing and its
         opposite, two ideas that antagonize each other. (1970, p. 71)

    According to Macrorie's definition, opposition may be created through style
or content, the latter of which seems to be more important to Bramhall. His
advice to "Argue with yourself when you feel yourself divided about something"
sounds similar to Macrorie's idea of opposition being created by "two ideas that
antagonize each other" (1970, p. 89).

    The only direct reference Bramhall makes to Macrorie in the syllabus is this
summary of the chapter on journal writing: "I guess the main thing stressed
in the MacCrorie [sic] chapter included here ["keeping a journal"] is to write
concretely--and to write thoughts and feelings rather than mainly a record of
actions." Here Bramhall seems to be alluding to what Macrorie calls "telling
facts," concrete images and details that portray a writer's realization of a feeling
or idea. Macrorie recommends the following steps for creating "telling facts":

         when you have to mention anything in order to tell a story
         or make a point, force yourself to put down the name of that
         thing if it has a name, or to show it in its particular setting or
         doing its thing particularly. Don't say you pushed the throttle
         and the motorbike did its thing. Give the name of that thing
         and the sound and fell or smell, or whatever you can. (1970,
         p. 35)

    For Macrorie, "telling facts" are important to journal writing for an addition-
al reason: they allow the writer to get meaning from their journal entries upon
subsequent re-readings (1970, pp. 122-123). It's interesting to note, however,
that Bramhall appears to distill this concept down to the commonplace advice
"to write concretely," which doesn't capture the imagistic nature of Macrorie's

196
                                                                                       Expressive Pedagogies

"telling facts." Additional evidence in this passage--Bramhall's phrase "I guess
the main thing stressed in the ... chapter" suggests Bramhall is uncertain about
his reading of Macrorie, understandable given his professional training is in eco-
nomics, not writing.

    The most significant point at which Bramhall's syllabus diverges from Mac-
rorie's approach is when Bramhall explains the purpose of journaling. Unlike
Macrorie, who argues that "all good journals observe one fundamental: they do
not speak privately" (1970, p. 123), Bramhall tells students they can share their
journals with others after the fact, but they'll have more success keeping a jour-
nal if they think of it as private. (See Daniel Collins' essay in this collection for
a further explanation of the social dimension behind Macrorie's pedagogy.) The
journal, according to the course description, "is your continuing dialogue with
yourself--that's the purpose and you won't make it if you try to write it for any-
one else--a teacher, posterity, or even a loved one." It remains unclear whether
this disagreement with Macrorie was conscious on Bramhall's part. Especially
given his summary of Macrorie's chapter, it could be that Bramhall overlooked
or misunderstood this part of Macrorie's argument, and/or it could be that this
sense of the journal as an engine of private reflection better fit Bramhall's teach-
ing philosophy, which was described in a profile of Bramhall that appeared in
the fall 1974 issue of the AC Newsletter. An important aspect of Bramhall's
pedagogy, according to the unnamed student writer, is reflection: "Finally there
is reflectiveness. Dave feels we must keep looking at the process of learning,
and at what is happening to human relations." Even though the latter part this
comment suggests that there was a social dimension to Bramhall's teaching, it
appears that an even more important goal of Bramhall's teaching was to have
students better understand themselves as learners, which could help explain the
syllabus' definition of the journal as a "continuing dialogue with yourself."

    The course file also contains model student journals that Bramhall distrib-
uted to the class, and these texts further reveal the complex manner in which
Bramhall appropriated Macrorie's work. This is especially the case with the first
journal in the file, which was written by an unnamed young woman enrolled in
the program during its first semester. The journal consists of a handful of entries,
all of which focus on the writer's attempt to figure out who she is. One particular
entry discusses the writer's realization that she has no discernible self:

         I want to write something about myself but I don't know
         what because I don't know myself. I'm not even sure I have
         a "myself " any more at this point. Right before I went home
         for Thanksgiving I felt as though I really had things straight in
         my mind and that I was happy with me. Maybe I was justified

                                                                                                 197
Warnick

         in feeling like that for a few days because I really did think I
         had my head together. But now I know I'm wrong. There is
         no "me." "Me" is a lot of other people's ideas, opinions and
         gestures. I am what I want other people want me to be.

    A later entry from the journal shows the writer expressing more self confi-
dence, although it remains unclear whether she's come to any greater under-
standing of who she is, other than that she wants to be happy: "I am fighting.
Sometimes I think the other side is getting the better of me, but I won't lose.
I can't. Because if I don't win, I'll die. And I don't want to die. A dead person
cannot be happy. I want to be happy and I will. Today is the first day I'm going
to be alive."

    Absent from this writer's journal, or at least those excerpts Bramhall shared
with the class, are any "telling facts." Instead of recording images, descriptions,
or quotes that capture her self-doubt, these passages present a string of declara-
tive sentences that simply state the writer's predicament ("There is no `me.'" "I
want to be happy and I will."). And even though these passages follow Bramhall's
advice "to write thoughts and feeling rather than mainly a record of actions,"
they don't follow his suggestion "to write concretely." The reasons behind the
writer's self-doubt remain unclear, and nowhere does she explain why she has a
new understanding of herself or what she will do exactly "to be alive." Bramhall's
syllabus suggests that this writer's journal, along with the others he distributed
to the class, serves as a model for students. "They help to show how different
journal styles may be," he writes. But this student's journal doesn't always seem
to match up with Bramhall's own approach to journal writing.

    My intention in pointing out this inconsistency is not to criticize Bramhall or
the unnamed student writer. Instead, I cite these examples because they illustrate
my larger point that we are unable to fully determine the exact pedagogical prac-
tices that emerge from expressivist theory--or any theory, for that matter. If we
are to understand the myriad ways an important pedagogical theory (or rather, set
of theories) like expressivism informed classroom practice, more archival research
needs to be done on 1960s-era classrooms and programs, including those, like the
Alternative Curriculum, that existed separately from English departments.

NOTES

1. In his essay included in this collection, Peter Elbow similarly claims that histori-
ans of the field "need to find more accurate ways to describe the views of the people
[expressivism] was pinned on." I agree with Elbow, and this essay attempts to answer
his call. I am aware that my reliance on the terms "expressive," "expressivist," and
"expresivism" in this essay could be read as problematic because they potentially

198
                                                                                       Expressive Pedagogies

re-inscribe the simplistic attitude toward expressivism I seek to contest. However, I
use these terms because they frame the field's long-standing debate about pedagogies
involving personal writing (another term Elbow complicates in useful ways). In an-
alyzing the complexities involved whenever any theory is adapted to classroom prac-
tices, this essay can be read as a first step toward Elbow's goal of eliminating the word
"expressivism"--and the assumptions that surround it--from our historical lexicon.

2. Other readings included excerpts from Henry David Thoreau's and Simone de
Beauvoir's journals; The Education of Kate Haracz: Journal of an Undergraduate,
which was originally printed in a 1970 issue of Change magazine; and a chapter
from Barrett Mandel's Literature and the English Department that examines stu-
dents' journal writing in an Honors drama course. Mandel had previously taught at
Pitt and had worked alongside Bramhall on curriculum reform.

REFERENCES

Alternative Curriculum Records. (1973-1979). University of Pittsburgh Ar-
   chives, Archives Service Center, University Archives, Pittsburgh, PA.

Arts and sciences review committee reports open hearing findings. (1970, Janu-
   ary 19). The Pitt News Microfilm.

Berlin, J. A. (1987). Rhetoric and reality: Writing instruction in American colleges,
   1900-1985. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

Fulkerson, R. (2005). Composition at the turn of the twenty-first century. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication, 56(4), 654-687.

Haracz, K. (1970). The education of Kate Haracz: Journal of an undergraduate.
   Change in Higher Education, 2(3), 12-26.

Holt, J. C. (1972). Freedom and beyond. New York: E.P. Dutton.
Holt, J. C. (1964). How children fail. New York: Pitman.
Kambic, M. (1974, March 4). Unusual class prepares frosh. The Pitt News Mi-

   crofilm.
Levenson. (1969, May 27). Bramhall talks course review. The Pitt News Micro-

   film.
Macrorie, K. (1970). Telling writing. Rochelle Park, NJ: Hayden.
Mandel, B. J. (1970). Literature and the English department. Champaign, Il: Na-

   tional Council of Teachers of English.
Marbury, D. (1969, October 22). ASRC: Curriculum innovation. The Pitt News

   Microfilm.
Neill, A. S. (1977). Summerhill: A radical approach to child rearing. New York:

   Simon and Schuster.
Paley, K. S. (2001). I-writing: The politics and practice of teaching first-person writ-

   ing. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

                                                                                                 199
Warnick

Russell, D. R. (2006). Historical Studies of Composition. In P. Smagorinsky
   (Ed.), Research in Composition: Multiple Perspectives on Two Decades of Change.
   New York: Teachers College Press.

Tiernan, D. (1969, June 10). Houston, four others join Bramhall, ASCRC. The
   Pitt News Microfilm.

200
REREADING ROMANTICISM,
REREADING EXPRESSIVISM:
REVISING "VOICE" THROUGH
WORDSWORTH'S PREFACES

      Hannah J. Rule
      University of South Carolina

    To take up the idea of critical expressivism is to insist upon complexity, con-
tradiction, revision, and expansion, rather than reduction, dismissal, and sim-
plification. Being critically expressivist too then involves a stance toward how
we shape disciplinary histories. Current-traditional, expressivist, social construc-
tionist--these are meant to signal broad and sure shifts in the foundations of
writing pedagogy and disciplinarity. While these camps might render a telos or
progress narrative, they at the same time inevitably diminish practice and con-
cepts. There is imprecision in monolithic terms--expressivism, social construc-
tionism, the personal, the social, romanticism--because, as Peter Elbow writes
in this volume, these broad terms conceal their multiplicity. Equally unproduc-
tive, the terms are often wielded as weapons, as instruments of reduction and
dismissal. As this essay works to point out, pedagogies and rhetorics are deemed
untenable because they are labeled romantic or expressivist, or romantic-expres-
sivist. This essay works to complicate these alliances.

    Over time, composition scholars have found both resonance and dissonance
with romanticism. While some have found romantic influence a reason to dis-
miss certain practices or pedagogies, still others have drawn upon the romantic
period to invigorate our conceptions of expressivism. Finding the British ro-
mantic period a productive historical site, in this essay I suggest that nuance can
be brought to understanding how expressivism, through romanticism, might
understand language as "personal." Through the canonical text on language in
the Romantic period, Wordsworth's Prefaces to Lyrical Ballads and theories of
language circulating in the romantic period, I offer a means of seeing roman-
tic--and by extension, expressive--language and expression in a novel way. Es-
tablishing connections between Wordsworth's Prefaces and the work of Peter
Elbow make it possible to understand that language emanates not from the radi-
cally isolated individual (as the most familiar cultural understandings of roman-
ticism would have it), but from immersion in the physical world. Understanding

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.13  201
Rule

romantic-expressivist language in this way illuminates under-theorized aspects
of language in the expressivist tradition, including the role of the physical body
in writing, as well as the role of sense experience, presence, and physical location.
Most significantly perhaps, this rereading complicates the field's often obses-
sive disavowals of the idea of voice in writing. Finally, this reimagined roman-
tic conception of language brings productive complication to the most familiar
and over-simplified divides between expressivism and constructionism, a goal of
many contributors in this volume.

READING ROMANTICISM FOR COMPOSITION STUDIES

    Since its disciplinary beginnings, composition studies has forged curious links
to romanticism. Linda Flower, for example, in her textbook Problem-Solving
Strategies for Writers, defines her problem-solving view of writing in opposition
to what she deems a particularly romantic version of invention. The romantic
model of writing, exemplified by Coleridge's "Kubla Kahn," she suggests, posits
writing as effortless, mysterious, and as the domain of genius. Wanting to em-
phasize "learnability," Flower defines her rational, problem solving approach as
the only reasonable alternative to Coleridge's (and by extension, romanticism's)
seeming creative mysticism, its "myth of inspiration" (Flower, 1989, p.41). Ac-
cepting Coleridge's conception of writing, after all, would mean the writer isn't
able to learn to write at all. For Flower, Coleridge, and romanticism more broad-
ly, is big trouble for invention and big trouble for writing instruction.

    Tethered to familiar romantic cultural tropes of original genius, mysticism,
and inspiration, Coleridge, and more generally familiar "romantic" conceptions
of writing, have become sites against which some compositionists have defined
our disciplinary pursuits. Among the most familiar of these voices include Rich-
ard E. Young, who works to separate rhetoric's pursuits from a particularly res-
onant word on theories of Romantic invention, vitalism. "Vitalist assumptions,
inherited from the Romantics," Young matter-of-factly states,

         with [their] stress on the natural powers of the mind and
         the uniqueness of the creative act, leads to a repudiation of
         the possibility of teaching the composing process, hence the
         tendency of current-traditional rhetoric to become a critical
         study of the products of composing and an art of editing.
         Vitalist assumptions become most apparent when we consider
         what is excluded from the present discipline that had earlier
         been included, the most obvious and significant exclusion
         being the art of invention. (2009, p. 398)

202
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

    Vitalist influence for Young is then simultaneously romantic and detrimen-
tal to rhetoric's pursuits. Both Flower and Young offer shorthand conceptions
of romantic ideas that they assume endure in culture, influencing writing stu-
dents and teachers of writing. Moreover, they define this romantic influence
antithetically to the pursuits of composition studies. From this viewpoint, to
purport pedagogies or rhetorics inflected with romantic assumptions is to be
backward--as Young says, romantic-vitalist assumptions put focus on products
and take us back to the debunked, product-centered days of current-tradition-
alism. Indeed, as Hawk points out, composition scholars have most often used
romanticism as "a category ... in the discipline for identifying and excluding
particular rhetorical practices" (Hawk, 2007, p. 1). Quickly naming a concept
in composition studies "romantic" has then, on one hand, become shorthand in
composition studies for dismissal and obsoletism.

    On the other hand, though, and often working to problematize these
quick links, many compositionists have conversely found the romantic peri-
od a fruitful site for contextualizing and expanding some of our disciplinary
concerns. Berlin, Hawk, Fishman and McCarthy, and Gradin, to name a few,
bring complexity and dimension to the relationship between composition and
romanticism primarily through close readings of primary romantic texts and
figures. James Berlin, for example, in "The Rhetoric of Romanticism" questions
the grounds on which Young and others have made "Romanticism--and, by
implication Coleridge--responsible for the erosion of rhetoric as a discipline"
(1980, p. 62). Berlin close reads the primary texts of Coleridge to arrive at the
conclusion that "many of the objections made to Coleridge's view of rhetoric
would be rendered nugatory if those making them would realize that Coleridge
does not demean rhetorical activity in favor of the poetic" (1980, p. 72). The
close reading of primary romantic texts and figures reveals productive insights
on the nuance of Coleridge's considerations of rhetoric and poetic. Byron Hawk
performs similar, sustained close readings in order to understand differently the
traditionally romantic concept of vitalism. Though he includes Coleridge on the
way, Hawk reworks romantic influence by contextualizing vitalism in a history
much longer than just the romantic period, extending it toward complexity the-
ory (2007, p. 259). His book complicates the often-easy ways romanticism gets
linked to composition. The result of these "closer looks" at romantic texts and
ideas is a more nuanced understanding romantic writers and cultural ideals and
an invigorated concept in composition. For Hawk, a more nuanced conception
of vitalism opens space for him to reimagine pedagogy that fits "our current
electronic context and the complex ecologies in which students write and think
and situates these practices within a contemporary vitalist paradigm of com-
plexity" (2007, p. 10). While there has been a habit of using romanticism to

                                                                                                 203
Rule

undermine certain schools of composition thought, romanticism can be equally
generative, bringing new light to pervasive questions or conventional composi-
tion wisdoms. In the broadest sense, in this essay, I continue this productive act
of looking back to romanticism to question the tacit ways in which expressivism
has been tenuously linked to certain thin versions of romanticism.

    Like vitalism, expressivism has garnered strong connections between com-
position and romanticism; naming expressivism "romantic," scholars have at-
tempted to make it out of time, untenable, and passé. Lester Faigley, for exam-
ple, implicitly weaves expressivism with romanticism in "Competing Theories
of Process: A Critique and a Proposal." Faigley describes expressivism exclusively
in romantic terms: expressivist and romantic figures become advocates of the
other, such that romantic figures somehow anticipate and embody tenets of ex-
pressivist pedagogy. Faigley narrates these implicit connections by first naming
Rohman and Wlecke "instigators of a `neo-Romantic' view of process;" Peter El-
bow is described as subscribing to the romantic theory "that `good' writing does
not follow the rules but reflects the processes of creative imagination" (1986, p.
530). And paradigmatic romantic figures make arguments about expressivism:
"at times Wordsworth and to a lesser extent Coleridge seem to argue that expres-
sivism precludes all intentionality" (1986, p. 530). In this way, Faigley's descrip-
tion of expressivist rhetoric doesn't argue for its romantic inflections, but makes
this connection implicit. In his later work (Faigley, 1992) questions expressivism
especially on its theorization of subjectivity,1 finding it out of sync with the reign
of postmodern subjectivity which, like other social constructivist-leaning com-
positionists, pushes him toward seeing language as shared social material rather
than the domain of the individual. Here, yoking expressivism to romanticism
ultimately becomes, as it did for Flower and Young, a means of undermining
expressivist rhetorics.

    Faigley finds the romantic-expressivist notion of selfhood problematic and
ultimately finds ground for favoring social constructionist formulations of self
and language. As Chris Burnham writes, "Faigley argues that expressivism's ro-
mantic view of the self is philosophically and politically retrograde, making it in-
effectual in postmodern times. Further, expressivism's concern with the individ-
ual and authentic voice directs students away from social and political problems
in the material world" (2001, p. 28). Burnham encapsulates how expressivism is
most often defined against social constructionism. Expressivism, this broad jux-
taposition tends to go, constructs a coherent self with a radically unique voice,
while constructionism recognizes fragmented subjectivity and the sociality of
language.

    The link of expressivism to romanticism is, I suggest, in part from where
this oversimplified binary emanates. Theories of language and selfhood tend to

204
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

sharply divide constructionism from expressivism on the basis of expressivism's
implicit links to versions of romantic theories of language and expression. Ber-
lin--in spite of the nuanced way he understands romanticism and rhetoric--il-
lustrates these connections; Gradin notes that Berlin is "almost single-handedly
responsible" (1995, p. 2) for the divisions observed in contemporary rhetorics
of expressivism, social constructionism, and cognitivism. As Berlin categorizes
rhetorics and their histories in Rhetoric and Reality, he first links "expressionist
rhetoric" emergent in the era of progressive education with "Brahminical ro-
manticism" (1987, p. 73), a rhetoric devoted uniquely to the individual. From
this perspective, in romantic-expressionistic rhetorics "the writer is trying to
express--the content of knowledge--is the product of a private and personal
vision that cannot be expressed in normal, everyday language" (1987, p. 74). In
this description, romanticism, expressivism, and the idea of private language are
consolidated. Later in his history Berlin writes that expressionistic rhetoric, or
what he calls the "subjective rhetoric" of the 1960s and 70s," held the

         conviction that reality is a personal and private construct. For
         the expressionist, truth is always discovered within, through
         an internal glimpse, an examination of the private inner
         world. In this view the material world is only lifeless matter.
         The social world is even more suspect because it attempts to
         coerce individuals into engaging in thoughtless conformity.
         (1987, p. 145)

    Berlin again emphasizes that in expressivist rhetorics, language and expres-
sion are thought to emanate from within the individual. Expression is deemed to
be radically individual, unique and avoiding (or ignoring) influence from both
the material and, by extension, social world. Berlin, ultimately an advocate of
social constructionism, is quick then to explain how this inward-turned para-
digm "denies the place of intersubjective, social processes in shaping language"
(1987, p. 146). Put more plainly, social constructionists accuse expressivism of
understanding language as individual, a private language that is supposed to be
true and radically unique. Social constructionists, by contrast, see language as
the province of the social group and thus there can be no purely personal truth
or unique expression.

    Taken together, Faigley and Berlin are constructionists who define them-
selves against expressivism on the issue of from "where" language emanates.
Patricia Bizzell too echoes this distinction when she discusses the difference be-
tween outer and inner directed theorists:

         one theoretical camp sees writing as primarily inner-directed,
         and so is interested more in the structure of language-learning

                                                                                                 205
Rule

         and thinking processes in their earliest state, prior to social
         influence. The other main theoretical camp sees writing as pri-
         marily outer-directed, and so is more interested in the social
         processes whereby language-learning and thinking capacities
         are shaped and used in particular communities. (1992, p. 77)

Associating expressivism with romanticism enhances this divide. In the next sec-
tion, I reread romanticism to complicate our sense of romantic expression.

REREADING ROMANTICISM: WORDSWORTH'S PREFACES
TO LYRICAL BALLADS

    This essay argues that romanticism can be an illuminating historical period
for composition studies, laden as it is with theories of creativity, language, and
subjectivity. In particular, as some compositionists have already demonstrated,
taking a closer look at romantic texts complicates the dichotomy between ex-
pressivism and social constructionism. Steve Fishman, for example, aligns the
writings of Elbow and German Romantic philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder,
suggesting ultimately that "it was the social reform dimension of German ro-
manticism that inspired expressivism" (1992, p. 647). This revised lineage pro-
vides a means of understanding expressivism's relation to the social. Fishman
suggests that Herder and Elbow "stress the integration of personal life and public
expression," understand expression as "the start of our dialogue with others," and
are "critical of the exclusionary quality of academic discourse" (1992, p. 651).
Fishman's comparative reading of Elbow and Herder leads him to understand
both romanticism as a movement and Elbow as an expressivist figure in a new
light: neither romanticism nor expressivism should be seen as asocial; instead,
the emphasis on the individual's relation to the broader political and social com-
munity. In this way then, Fishman eases the dichotomy between expressivism
and constructionism, understanding the focus on the personal as implicitly a
focus on the social.

    So too does Gradin, in her book-length second look at romanticism, seek
ways to ease the divides between expressivism, feminism, and social construc-
tionism. To accomplish this, like Fishman, Gradin revisits romantic primary
texts primarily to see within romantic philosophies an investment in the social.
Unlike Fishman however, she turns to highly visible figures from the English
tradition, particularly Wordsworth and Coleridge, as she suggests that these fig-
ures "were much more directly influential on American educational thought that
were the Germans" (Gradin, 1995, p. xvii). Overall, Gradin finds a productive
thread running from romanticism to expressivism especially in the romantic the-

206
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

ories of imagination (1995, p. 38) and in the ways romantics theorized educa-
tion ("the importance of the individual; the importance of personal experience;
and an emphasis on activity as opposed to passivity" (1995, p. 36)). Like Gradin,
I turn back to a familiar romantic, William Wordsworth, but with a different
goal. In theories of language from the period and from the pinnacle statement
on language in the period, Wordsworth's Preface(s) and Appendix to Lyrical
Ballads, I question the easy assumption that romantic-expressivist language is
thought to emanate from the interior of the unique, isolated individual. Instead,
the Prefaces suggest that language and meaning is found in of the sensuous world
of physical experience. Following Fishman and Berlin's reading of Coleridge,
depth and insight can come from careful micro-focused reading.

    In order to glean from Wordsworth's Prefaces a novel way of understanding
romantic expression, it's helpful to contextualize his work in conversations about
language's origins popular in this period. In the eighteenth century, language
became a philosophical "problem." Inquiries into the nature and the origin of
language, including the relationship of physical, worldly things to language, ac-
cumulated. According to Hans Aarsleff, "language study" in this period "even
when called philology," was not merely a matter of knowing the forms, syntax,
phonology, historical relationships, and other aspects of particular languages. It
involved questions of wider significance. What, for instance, was the origin of
thought? Did the mind have a material basis? Did mankind have a single origin?
(1967, p. 4). Considerations of language in the romantic period were also an
opportunity to consider mind, thought, being, and knowledge. In these theo-
ries, many hypothesized a physical, embodied basis for language in early human
interactions and interactions with the physical environment.2 This broad sense
that language has physical and material bases, provides the central premise of
the work of Horne Tooke, the most important and popular language theorist
in the period, to advance what would become a popular (Aarsleff, 1967, p. 73),
provoking, lightning-rod text.

    Tooke's Diversions of Purley published first in 1786, reissued in 1798 and
released with a second volume in 1805 (dates which correspond with Roman-
ticism's heyday) posits the most simplified version of language which argues
that both language's origins and contemporary language systems are based in
the material world. Completely undermining arbitrariness and fully embracing
empiricist sensation, Tooke's "linguistic materialism" (McKusick, 1986, p. 12)
deploys elaborate etymologies to show how words are immediately the signs
of material things and concepts or what he calls "abbreviations" of them. Says
Aarsleff, "Naming is the essence of language as Tooke had shown by tracing all
words via etymology to the names of sensible objects" (1967, p. 94). Etymolog-
ical analysis shows how parts in words correspond to the way we associate our

                                                                                                 207
Rule

physical experience with these things in the world; for example, Tooke offers
"bar" as example meaning "defence," and then goes on to explain that a `barn'
is a covered enclosure, a `baron,' a powerful man, `barge,' a strong boat, etc.
(Tooke, 1847). This simple idea that "all words can be reduced to names of
sensations" was quite popular and tapped into some of the major concerns of
the moment. In claiming that language is implicitly connected to physical expe-
rience in the world, Tooke's pervasive and popular thoughts on language carried
many implications for romantic thought. One such implication is language's
relationship to education. If language is out there in the material world, and not
the domain of mind and education, rationality is dislodged from its centrality in
matters of thinking and speaking. Olivia Smith helps articulate this implication
for education as she states, "if sensation and feeling are the basis of vocabulary
and all modes of thought, then experience and perception become reputable
forms of knowledge and can no longer be described as essentially different from
rationality and abstraction" (1984, p. 213).

    Taking up the popular interest in language, Wordsworth's famous poetic ex-
periment, Lyrical Ballads, with its explanatory prefaces and appendix, founds
Romanticism as a movement. As is commonly remembered, recited in fact,
Wordsworth's Advertisement to the 1798 Lyrical Ballads describes the poetry
collection as an experiment as to "how far the language of conversation in the
middle and lower classes of society is adapted to the purposes of poetic pleasure."
And thus, language becomes central, but not so central, to Romanticism as a
literary movement. I say, "not-so" as an acknowledgement to the fact that while
language is the experiment so touted, it is not what is often considered "revolu-
tionary" about this text. Rather in more conventional readings of Romanticism,
feeling seems to overshadow language's sensuousness. However, especially in
light of Tooke's theory--published and republished as it was just before Word-
sworth's first publication of Lyrical Ballads in 1798--Wordsworth's Prefaces par-
ticipate in the origin of language debates by arguing that expression suited to
poetry should be saturated not with the unique emanations of the genius poet,
as is often thought, but instead this expression should reveal the physical, inhab-
ited world of the speaker.

    One place to see Hooke's theory of language reflected is in Wordsworth's ar-
ticulation of his experiment in the 1802 preface. Here Wordsworth shifts the
terms of his language revolution to "a selection of the real language of men in a
state of vivid sensation" and "a selection of language really used by men" (Preface
to 1802). I want to here really lean on that new phrase "vivid sensation" and link
it to Tooke's theory of language. Wordsworth advocates for language that emerges
in relation to physical, material, natural encounters. Rather than language being
abstract, poetical language should emerge from context, sensation, and feeling.

208
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

Moreover, as Gradin's work details, Wordsworth had particular liberatory ideas
about education and the social classes. For his poetic experiment, he focuses on
"low and rustic life" as the subject and speakers of many of his poems. Word-
sworth focuses on the lives of the "rustics" as a poetic ideal because, he writes,
"in that condition, the essential passions of the heart find a better soil in which
they can attain their maturity, are less under restraint, and speak a plainer more
emphatic language" and because "such men hourly communicate with the best
objects from which the best part of language is originally derived" (Preface to
1802). Like Tooke, Wordsworth believes that expression should not be trained,
rational, and abstract; which is to say in another way that poetry should no lon-
ger follow neoclassical rules. Instead, expression should emerge from lived ex-
perience; facility with language and expression comes best from those who can
"hourly communicate" with the physical world.

    The Appendix to the 1802 Lyrical Ballads too dramatizes Wordsworth's the-
ory of romantic expression. To begin, Wordsworth thinks back to the origins of
poetry first stating, "The earliest Poets of all nations generally wrote from passion
excited by real events; they wrote naturally, and as men" (Appendix to 1802). By
contrast, he sees in his immediate predecessors the mechanization of poetic lan-
guage. These poets produce language without the influence of sense experience:

         desirous of producing the same effect, without having the
         same animating passion, set themselves to a mechanical
         adoption of those figures of speech, and made use of them,
         sometimes with propriety, but much more frequently applied
         them to feelings and ideas with which they had no natural
         connection whatsoever. A language was thus insensibly pro-
         duced, differing materially from the real language of men in
         any situation. (Appendix to 1802.)

    Wordsworth's poetic experiment is in this way a critique of poetic expression
that fails to rely on physical sensation and physical experience with the world.
He wants poets to express language having a "natural connection" to one's real,
lived experience in the world. He is against "a language ... thus insensibly pro-
duced" (Appendix to 1802), against language that's hollow and abstracted. This
phrase--"insensibly produced" language--echoes Tooke's theory of language.
Wordsworth aligns with Tooke by understanding language as emergent from the
world of experience, sense, and feeling. Wordsworth's "rustics," close to nature
and "hourly communicat[ing] with the best objects from which the best part
of language originally derived" (Preface to 1802) become the expressive ideal.
This theory of romantic language and expression, as shaped by close readings
of Wordsworth and Tooke, sees words as fundamentally "out there," accessed

                                                                                                 209
Rule

through physiological sensation and feeling. Rather than assuming that romantic
expression as isolated and inward-looking, this second look at the most canoni-
cal of Wordsworth's thinking shows instead that expressive-romantic expression
looks decidedly outwardly, toward first-person, embodied, sense experience, as if
writers were "standing in a landscape of language" (Smith, 1984, p. 215).

REREADING EXPRESSIVISM: ANOTHER LENS FOR "VOICE"
IN WRITING

    By taking this second look at romantic theories of language, the "expres-
sion" in expressivism can look substantially different. By expanding on the tacit
link that Berlin and others have made between expressivism and romanticism
through close reading of a canonical romantic text, some of Berlin's foundation-
al and lasting assertions about expressivism denying the social and valuing the
inwardness of unique expression could be challenged. For one, this rereading
of Wordsworth goes some distance in undoing certainty about the supposed
inwardness of language in romantic philosophies. It is useful also to cut through
these binary impulses more directly by applying Wordsworth's romantic theory
of language directly to a still percolating debate about the idea of voice in writ-
ing. I want to expand the possibilities for understanding language and voice, and
ultimately then, expand our senses of the "expressivist tradition."

    There are few more vexed concepts in composition, and in expressivism more
specifically, than voice. Linked to this concept are debates about subjectivity and
selfhood, structures of power, and theories of language. Most stable about this
concept seems to be its unrelenting persistence and imprecision. As Peter Elbow
writes in Voice in Writing Again: Embracing Contraries, critiques of voice "seem
valid, yet voice stays alive, even in the most "naïve" forms that have been the
most powerfully critiqued" (2007, p. 3). Darcie Bowden, among the most vocif-
erous critics of the voice metaphor, echoes this ambivalence: "the permutations
and varying conceptions of voice, especially during the 1970s and 1980s, make
voice difficult to completely support or to completely reject as a useful metaphor
for textual analysis or for pedagogy" (1999, p. vii). Voice has become a key site
for debate in liberatory, feminist, expressivist, and multicultural rhetorics, as
"voice is a pivotal metaphor in composition and rhetoric studies [as it] focuses
attention on authorship, on identity, on narrative, and on power" (Bowden,
1999, p. viii). While voice in general endures as a concept, there are nonetheless
voices in the field that, like Faigley, understand voice as matter-of-factly unten-
able in our current postmodernist, poststructuralist framework. Mimi Orner, for
example, scrutinizes the idea of voice in liberatory education rhetorics, claiming
plainly that "calls for `authentic student voice' contain realist and essentialist

210
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

epistemological positions regarding subjectivity which are neither acknowledged
specifically nor developed theoretically" (1992, p. 75). Voice, under this critique,
implies stable identity and personal language. Writes Orner, "discourses on stu-
dent voice are premised on the assumption of a fully conscious, fully speaking,
`unique, fixed, and coherent' self " (Orner, 1992, p. 79). Bowden, on similar the-
oretical grounds, argues that voice has lived past its usefulness as her whole book
rests on the "assumption that that there can be no such thing as voice, that it was
a metaphor of particular historical moment, and that that moment has passed"
(1999, p. viii). The idea of voice in writing becomes most vigorously critiqued
when voice is said to reveal a unique individual and when language is thought to
reveal the self, each accusations leveled at expressivist voice in general.

    Keeping Wordsworth's desire for expression to be saturated with experience
in mind, we can understand Peter Elbow's concern with voice as a concern with
physical reality and experience; that is, voice in Elbow and more broadly across
expressivist thinking, can be understood not as transcendent personal truth or
unique expression, but instead as alive, embodied language that sounds like a
real human person is speaking. Using Wordsworth's romantic theory of language
as a backdrop highlights Elbow's concern with the physical body, the spoken
voice, and attention to contexts for speaking.

    To begin seeing this physical nuance in expressivist voice, I look back to El-
bow's 1968 essay "A Method for Teaching Writing." This essay describes Elbow's
experience helping conscientious objectors writing petitions to avoid the draft.
Much of how Elbow talks about voice and expression in this essay is echoed in
how Wordsworth talks about poetic language in his Prefaces. Central to this essay
is Elbow's concern for writing that is "alive" (1968, p. 122). Evidence of life in
written language is, for Elbow, "when words carry the sound of a person" (1968,
p. 122). Like Wordsworth, then, Elbow emphasizes the importance of language
sounding true to one's lived experience, the words uttered in the experienced
world--or as Wordsworth might say, the "real language of men in any situation"
(Appendix to 1802). Moreover, Elbow explicitly values language connected to
experience, explaining that "everyone does have a `word-hoard': a collection of
words that are connected to his strong and primary experiences in the world--
as opposed to words which (putting it inexactly) are only connected to other
words" (1968, p. 120). With a focus on language relating to physical experience
in the material world, Elbow here cites Vygotsky's Thought and Language on the
difference between spontaneous and scientific concepts. Just as Elbow briefly
explains, spontaneous or "everyday" concepts "are the meanings of words of ev-
eryday language, which a child uses in everyday life/interaction, while scientific
concepts are the ones the child masters during systematic instruction of basic
knowledge" (Temina-Kingsolver, 2008). Implicit then in Elbow's suggestion of

                                                                                                 211
Rule

writer's "word-hoards" is the idea that language has an explicit connection to
worldly experience, aligning with the romantic-expressivist conception of lan-
guage as having a material, physical basis.

    There is much made about how expressivism falsely supposes that one can
access through language a transcendent self or personal truth. Mimi Orner, writ-
ing on voice in liberatory rhetorics, argues that "calls for student voice in edu-
cation presume students, voices, and identities to be singular, unchanging and
unaffected by the context in which the speaking occurs" (1992, p. 80). In "A
Method for Teaching Writing," an essay that could be categorized under libera-
tory rhetorics, Elbow moves away from this side of the voice concept, explaining
again more of a concern with physical bodies in the real world. Elbow writes:

         but I am not talking about intimate, autobiographical
         "self-exposure" when I talk of "revealing a self in words." Writ-
         ing in words which "reveal the self " has nothing necessarily
         to do with exposing intimacies--undressing. For I am talking
         about the sound or feel of a believable person simply in the
         fabric of the words ... the most impersonal reasoning--in
         lean, laconic, "unrevealing" prose--can nevertheless be alive
         and infused with the presence of a person or a self. (1968, p.
         123)

Elbow here is very clear that he's not interested in personal truths or confessions,
but with getting words on the page that are saturated with experience, words
that come out of the body, not ones conceived of in a purely intellectual way, not
from that tissue of words only connected to other words.

    There is certainly more to say about Elbow's takes on voice across his work
but in this 1968 essay it becomes very clear that voice has fundamentally to do
with the body and sense experience. But this embodied basis for voice is some-
what under-theorized in Elbow's own considerations and the more general ways
voice circulates as a concept in our field. In his most recent, extensive consider-
ation of physical voice too, Vernacular Eloquence, Elbow only seems to narrowly
suggest that his interest in the speaking voice and the natural pacing of intona-
tion units has something to do with the body and with language being connect-
ed to the physical world. Sounding a lot like Wordsworth in the Prefaces, Elbow's
mission in the book is to shift the paradigm of literate culture: "our culture of
literacy functions as though it were a plot against the spoken voice, the human
body, vernacular language, and those without privilege" (2012, p. 7). But only
in one section does Elbow attempt to consider the implications of embodiment
theory. Occasionally, he will make mention of the embodied nature of language,
such as, "our longest and usually deepest experience of how words carry meaning

212
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

involves felt bodily experience, not just intellectual understanding" (2012, p.
252). Beyond this though, the voice in expressivism has remained mostly dis-
embodied. Putting new focus on romantic primary texts reveals a way to under-
stand romantic expression as experiential and physical. Rereading romanticism
in this way helps us disrupt the sticky sense that expressivism is about radically
unique self-expression and even that language is the domain of each individual.
Rather, another version of romantic expressivist version of voice only really asks
that writer's "put their body where their words are" (Elbow, 2012, p. 253).

    Elbow has tirelessly reexamined voice in his own thinking, as well as in the
thinking of his critics. This view of voice as seen above encapsulates Elbow's
most recent emphasis on voice as spoken, lived, and embodied. And this em-
bodied dimension of voice seems to be something Bowden can agree with El-
bow on. Bowden takes a whole chapter of her book to "detach the literal voice
from the metaphorical one" (1999, p. 82) and demonstrate the usefulness of
this to reading practices: "the only useful application of voice may stem from
an understanding of how the literal voice operates in reading" (Bowden, 1999,
p. 83). Bowden's chapter in support of literal voice has her sounding very much
like Elbow in her recommendations to enlist the spoken voice for interpretation
and revision. Bowden writes: "reading aloud helps writers and readers tap into
their aural imaging, and understand at a visceral level the rhythms, contours,
and tones of a written text" (1999, p. 97). Amidst the restless ground of voice
then, Bowden, Elbow, and Wordsworth find a common ground in the idea that
written expression has a basis in the embodied and physical voice.

    A rereading of romanticism highlights a way of conceptualizing voice and
language in the expressivist tradition in a way that emphasizes its physicality,
rather than its inwardness. This in turn complicates the easy ways expressiv-
ism is divided from social constructionism. Romantic theories of language value
first-person experience, but experiential and sense experience instead of unique-
ness or transcendence. Moreover, looking back to romanticism provides another,
under-theorized way of considering language that can also disrupt the expressiv-
ism/constructionism binary.

    The romantics conceived of language and meaning as fundamentally em-
bodied and material. Wordsworth and Tooke's romantic theories of language
create an under-theorized connection from romanticism to composition. This
emphasis can be linked to current work in composition. For example, Sondra
Perl's conception of felt sense would be a site at which language is understood as
a physical act. Working from the philosophies of Eugene Gendlin, Perl's concep-
tion of felt sense "calls attention to what is just on the edge of our thinking but
not yet articulated in words" (2004, p. xiii), a view that there is meaning, located
in the body, prior to and informing of language. Perl suggests "that language and

                                                                                                 213
Rule

meaning are connected to inchoate, bodily intuitions" (2004, p. xvii). Perl ends
up nodding to an expressivist tradition here too, positing the physical body as
a site of fresh and "true" expression. Tapping into felt sense in this way echoes
expressivist practice in which the body's "natural" rhythms might resonate with
lived experience. This embodied view of language is further elaborated in the
work of Lakoff and Johnson. Metaphors We Live By kicks off their exploration
of the embodied foundations of language, demonstrating that metaphors ar-
en't specialized language but have implicit physical dimensions. Johnson, in his
book The Meaning of the Body: Aesthetics of Human Understanding, writes "an
embodied view of meaning looks for the origins and structures of meaning in
the organic activities of embodied creatures in interaction with their changing
environments" (2007, p. 11). Much more than a cognitive engagement with
language, Johnson suggests, "meaning reaches deep down into our corporeal
encounter with our environment" (2007, p. 25). Johnson here echoes Word-
sworth's concern for "hourly communicating" with the physical world. If we see
language as having a physical basis, the product of embodied human beings in-
habiting a material world, how might we understand voice, expression, identity,
and authorship differently?

CONCLUSION: REVISING THE DIVIDES

    If composition studies can be neatly divided into camps, paradigms, and
pedagogies, there certainly will be some generalizing that doesn't hold true in all
cases. Expressivism, a historical time period and a set of informing orientations,
certainly takes its fair share of overgeneralizing. As a complement to these broad
disciplinary stories, we also engage in work on the micro-level, calling into ques-
tion the way these broad camps divide us. As Hawk says, "counter-histories can
always be drawn, and new groupings of texts, events, and practices can always
be articulated. The goal of such a historiography is not simply to arrive at a
more accurate image of the past but to create a particular affect in the present"
(Hawk, 2007, p. 11). Looking back to romantic theories of language brings an-
other more complex dimension to voice, expression, and the mythos of personal
language that often sticks to conceptions of expressivism. While the broadest
strokes tend to come from critics of expressivism, this revisionary move can even
shift the grounds that expressivist advocates may stake for it. Chris Burnham for
example describes "expressivism's strength" as "its insistence that all concerns,
whether individual, social, or political, must originate in personal experience and
be documented in the student's own language" (Burnham, 2001, p. 31). This
is a familiar refrain about expressivism. But in the context of Wordsworth, how
we understand "personal experience" and the "student's own language"--some

214
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

of the most essential ways we have to talk generally about what expressivism
is--is different. Personal experience, then, is not necessarily personal writing or
self-expression, but writing infused with physical experience out in the world--
first person experience, in other words, that doesn't lead necessarily to one's own
singular language. Rather than seeing expressivist language as personal, unique,
and transcendent, romantic texts make available a way of seeing language and
expression as having fundamentally a material and embodied basis.

    If language can be conceived as neither the domain of the individual or
purely the social group, then some of the deepest divisions between construc-
tionism and expressivism are eased. Especially as constructionism has branched
off in our current moment to a focus on networks, location, situatedness, and
material systems in ecological, post-process, and spatial theories, a revised sense
of romantic-expressive language as material and embodied draws attention to a
writer's always shifting physical location and relation with the world.

NOTES

1. In Fragments of Rationality: Postmodernity and the Subject of Composition, Faigley
"questions the existence of a rational, coherent self and the ability of the self to have
privileged insight into its own process" (1992, p. 111).

2. Three essayists who considered the origins of language were Thomas Reid, Lord
Monboddo, and Condillac. Thomas Reid thought that in language there are ar-
tificial as well as natural signs, and "particularly that the thoughts purposes, and
dispositions of the mind have their natural signs in the face, the modulation of the
voice, and motion and attitude of the body" (McKusick, 1986, p. 11) and without
this natural meaning located in the body, "language could never have been estab-
lished among men" (McKusick, 1986, p. 11). For Lord Monboddo, the process of
language learning should begin with the natural, embodied signs and meanings and
"only by means of them can the learner become oriented within the much larger
class of conventional signs" (McKusick, 1986, p. 12). Condillac, by contrast, pushes
the origins of language out in to the physical world. These thinkers' explanations
of language's relationship to sense experience demonstrate the pervasiveness of this
embodied, experiential view in the romantic period.

REFERENCES

Aarsleff, H. (1967). The study of language in England: 1780-1860. Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press.

Berlin, J. A. (1980). The rhetoric of romanticism: The case for Coleridge. Rhet-
   oric Society Quarterly, 10(2), 62-74.

                                                                                                 215
Rule

Berlin, J. A. (1987). Rhetoric and reality: Writing instruction in American colleges,
   1900-1985. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Bizzell, P. (1992). Academic discourse and critical consciousness. Pittsburgh, PA:
   University of Pittsburgh Press.

Bowden, D. (1999). The mythology of voice. Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook.
Burnham, C. (2001). Expressive pedagogy: Practice/theory, theory/practice. In

   G. Tate, A, Rupiper, & K. Schick (Eds.), A guide to composition pedagogies (pp.
   19-35). New York: Oxford University Press.
Elbow, P. (1968). A method for teaching writing. College English, 30(2), 115-
   125.
Elbow, P. (2007). Voice in writing again: Embracing contraries. College English,
   70(2), 168-188. Selected Works of Peter Elbow. Retrieved from http://works.
   bepress.com/peter_elbow/23/
Elbow, P. (2012). Vernacular eloquence: What speech can bring to writing. New
   York: Oxford.
Faigley, L. (1986). Competing theories of process: A critique and a proposal.
   College English, 48(6), 527-542.
Faigley, L. (1992). Fragments of rationality: Postmodernity and the subject of com-
   position. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Fishman, S. M. & McCarthy, L. P. (1992). Is expressivism dead? Reconsidering
   its romantic roots and its relation to social constructionism. College English,
   54(6), 647-661.
Flower, L. (1989). Problem-solving strategies for writing (3rd ed.). San Diego, CA:
   Hartcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Gradin, S. L. (1995). Social expressivist perspectives on the teaching of writing.
   Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook.
Hawk, B. (2007). A counter-history of composition: Toward methodologies of com-
   plexity. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Johnson, M. (2007). The meaning of the body: Aesthetics of human understanding.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.
McKusick, J. C. (1986). Coleridge's philosophy of language. New Haven, CT: Yale
   University Press.
Orner, M. (1992). Interrupting the calls for student voice in "liberatory" educa-
   tion: A feminist poststructuralist perspective. In C. Luke, & J. Gore (Eds.),
   Feminisms and critical pedagogy (pp. 74-89). New York: Routledge.
Perl, S. (2004). Felt sense: Writing with the body. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Smith, O. (1984). The politics of language, 1791-1819. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
   sity Press.

216
                                                        Rereading Romanticism, Rereading Expressivism

Temina-Kingsolver, V. (2008). Scientific v. spontaneous concepts: A Vygotski-
   an perspective. Languageavenue.com. Retrieved from http://languageavenue.
   com/psycholinguistics/language-and-thought/scientific-vs-spontaneous-con-
   cepts-vygotskian-perspective/distinctive-characteristics

Tooke, J.H. (1857). Diversions of Purley. London: William Tegg. Retrieved from
   https://play.google.com/books/reader?printsec=frontcover&output=read-
   er&id=izYOAAAAMAAJ&pg=GBS.PA436

Wordsworth, W. (1798). Advertisement to lyrical ballads. Retrieved from Uni-
   versity of Pennsylvania Department of English Web site: http://www.english.
   upenn.edu/~mgamer/Etexts/lbprose.html#advertisement

Wordsworth, W. (1802a). Appendix to the preface to lyrical ballads: By what
   is usually called Poetic Diction. Retrieved from University of Pennsylvania
   Department of English Web site: http://www.english.upenn.edu/~mgamer/
   Etexts/lbprose.html#advertisement

Wordsworth, W. (1802b). Preface to lyrical ballads. Retrieved from University
   of Pennsylvania Department of English Web site: http://www.english.upenn.
   edu/~mgamer/Etexts/lbprose.html#advertisement

Young, R. (2009). Paradigms and problems: Needed research in rhetorical in-
   vention. In S. Miller (Ed.), The Norton book of composition studies (pp. 397-
   415). New York: W.W. Norton.

                                                                                                 217
EMERSON'S PRAGMATIC CALL
FOR CRITICAL CONSCIENCE:
DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS,
COGNITION, AND HUMAN NATURE

      Anthony Petruzzi *
      University of Massahussetts Boston

    Ralph Waldo Emerson, William James and John Dewey, in various keys,
develop a philosophy of pragmatic naturalism that articulates the continuity and
inter-animation between human experience and nature. By the time Darwin
published Origin of the Species in 1855, Emerson's work as a natural philosopher
had already led him to a general understanding of the evolutionary continuity
between simple and complex forms of life: "the fossil strata show us that Nature
began with rudimentary forms, and rose to the more complex, as fast as the
earth was fit for their dwelling place; and that the lower perish, as the higher
appear" (1983, p. 1033; also pp. 175-176; 668-669; 945). James and Dewey
both started their work by focusing on psychology and evolution--exploring
the ways that mental activity is connected to our physical nervous system. They
argued that the brain is continuous with the body as part of their critique of the
traditional philosophical dualism between body and soul. Hephzibah Roskel-
ly and Kate Ronald note, "Emerson foreshadows not only the pragmatism of
Peirce, James and Dewey, and others, but the studies of cognition and literacy
that have influenced composition studies so profoundly in the last thirty years"
(1998, p. 56).1

    Joan Richardson places pragmatism's studies of cognition in a Darwinian
context: "the signal, if implicit, motive of pragmatism is the realization of
thinking as a life form, subject to the same processes of growth and change
as all other life forms" (p. 1). Human cognition is located in our animal na-
ture; our minds are embodied (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999, pp. 16-44; Unger,
2007, pp. 136-137; Herrnstein Smith, 1997, pp. 46-47). As Richardson notes,
"James learned from Darwin and from Emerson to consider not only language
but thinking, too, as a life form constantly undergoing adaption and mutation"
(p. 8). For Emerson, the brain is continually expressing these adaptions and
transformations. Some, like Descartes, claim our minds are eternal "souls" and
our brains are merely mechanical (Doidge, 2007, pp. 213). Others such as

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.14  219
Petruzzi

Emerson and the classical pragmatists claim that "because the history of nature
is characterized in" the brain (1983, p. 548; also see Pierce, 1955, p. 359) our
mind/soul must be understood in terms of natural science: the evolutionary
and cognitive patterns of instincts, habits, beliefs, affects, attention, moods,
classifications, and imaginations constitute various historically sedimented and
yet evolving cognitive abilities.

    For Emerson and the classical pragmatists, persuasion must understand, ex-
plore, and use cognitive patterns to effectively alter others' beliefs. In order to
understand the materiality of persuasion, Emerson identifies two patterns in
the human mind--two evolutionary forces or instincts, one centripetal and the
other centrifugal. They form our double consciousness, one private and one
public, which are locked into an "irreconcilable antagonism" (Emerson, 1983,
p. 174). The inter-animation of these "two poles of nature" (Emerson, 1983, p.
173) provides "a certain self-regulated motion, or change" (Emerson, 1983, p.
457). The human conscience is constituted in the space between the centripetal
and centrifugal forces that inter-animate one's double consciousness of private
and public mind. The two evolved cognitive tendencies are survival instincts:
self-protection, a conservative, centripetal force;2 and self-projection, an expan-
sive, innovative, centrifugal force.3 The call to conscience emerges and sways
between the two poles of nature, between the two instincts, where a social and
individual psychology emerges with the same biological and cultural plasticity
and ameliorative properties as the rest of nature.4

    Emerson articulates the two primary forces of nature's self-regulation--
self-protection and self-projection--which occur in the human brain as two
contrary instincts more persistently and clearly than the other classical prag-
matists. "No [hu]man" Emerson states, "can continue to exist in whom both of
these elements do not work" (1983, p. 176). However, he admits, to establish a
"harmony of the centrifugal and centripetal forces" (1983, pp. 174; 549; 628)
would make "an impossible whole." In The Conservative, Emerson identifies
this "primal antagonism" as "the two parties that divide the state, the party of
Conservatism and that of Innovation" (1983, p. 173). Human politics, through-
out civic history, demonstrates how we strive to hold society together in "an
impossible whole" (Emerson, 1983, p. 175). Self-protection is the centripetal
force that conserves tradition, "the actual state of things" (Emerson, 1983, p.
174) and the individual's everyday public understanding of one's world. In the
self-protecting mode, one's discourse and understanding is embodied, limited,
partial; while it does have some truth value, it also has false values; but it remains
useful because in this mode of being-in-the-world, we are conditioned to oper-
ate in the known limits of the state of things (Emerson, 1983, p. 176-177). This
"existing world is not a dream ... but it is the ground on which [we] stand, it is

220
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

the mother of whom [we] are born" (Emerson, 1983, p. 177). We are thrown
into the existing world and it provides a conditioned ground for us to thrive. As
Emerson states: "we are encamped in nature, not domesticated" (1983, p. 552).

    Self-projection is the centrifugal force that pushes us from our center, our
grounding in endoxa (everyday public knowledge), opening an individual's un-
derstanding to different understandings of one's world. In the self-projecting
mode, one's discourse and understanding is incarnate, expansive, and ecstatic; its
force pushes us up from the ground of the actual so that the private mind emerg-
es from self-protective modes of thinking imposed on it by public embodied
discourse to imagine new possibilities for being-in-the-world. Neither feature
of double consciousness, the private or the public, is otherworldly; rather, they
exist in a transitive network down to the molecular level: "All things are in con-
tact; every atom has a sphere of repulsion" (Emerson, 1983, p. 585). The sphere
of attraction and repulsion, of closing one's self off from possible threats to one's
being and opening one's self up to new possibilities for being, is at the heart of
the undomesticated antagonism.

    Self-protection is the centripetal adaptive instinct to defend tradition and
the status quo--to conserve the beliefs and knowledge of the present order. It
does not domesticate us because it is compensated by self-projecting instinct to
change and transform ourselves and our relations to the environing world. These
"strange alternation[s] of attraction and repulsion" (Emerson, 1983, p. 503) are
tendencies or patterns of nature nurturing; they sway between the withdrawing
(self-protection) and arrival (self-projection) to disclose the partiality of truths,
which are not calculable, not measureable. The polarities are always already em-
bodied in human discourse, cognition, and experience, and, for Emerson, in-
dicative of how the brain/mind physically operates according to tendencies of
human nature. The self "can not live without a world" (1983, p. 254), Emerson
claims, because it is a necessary platform that resists our instinct to expand out-
wards, to be self-reliant, to imagine and project ameliorations for one's future.

    One's imagination emerges in the gravitational force that sways between the
private and public minds or selves--what Dewey calls the "inner and outer vi-
sion," when "possibilities are embodied ... that are not elsewhere actualized"
(1980, p. 268). Imagination is not isolated from the environing world, nor is
it a faculty of mind, self-contained and separate from history; it is a cognitive
and communicative act: "Expression of experience is public and communicating
because the experiences expressed are what they are because of experiences of the
living and dead that have shaped them" (Dewey, 1980, p. 270). Self-expression
is a most human behavior, opening our habituated public self to "an influx of
the ever new, ever sanative conscience" (Emerson, 1983, p. 256). The call of
conscience emerges in the inter-animation of private integrity--"nothing at last

                                                                                                 221
Petruzzi

is sacred but the integrity of your own mind" (Emerson, 1983, p. 261)--and
public care for one's world. Conscience calls the private mind from submersion
in the public mind, and recalls our desire for self-reliance--to imagine, project,
and innovate towards a better state of things (Emerson, 1983, p. 174; Dewey,
1922, pp. 106ff). Self-projection is the imaginative reformation of the self and
existing reality.

    Contrary to Richard Rorty and Stanley Fish's claims--that there is no con-
ception of critical self-awareness or self-consciousness that is not "at once im-
possible and superfluous" (Fish, 1989, pp. 463-464; also see Rorty, 1991b, pp.
211ff), I argue that the "axis" upon which a classical pragmatist theory of per-
suasion turns is a "call to conscience," which discloses critical self-awareness as
a cognitive event that is directed by care and attention, imagined by thinking
and disclosed by action that is ameliorative. Emerson and the classical pragma-
tists--James, Pierce, and Dewey--are important interlocutors for the field of
rhetoric and composition, even though in most classification schemas of the
field, their work has not been fully explored. I focus on three cognitive features
that Emerson and the classical pragmatists describe--classification, imagination,
and the plasticity of the mind--that are particularly useful for understanding
how classical pragmatism is affiliated with rhetoric and composition. On the one
hand, we will see how critical conscience is the way human beings interact with
their environment at specific moments, not a faculty of mind, or a permanent
state of critical awareness. And, on the other hand, I propose an interpretation
of pragmatist rhetoric that has substantial differences from what Steven Mail-
loux calls, "a rhetoricized version of contemporary neo-pragmatism" (1998, p.
56). Rather than focusing on conventions and beliefs, as do the neo-pragma-
tists, the classical pragmatists focus on why affective reasoning and imagination
are both persuasive and expresses truth: as Dewey notes, reasoning "must fall
back upon imagination--upon the embodiment of ideas in emotionally charged
sense" (1980, p. 33). My claim focuses on three aspects of human expressivity--
classification, imagination, and plasticity--explicated by pragmatism's cognitive
science; which can lead rhetoric and composition to a less antagonistic relation-
ship with critical discourse--legitimating research that focuses on individuality,
self-expression, and mindful being-in-the-world.

COGNITION AND CLASSIFICATION

    Classical pragmatists were at the forefront of cognitive psychology to con-
textualize the continuities between humans, as beings embodied in the world,
and nature. The continuities include, but are not limited to, these three cogni-
tive features--classification, imagination, and plasticity--which offer us useful,

222
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

albeit narrow, examples that contribute generally to pedagogy, and specifically
to rhetoric and composition, so, as James puts it, we can "make our nervous
systems our ally instead of our enemy" (1992, p. 140). For James, classification
is a feature of "our organic mental structure" that was produced accidentally by
evolutionary variation, "then transmitted as fixed [a] feature" (1955, p. 851). As
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson note, "every living being categorizes ... food,
predators, possible mates, members of their own species, and so on" (1999, p.
17). Culturally and socially, classification is central to organization of human in-
stitutions, particularly education and generally to the organization of intellectu-
al history. As Mike Rose aptly notes, classification schemes both "sharpen [our]
own abilities to systematize what [we] study, and to develop a critical awareness
of the limitations of classification schemes" that we are submerged in (1989, p.
139).

    From a rhetorical point of view, classification starts as an invention strategy
divisio, the division into categories or classes and then becomes dispositio, the
effective arrangement of ideas that structure an argument. As Frank J. D'Angelo
argues, rhetorical topics are "differentiations of basic mental processes that have
evolved over thousands of years" (Judd, 2005, p. 81. From a cognitive point of
view, classification is a phenomenological/hermeneutical act that psychological-
ly is both private and public: we understand everything in term of its structure.
We understand it as a danger, as a food source, as something that matters or not,
as something to care for, or not. According to Patricia Smith Churchland, "pre-
scientifically, we classify things on the basis of their gross physical and behavioral
similarity, or on the basis of the relevance to our particular needs and interests."
(2002, p. 124 ). In a scientific context, classification schemes order "the reality
behind appearances" according to specific principles that "have an effect on per-
ceptual recognition" (Churchland, 2002, p. 129). In either case, classification
structures how the brain understands something as-something: we must know
something as-something before we can understand or make statements about
it (Heidegger, 1996, pp. 139ff). What one perceives depends upon either one's
needs and interests or one's sense that there is a pattern that organizes what is
perceived.

    Classification, in the public sense, is the process of surveying a field of objects
to discern and thematize patterns, to identify and distinguish and therefore to
define or redefine the topic. This is useful for cognition because it frames and
structures one's argument in relation to the categories created by the topograph-
ical map. In the public mind,5 the classification becomes part of social and in-
stitutional power--i.e. in higher education, it is used to control what and how
a subject is taught.6 How does one teach composition in the university? Is there
one theory of composition that works most effectively? Should pedagogy focus

                                                                                                 223
Petruzzi

on the product or on the writing process? Questions like these exist because our
minds are embodied; cognitive operations like classifying are structured by how
bodies/minds have evolved, therefore structuring our everyday understanding of
the order of things.

    Emerson was fascinated by natural science, especially how the cognitive abil-
ity of the human brain uses classification schemes to advance factual knowl-
edge.7 Emerson intends to give an "account, which the human mind gives to
itself of the constitution of the world" (1983, p. 634). Emerson's knowledge of
neural networks was up to date for his time; he was aware of Galvani's discovery
that nerves operate on electrical energy and he hypothesized that the mind uses
electrical, and therefore physical, force to shape and animate the mind. The in-
teraction of a brain/mind shapes both the mind and world: "Every solid in the
universe is ready to become fluid on the approach of the mind, and the power
to flux it is the measure of the mind .... The whole world is the flux of matter
over the wires of thought to the poles or points where it would build" (Emerson,
Essays 1983, p. 964-965).

    Classification is closely related to imaginative cognition that is necessary in
the natural sciences, as well as the humanities: "Science does not know its debt
to imagination" (Emerson, 1929, vol. 8, p. 10). Emerson argues that classifica-
tion is a cognitive activity, a "tyrannical instinct of the mind" (1972, vol. 2, p.
23): "it is the perpetual effort of the mind to seek relations between the multi-
tude of facts under its eye, by means of which it can reduce them to some order"
(1972, vol. 2, p. 22). Emerson identifies classification both as an instinct and as
one of "the actions of the intellect" (1972, vol. 2, p. 25) because it discloses un-
expected resemblances and common origins between things that, at first, appear
unrelated (1972, vol. 2, p. 27).

    For Emerson, classification creates a vocabulary that becomes part of the pri-
vate and public mind, an antagonistic discourse within our double consciousness.
The instinct to classify is natural and useful; yet, it has a double edge because as
it becomes commonplace knowledge of the public mind, we lose sight of the fact
that we are part and partial of an organic system that continually changes:

         A nomenclature, a classification used by the scholar as a help
         to the memory, or a bare illustration of his present perception
         of the law of nature, the memorandum only of his last lesson,
         and, in the face of it, merely a makeshift; merely momentary;
         a landing place on the staircase, a bivouac for a night, and im-
         plying a march, a progress [that] becomes, through the indo-
         lence or absence of mind, a barrack, a stronghold, an obstacle;
         in which the man settles down immoveable, insane, obstinate,

224
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

         mistaking his means for his ends ... and requires your respect
         to this whimsy as to truth itself. (1972, vol. 3, pp. 129-130)

    Emerson and the classical pragmatists describe classification in a way that
is useful to argumentation, persuasion, and pedagogy of composition because
it is based on understanding our human nature--how our brain/mind actually
works. For classical pragmatists, every time one classifies, one encounters the
sway of "doubleness" between its usefulness for the private mind and its dangers
for the public mind.

    Dewey agrees with Emerson, classification is one of the various instinctual
organizational tendencies that circumscribe all mental activity:

         To classify is, indeed, as useful as it is natural. The indefi-
         nite multitude of particular and changing events is met by
         the mind with acts of defining, inventorying, and listing,
         reducing to common heads and tying up in bunches. [These
         acts] are performed for a purpose. [But we often lose sight of
         the purpose] to facilitate our dealings with individuals and
         changing events. Our thought [becomes] hard where facts
         are mobile; bunched and chunky, where events are fluid and
         dissolving. The tendency to forget the office of distinctions
         and classifications, and to take them as marking things in
         themselves, is a fallacy. (1992, p. 131)

    Dewey's stipulation that classification does not represent things in them-
selves echoes Emerson's description of how self-protection works to turn contin-
gent classifications into fixed truths.

    Our environment forces us to pay attention to an array of "indefinite mul-
titude of particular and changing events" (James, 1992, p. 227); also, we use
systems of classification to assess the amount of attention we need to spend on a
given object. In other words, in order to create opportunities to self-project, to
take advantage of changing events, decisive classification is necessary. As Herrn-
stein Smith notes

         human beings have evolved as distinctly opportunistic
         creatures and that our survival, both as individuals and as a
         species, continues to be enhanced by our ability and incli-
         nation to reclassify objects and to "realize" and "appreciate"
         novel and alternate functions for them--which is also to
         misuse them and to fail to respect their presumed purposes
         and conventional generic classifications. (1988, pp. 32-33 also
         see pp. 122-123)

                                                                                                 225
Petruzzi

    Lakoff and Johnson give a concrete biological example of how classification
allows us to function in the world opportunistically:

         Each human eye has 100 million light-sensing cells, but only
         about 1 million fibers leading to the brain. Each incoming im-
         age must therefore be reduced in complexity by a factor of 100.
         That is, information in each fiber constitutes a "categorization"
         of the information from about 100 cells. Neural categorization
         of this sort exists throughout the brain. (1999, p. 18)

Most of our cognitive categorizations come from how our bodies function in our
environment. These are mostly unconscious and when we are in stable environ-
ments, we tend to rely on them to speed decision making processes; however,
in environments that are unstable we tend to more carefully examine objects,
sometimes creating new classifications.

    Elizabeth Flynn argues that the received view of romanticism/expressivism is
a form of "anti-modern" discourse or rhetoric: "Since individuals are unique and
since perceptions of reality are entirely subjective, scientific knowledge has very
limited authority, and the ability of scientific projects to lead to valid or reliable
truth claims is questioned" (1997, p. 542). Flynn is correct that romantics and
expressivists, like classical pragmatists, critique the modernist drive to calcula-
tion and commodification of nature. Yet, while romantic writers are generally
considered to be reacting against the modernist quest for certainty, for objective
truth typified by modern science, these critiques do not mean that every expres-
sivist rejects natural science tout court. Many expressivists--Goethe, Thoreau,
and Emerson, to name a few--actually embrace the useful applications of new
facts that natural sciences disclose. Emerson notes that the human brain be-
comes impatient when confronted with

         a multitude of facts; it aims to find some pattern or reasoning
         to set them in some order. Classification is one of the main
         actions of the intellect .... every theory of science, every ar-
         gument of the barrister, is a classification, and gives the mind
         the sense of power in proportion to the truth or centrality of
         the traits by which it arranges. (,1972, vol. 2, p. 25. ).

IMAGINATION, USE, AND THE CONDUCT OF LIFE

        The endless passing of one element into new forms ... explains the rank which
        the imagination holds in our catalogue of mental powers. The imagination is
        the reader of these forms.

                                                                                        --Emerson

226
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

    Descartes' claim--that our minds are disembodied, not physical and that
our brains are material objects, merely things--has a dramatic effect on how
imagination has been classified in modernity. He claims imagination does not
produce "entirely certain and indubitable" knowledge (1968, p. 95). Therefore
he rejects imagination (and emotion) as essential components of rationality or
human nature (1968, pp. 151-152). Rhetoricians tend to agree with Descartes
that the expression of affect and imagination is not a cognitive activity, and while
they are not separate from the mind, they are separate from the social realm: "key
terms [of Romantic rhetoric] are solitude, spontaneity, expression of feeling and
imagination--all quite opposed to the rhetorician's concern for society, planned
discourse, communication, and moving the will through reason and passion";
the received view reduces "expressivism" to a "soliloquy, not an argument, and
... reflection not action" (Bizzell & Herzberg, 2001, p. 995).

    The received view claims that "expression of feeling and imagination" is op-
posed to the rhetorical goals of "reason and passion;" however, pragmatists do
not make the foundation lists move by appealing to "reason" because that im-
plies the imagination is an innate faculty like reason and passion. Neither the
idea of antecedent thought nor the social constructionist denial of our biological
human nature explains how our experiences of the world are inseparable from
our conceptualization of the world (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999, p. 509). As La-
koff and Johnson argue, the metaphoricity of language is fundamental to the
"sensorimotor inferences" that minds use to perpetually search for relations in
order to classify things, to describe emotions, concepts, and percepts in terms
of similitude (1999, p. 555). Classical pragmatists understand imagination as a
natural part of our cognitive network. "Imagination uses an organic classifica-
tion" (Emerson, 1929, vol. 8, p. 29) that is part of our self-projecting instinct:
"imagination expands and exalts us" (Emerson, 1929, vol. 8, p. 29). Imagination
moves us from the embodied realm of self-protection; it brings us to new ways
of living in the world; "imagination animates" (Emerson, 1929, vol.8, p. 29).

    Imagination is not a solitary or quietist concept for the classical pragmatists:
"Our modes of living are not agreeable to our imagination" (Emerson, 1929,
vol.1, p. 271). Neo-pragmatists Rorty and Unger argue that pragmatism and ro-
manticism are not opposed because both give priority to the imagination rather
than to reason (Rorty, 2007, pp. 105ff).8 "Imagination," says Unger, "does the
work of crisis without crisis [showing] us how we can turn what we have into
something else" (2007, pp. 61-62). Emerson, like Dewey notes, "imagination
[is] a perception and affirming of a real relation between a thought and some
material fact" (1929, vol. 8, p. 29).9 The imagination is not a discrete faculty of
a static brain; rather, it is the use of materiality, the transformation the mate-
rial world to ameliorate environing conditions. The power of eloquence is that

                                                                                                 227
Petruzzi

one uses the materiality of language "to report the inner man adequately to the
multitudes of men, and [to] bring one man's character to bear on all others"
(Emerson, 1972, vol. 3, p. 349).

    While many assume that Emerson's first work, Nature, announces a uniquely
American iteration of romantic idealism which is monological, others under-
stand the book's lasting contribution as being the first to articulate a pragmatic
"doctrine of Use."10 The imagination is important to Emerson; yet, in terms of
priority, he emphasizes use over either imagination or reason: "the imagination
may be defined to be, the use which the Reason makes of the material world"
(1983, p. 34).11 Emerson's "doctrine of Use" is a central principle shared by
pragmatists, "neo" or classical. He analyzes the materiality of "brute nature,"
and how nature educates the brain/mind "in the doctrine of Use, namely, that a
thing is good," and has being only so far as it serves "the production of an end"
(1983, p. 29).

    For Emerson, the doctrine of use is "the axis on which the frame of things
turns" (1983, p. 747). As Emerson and Unger note, sudden moments of crisis
force humans into revising their commonplace beliefs (Emerson, 1929, vol. 7,
p. 92). The imagination, according to Unger, "does the work of crisis without
crisis" (2007, p. 61). As in moments of crisis, imagination provokes the self-pro-
tection instinct, and releases energy that powers our imaginative performances
and our conduct in implementing them as caring acts in the world. Emerson
argues that nature does not serve any single or multiple ends; nature follows an
ecstatic structure of circular movement that tends to produce redundancy and
excess, focused on momentary ends that are always superseded by new ends, and
therefore open to modification and transformation (Herrnstein Smith, 1997,
pp. 38, 46, 49). The imagination expresses possible new ends and communicates
its fundamentally social dimensions: "the heart of language is not `expression' of
something antecedent, much less expression of antecedent thought. It is com-
munication; the establishment of cooperation in an activity in which there are
partners, and in which the activity of each is modified and regulated by partner-
ship" (Dewey, 1958, p. 179).

    Rorty is correct that pragmatists explicate the universal dispositions and ten-
dencies of human minds in terms of the exigencies of the existential context. As
Emerson notes, the exigency of each generation resolves "itself into a practical
question of the conduct of life" (1983, p. 943). These dispositions and tenden-
cies provide the means for a "comprehensive and persisting ... standardization
of habit" that orders all "social interaction" (Dewey, 1958, p. 190). For Em-
erson, the "worst feature of this double consciousness is, that the two lives, of
the understanding and of the soul, which we lead, really show very little rela-
tion to each other, never meet and measure each other" (1983, pp. 205-206).

228
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

Concrete understanding of the environing world--which attunes to its use and
takes protective care of it--is human conduct based on the desire for stability
and consistency. The individual mind (self ), which uses imagination and reason
to self-project, to create, and to communicate new possibilities in the world,
renews habituation and the conduct of life. Renewal happens because nature has
various forms of compensation to maintain the balance between self-protection
and self-projection. If society privileges the concept of materialism, then ideal-
ism emerges as compensation, and so it is with concepts like the one and the
many, reality and imagination, identity and difference, stasis and change, reform
and conservation, or, subjective and objective. In the run of everyday life, the
double consciousness shows little relation to each other. It is, as we see below, the
call of conscience that connects the private mind and the public mind.

    Compensatory behavior does not emerge from "a single and all-at-once be-
ginning," but from the natural evolutionary pattern of fits and starts, composi-
tion and decomposition, and from an excess of ends, the ecstatic culminations
of "incessant beginnings and endings," which animate nature (Dewey, 1958,
p. 97-98; Emerson, 1983, pp. 120-121; Poirier, 1992, p. 54-55). The human
brain/mind reflects nature's propensity for "calculated profusion": "the craft with
which the world is made, runs also into mind and character of " human beings
(Emerson, 1983, p. 550). Peirce calls the brain/mind "organized heterogene-
ity"--which, nonetheless, has "extreme complexity and instability. It has ac-
quired in a remarkable degree of a habit taking and laying aside habits" The laws
of the brain/mind are "so fluid a character as to simulate divergence from law"
(Peirce, 1955, p. 359-360).

    The brain/mind is, as Pinker says, a complex and interactive media that is
attuned to the world. It uses all of its unpredictability in order to adapt to and
reorganize the world; evolution produces a basic design for relatively stable hab-
its of mind (1997, p. 32). In other words, the innate aspects of human nature
are "what all minds have in common, and how minds can differ" (Pinker, 1997,
p. 34). The mind has various organizational tendencies that circumscribe spe-
cies-wide mental activity: "Simple logic says that there can be no learning with-
out innate mechanisms to do the learning. Those mechanisms must be powerful
enough to account for all kinds of learning that humans accomplish" (Pinker,
1997, p. 101). But these mechanisms are not, a priori, knowledge: "Saying that
the different ways of knowing are innate is different from saying that knowledge
is innate" (Pinker, 1997, p. 315). The claim that the human brain has sets of
habits, or internalized adaptations, characterized by reflexive actions or instinc-
tual reflexes, should not be confounded with claims that human nature has an
unalterable or essential nature, or biological determinism, as is crudely articu-
lated by Social Darwinism or by the more modern notions like genetic deter-

                                                                                                 229
Petruzzi

minism, or that the brain is a modular and `hard-wired' computer-like machine
(Unger, 2007, pp. 131-133).

    There is continuity between nature and the dispositions acquired that have
evolved into brain/mind (Dewey, 1980, p. 29). Some neo-pragmatists, like
Rorty, claim the lack of intrinsic, genetic or evolutionary human nature does
not make human existence a relativistic "abyss." The traditional interpretation
of Emerson, which often acknowledges his repeated claim, "there are no fixtures
in nature. The universe is fluid and volatile" (1983, p. 403), is coterminous with
Rorty's non-foundation position. The only way it would not be synonymous is
if one erroneously assumes "abyss" somehow implies a bipolar, other-worldly
ideal or stable universal, which Dewey disputes: Emerson "finds truth in the
highway ... in the unexpected idea .... His ideas are not fixed upon any Reality
that is beyond or behind or in any way apart" (1980, pp. 27-28) from the natu-
ral world. Rorty's argument, however--that there is an "absence of an intrinsic
human nature"--is not supported by evidence from contemporary cognitive
and biological science (1991a, p. 132). All mental development or learning de-
pends upon the deconstruction of useless neurons and reconstruction of use-
ful neural networks. Current neutral studies show that each human brain has
"100 billion neurons and 100 trillion synaptic connections" (Ratey, 2002, p.
18). Many unused connections die during a development stage called `pruning'
and "new connections grow, again depending on which are used and which are
not" (Ratey, 2002, pp. 34-47). Therefore, a) the concept of innateness can only
hold meaning in terms of potentialities, and b) the tabula rasa theory can only
hold meaning in terms of reconstructing what we are born with, not simply
inscription on a blank slate by experience. As Lakoff and Johnson state, "the
traditional innateness versus learned dichotomy is simply an inaccurate way of
characterizing human development, including linguistic development" (1999,
pp. 507-508).

    Dewey clarifies how human nature contains "regularity" without resorting
to static universals:

         Since nothing in nature is exclusively final, rationality is
         always means as well as end. The doctrine of the universality
         and necessity of rational ends can be validated only when
         those in whom the good is actualized employ it as a means
         to modify conditions so that others may also participate in
         it, and its universality exist in the course of affairs. (1958, p.
         120)

Dewey, like James and Emerson, argues, "nothing in nature is exclusively final"
(1958, p. 120), including things like the brain/mind, which were thought to be

230
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

static and unchanging, like truth or the self (James, 1992, p. 287). Imagination
and classification are cognitive behaviors adapted from the plasticity of nature;
both cognitive behaviors are useful insofar as they "incarnate themselves in ac-
tion." Thinking is for use; it frames, animates, alters, and ameliorates both the
private or public mind; Emerson, 1929, vol. 12, pp. 18-19).

PLASTICITY AND HUMAN NATURE

        Whilst we converse with truths as thoughts, they exist also as plastic forces.
                                                                                        --Emerson

    The third cognitive disposition that Emerson and the classical pragmatists
analyze, which makes humans capable of experiencing moments of critical con-
science, is an inherent evolutionary plasticity both in the human brain/mind and
in nature. Darwin's evolutionary discovery--that species have no foundational
point of origin but emerge, reconstructing themselves and in effect deconstruct-
ing those that cannot or do not change--is fundamental to pragmatic natural-
ism. This structure of "continual decomposition and recomposition" (Emerson,
1983, p. 656; 1929, vol. 8, p. 213) is fundamental to the ways classical prag-
matists think about the world--not as a telos intended to culminate in stable
fixed object with a predetermined origin and end--but as an endless creative
production of infinite ends. All organisms in nature change without logical end
or goal; evolutionary changes emerge randomly and yet conservatively. Useful-
ness is the architect of the human mind. If a structure in the brain is not useful,
it wastes away; yet, if it is useful, it is maintained even if new structures get
added to face later challenges. As Wolf Singer notes, "the architectures of brains
evolved according to the same principles of trial, error, and selection as all other
components of organisms. Organisms endowed with brains whose architecture
permitted realization of functions that increased their fitness survived and the
genes specifying these architectures were preserved" (2011, p. 98).

    As James argues, "our fundamental ways of thinking about things are discov-
eries of exceedingly remote ancestors, which have been able to preserve them-
selves throughout the experience of all subsequent time" (1975, p. 83). Our
most primitive ways of thinking can be traced back the reptilian brain, or the
paleo-mammalian brain which maintains the old structures but adds the limbic
system, memory and emotion, and the neo-mammalian brain, which maintains
both and adds abstract thinking and planning abilities.12 Taken together, we
have a triune brain (Ratey, 2002, p. 10), what James calls an "additive constitu-
tion" (1975, pp. 82-83). The cognitive and physical changes in the brain follow
the evolutionary process. Plasticity works both at the historical/evolutionary

                                                                                                 231
Petruzzi

scale and the contingent individual scale: "changing your pattern of thinking
also changes the brain's structure .... Activities that challenge your brain actually
expand the number and strength of neural connections devoted to the skill"
(Ratey, 2002, pp. 36-37). Cognitive science now understands the brain can re-
pair certain injuries, rewire itself by relearning, for example, how to speak after
a stroke. We now know that the act of learning can rewire certain parts of the
human brain; sustained and mindful learning causes neurons to link and then
fire at the same time (Doidge, 2007, p. 63). After the neurons wire together and
fire together the brain becomes more efficient (Doidge, 2007, p. 67); the more
we learn (an essential survival trait) and the faster we think, act, and react to
environing conditions.

    As Pinker notes, "neural plasticity is not a magical protean power of the brain
but a set of tools" that indicates the complexity of human nature (1997, p. 100).
Some parts of the brain are not plastic, and even in childhood, our most plastic
developmental period, plasticity has real limits. However, plasticity also explains
why persuasive discourse must focus on habits, moods, and beliefs (rather than
logic and evidence)--because the brain/mind can learn to change how it thinks,
but generally only adapts to change by gradually retuning its disposition to a
topic or issue. The self-protecting instinct conserves so that change is resisted:
"we keep unaltered as much of our old knowledge, as many of our old prejudices
and beliefs as we can" (James, 1975, p. 83). James states

         the moment one tries to define what habit is, one is led to the
         fundamental properties of matter .... Organic matter, espe-
         cially of nervous tissue, seems endowed with a very extraor-
         dinary degree of plasticity ... so that we may, without hesita-
         tion, lay down as our first proposition the following, that the
         phenomena of habit in living beings are due to the plasticity
         of the organic materials of which their bodies are composed.
         (1955, p. 68)

    Plasticity is the brain's ability to change according to environmental condi-
tions, circumstances, and experiences. It is essential for learning and develop-
mental processes, and for recovery from injuries. While the most active period
of plasticity is between the ages of three and ten, the brain maintains a level of
plasticity throughout its existence (Ratey, 2002, pp. 35-47). New changes are
carried forward through the variety of useful adaptations and transformations
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1999, p. 43). Evolution discloses that the human brain is "far
from being a freely instructable tabula rasa" (Singer, 2011, p. 100). As Dewey
argues, "reformers, following John Locke, were inclined to minimize the signifi-
cance" of instincts and dispositions in order to emphasize "the possibilities inher-

232
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

ent in practice and habit acquisition" (1922, p. 106).13 While Locke attempts to
describe a more plastic vision of humanity by arguing that all human brains are
potentially and equally unlimited--depending upon the social or phenomenal
experience inscribed upon them--it has left us a legacy that ignores how human
nature develops from important interactions between biology, instincts, and the
environment. Wilson, in On Human Nature, argues: "the human mind is not a
tabula rasa, a clean slate on which experience draws intricate patterns ... The ac-
cumulation of old choices, the memory of them, the reflection on those to come,
the re-experiencing of emotions by which they are engendered, all constitute the
mind" (Wilson, 1979. pp. 67). Like Pinker, Wilson argues that Locke's descrip-
tion of human nature as a tabula rasa misrepresents human nature and excludes
biological evolution, which has thoroughly integrated into the human organism
sets of instinctual, reflexive, and innate behaviors, some of which are interac-
tional, some socially determined, and some that are determined by genetics. For
Pinker, the "blank slate" is only partially true: in some cases, social experience
does inscribe and construct human practices in a purely situational and contin-
gent manner. His objection centers on their denial of biological and evolutionary
forces, some of which are intrinsic to all species and some of which emerge in
specific interactions with the environing world.

    Some neo-pragmatists, like Rorty, argue there is no such thing as human
nature because any description offered is either another set of justifications or
another effort to reinscribe metaphysical dualisms and create a foundation out-
side of a human life-world through a non-linguistic access. According to Rorty,
"Dewey spent half his time debunking the very idea of `human nature'" (1991b,
p. 211). However, other neo-pragmatists, like Herrnstein Smith and Unger,
agree with the classical pragmatists' understanding that common tendencies can
shape the brain, mind, and cognition, without over-determined universalism.
Unger argues that innate human nature does not require metaphysical founda-
tions or dualisms: "we associate innateness with constraint. However, our most
significant innate faculty is a structure for out-reaching and rebuilding all struc-
tures" (2007, p. 132). Unger identifies the recursive process of the brain as the
fundamental habit of mind that powers the imagination--the instinct of sur-
prise and to invent. To survive, the mind must be able to make cognitive moves
that it has never made before (Unger, 2007, p. 68). The call to conscience is an
instinctual care for one's world--conduct attempts to create ameliorating and
imaginative reconstructions.

    Herrnstein Smith and Unger agree with the classical pragmatists that human
nature exists and includes innate components--while guarding against the "first
generation" of cognitivist claims (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999, p. 75-76)--which
claims the brain works like a computer, has an innate modular structure, and

                                                                                                 233
Petruzzi

is "hardwired," stable, unchanging (Unger, 2007, p. 131). As Unger notes, the
brain is an open system "subject to the enrichments and transpositions resulting
from the plasticity of the brain" (2007, pp. 131-132). This openness includes
rethinking the way innate aspects of the mind actually produce the ability to
self-project. The brain's plasticity, they argue, allows for constant adaptation and
reorganization--connecting the contingent existential conditions to how we
know and what we do (Dewey, 1966, pp. 336-338).

    Herrnstein Smith notes, "plasticity of belief is obviously advantageous and
indeed necessary for any creature that survives, as humans do, by learning ....
the countertendency--that is, mechanisms that foster the stability and persistence
of beliefs--would, under a broad range of conditions, also be necessary and ad-
vantageous. We are, it seems, congenitally both docile and stubborn" (1997, pp.
50-51). These two instinctual tendencies, stability and plasticity, provide us with
cognitive power to imagine new or ameliorating possibilities that can arise either
in moments of crisis (Unger, 2007, pp. 61, 112, 130, 132) or in moments of
imaginative self-projection. On the other hand, they provide us with "cognitive
conservatism," the instinctual act of self-protection--both individual and so-
cial.14 Herrnstein Smith notes, it "is not merely the tendency to hold fast to one's
beliefs but to incorporate into them whatever comes along and, often enough ...
to turn what might otherwise be seen evidence against one's beliefs into evidence
for them" (1997, p. 51). Human nature, like nature itself, grows not from "a
single and all-at-once beginning" but ecstatic culminations of "incessant begin-
nings and endings" (Dewey, 1958, pp. 97-98; Emerson, 1983, pp. 120-121).

    The classical pragmatists (and neo-pragmatists Herrnstein Smith and Ung-
er) apply evolutionary adaptions to deconstruct the Mind/Body binary, arguing
that human nature exists as shared, evolved tendencies to certain temperaments,
habits, and dispositions. They understand science as a method of inquiry into na-
ture's regularities and tendencies--without claiming that human nature is a static
essence operating from discrete and static faculties of mind. Human nature is
configured by the species' interactions in the environing world. As beings-in-na-
ture we produce culture and the arts, including eloquence and argumentation
(Dewey, 1922, p. 16), through ecstatic moments of imagination that allow an
individual to momentarily step out from habituation. Moments of critical con-
science and nonconformity to social conventions are both possible and necessary.

THE CALL TO CRITICAL CONSCIENCE

        The failure of critical consciousness is a failure without consequences since
        everything it would achieve--change, the undoing of the status quo, the re-
        distribution of power and authority, the emergence of new forms of action--is

234
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

        already achieved by the ordinary and everyday efforts by which, in innumerable
        situations, large and small, each of us attempts to alter the beliefs of another.

                                                                                    --Stanley Fish

        We only insist that the man meliorate, and that the plant grow upward, and
        convert the base into the better nature.

                                                                                        --Emerson

    The call to conscience reaches across both social realms of preserving and
transforming society; it operates on the level of individual citizens whose best
thought allows for democratic and ameliorative cultural critique. As James de-
scribes it, social evolution is caused by the interaction of the individual, who
bears "the power of initiative and origination" of change, and the public or so-
cial environment that has the "power of adopting or rejecting" original ideas to
reform and change society. The self-projecting instinct is necessary to balance
the self-protecting instinct, which tends to conformity, passivity, and fixity of a
public everyday understanding of one's world: "the community stagnates with-
out the impulse of the individual. The impulse [to change] dies away without
the sympathy of the community" (James, 1992, pp. 629-630).

    Both Fish and Rorty argue against a form of critical consciousness that leads
to emancipation or freedom (Fish, 1989, p. 332; Rorty, 1991b, p. 211ff). For
Rorty, a pragmatist utopia should be based on "narratives of increasing cosmo-
politanism, though not narratives of emancipation." Rorty's utopia is "not one
in which human nature has been unshackled .... [t]here is no human nature
which was once, or still is, in chains" (1991b, p. 213). Unfortunately, Rorty
frames emancipation or freedom in terms of over-determined universalism.
Dewey makes a different claim, arguing that emancipation "designates a mental
attitude rather than external unconstraint of movements" (1966, p. 305). Dew-
ey does not claim to free individuals from human nature, but rather to develop
democratic societies that promote intellectual freedom.

    While Fish and Rorty deny that "critical consciousness" is possible because
they deny that human nature exists, classical pragmatists articulate a melioristic
call to conscience framed around democratic political processes that provide a
context for cultural critique. The "human condition," Emerson states, is tied up
in "old knots of fate, freedom, and foreknowledge;" the way to untie the knots
is to propound double consciousness: the oscillation between the public and
private mind (1983, p. 966). Critical thinking extends the narrow understand-
ing of existing conditions by projecting into the truly practical realm of the un-
known. For Emerson, the public mind of everyday understanding is "a comatose
tendency in the brain" (1929, vol. 11, p. 300). As Dewey states it:

                                                                                                 235
Petruzzi

         men [sic] must at least have enough interest in thinking
         for the sake of thinking to escape the limits of routine and
         custom. Interest in knowledge for the sake of knowledge, in
         thinking for the sake of the free play of thought, is necessary
         then to the emancipation of practical life--to make it rich
         and progressive. (as quoted in Brinkmann, 2013, p.96).

    Critical conscience, according to Unger, shortens "the distance between the
ordinary moves" we make in everyday life, which are unconscious and operate
within established habits and limits, and "the exceptional moves by which we
redefine these limits" (2007, p. 57). We can ameliorate and liberate "individuals
from entrenched social division and hierarchy" (2007, p. 56) shrinking the dis-
tance "from context-preserving and context-transforming activities" (2007, p.
57). The power of thought to transform the world--the "choosing and acting"
of the mind--provides the context for what Dewey calls emancipation. Em-
erson states it this way: "so far as a [hu]man thinks, he is free" (1983, p. 953).
Thinking that is self-projecting is based on futurity. Thinking ends in ameliora-
tive action: it is "an actual alteration of a physically antecedent situation in those
details or respects which called for thought in order to do away with some evil"
(Dewey, 1916, p. 31).

    For West and Rorty, Emerson's style of writing is "culture criticism" (Rorty,
1982, p. xl; West, 1989, p. 36).15 Cultural criticism is not a discrete analysis or
evaluation of literature, intellectual history, moral philosophy, epistemology, or
social problems; rather, "all these things mingled together into a new genre"
(Rorty, 1982, p. 66) defy "disciplinary classification" (West, 1989, p. 9). Emer-
son's position outside of academic institutions allows him to evade and "strip the
profession of philosophy of its pretense, disclose its affiliations with structures
of powers (both rhetorical and philosophical) rooted in the past, and enact in-
tellectual practices, i.e., produce texts of various sorts and styles, that invigorate
and unsettle one's culture and society" (West, 1989, p. 37).

    James and Dewey both refer to the same passage in Nature: while "crossing a
bare common" Emerson experiences an ecstatic union with nature in which he
emerges from the public conventional external way of understanding, to a living
incarnate sense that humanity's "life currents" are given by the material world
(James, 1992, p. 856). As Dewey states, "every individual has grown up, and
always must grow up, in a social medium .... He lives and acts in a medium of
accepted meanings and values" (1966, p. 295). These values are embodied be-
liefs that shape his mind; therefore the idea that a mind is isolated and singular
is impossible: a "self achieves mind in the degree in which knowledge of things
is incarnate in the life about him, the self is not a separate mind building up

236
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

knowledge anew on its own account" (Dewey, 1966, p. 295).
    Persuasion is a form of cultural criticism that "flourishes in free countries"

(Emerson, 1929, vol. 8, p. 112) and is most noticeable during moments of social
crisis (Emerson, 1929, vol. 8, p. 119). Unger argues that imagination transfers
to moments of everyday life the call to conscience that emerges in social crisis. If
the call to conscience can be heard in everyday practices then a critical inquiry
can occur in every "account which the human mind gives to itself of the con-
stitution of the world" (Emerson, 1983, p. 634). It therefore becomes the duty
of each individual to become more fully free; concomitantly, each individual
has a public duty to make "laws just and humane ... and with the simple and
sublime purpose of carrying out in private and public action the desire and need
of mankind" (Emerson, 1929, vol. 11, p. 538). Finally, the pragmatic theory of
"double consciousness" represents the "incessant" role that human nature plays
in "the formation of the speculative man or scholar" (Emerson, 1983, p. 747).
As Emerson notes, in the United States, the power of eloquence to persuade and
suddenly expand the public mind is privileged:

         here is room for every degree of it, on every one of its as-
         cending stages, --that of useful speech, in our commercial,
         manufacturing, railroad and educational conventions; that of
         political advice and persuasion on the grandest theatre, reach-
         ing ... into a vast future, and so compelling the best thought
         and noblest administrative ability that the citizen can offer.
         (1929, vol. 8, p. 132)

    By focusing on Emerson's psychological and cognitive understanding of
"double consciousness ... of [our] private and public nature" (1983, p. 966),
I offer a counter-history to the received view about Emerson's pragmatic un-
derstanding of eloquence. His focus on biological and cognitive aspects of the
brain/mind leads us to recognize his affiliations with James and Dewey, and to
see that pragmatism has an inherent call to critical conscience, which is em-
bedded in the hopeful sense that continual democratic cultural critique brings
with it amelioration and social change. For Emerson and other pragmatists, el-
oquence is a means to provoke ameliorating social action in a democracy. Dem-
ocratic persuasion, as a call to conscience, describes the sway between personal
and public as the space where self-reliant behavior demonstrates that critique is a
form of attending to one's world with care. Change entails persuasion directed at
the private duty of each individual to care for what Emerson calls the "secular ...
evolution of man" (1929, vol. 11, p. 299). Care is a demonstration of our duty
to use new knowledge practically, for the purpose of becoming more fully free,
and our public duty to make "laws just and humane ... and with the simple and

                                                                                                 237
Petruzzi

sublime purpose of carrying out in private and public action the desire and need
of mankind" (Emerson, 1929, vol. 11, p. 538).

EXPRESSIVISM

    The field of composition and rhetoric is arguably dominated by "social con-
structionist" interpretations, which, as Steven Pinker argues in The Blank Slate,
have become hegemonic in social sciences and humanities (2002, p. 6). As Xin
Liu Gale notes, social constructionists base much of their theory on neo-prag-
matist philosophers (1996, p. 18), especially the work of Richard Rorty. Typ-
ically compositionists assume that Rorty's philosophy articulates a "social con-
structionist" position. Olson is startled because "Rorty does not recognize the
term social constructionism as referring to any intellectual movement that he
is aware of " (1988, p. 1). In another context, Rorty aptly argues the claim that
everything that is socially constructed is "hopelessly misleading" (2007, p. 115).
Rorty claims classifying all objects as "social constructs" detracts from the debate
over "the utility of alternative constructs" (1999, p. 86).

    Berlin traces expressive rhetoric "to Emerson and the Transcendentalists, and
its ultimate source is to be found in Plato" (1987 p. 71).16 Emerson, like Peter
Elbow and others, is categorized by social constructionist taxonomies, like James
A. Berlin's, as an expressivist.17 Berlin's position simply recapitulates the received
literary view of Emerson, what Thomas G. O'Donnell calls "expressivist bash-
ing" (1996, p.423 ), or what Michael Lopez calls the "anti-Emerson tradition
(1996)," epitomized by W. Ross Winterowd's "Emerson and the Death of Pathos"
(1996).18 In the received view, Romantic rhetoric based on Kantian or neo-Pla-
tonist idealism is committed to "an epistemology that locates all truth within a
personal construct arising from one's unique selfhood [and] prevents these expres-
sionists from becoming genuinely epistemic in their approach" (Berlin, 1987, p.
153). While there have been many articles that have defended Elbow against what
O'Donnell calls the "common but false assumptions about expressivist epistemo-
logical orientations" (1996, p. 424); also see Donald C. Jones, Sherrie Gradin,
Stephen Fishman and Lucille Parkinson McCarthy (1992 and 1995), Kathleen
O'Brien, Philip P. Marzluf, and Kristi Yager), only Hephzibah Roskelly and Kate
Ronald defend Emerson's position in this dispute, which is particularly odd given
the resurgent interest in literary and philosophical studies in Emerson's contribu-
tions to pragmatism19 and the emergence of a neo-pragmatist "school" of rhetoric.

    Yet Emerson argues that knowing is not a subjective state of mind; rather it is
an activity, an event in service of use: "my metaphysics are to the end of use ....
There is something surgical in metaphysics as we treat it" (1929, vol. 12, p.
13). Imaginative discourse is useful and social because it releases and increases

238
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

the interactions between interlocutors and the agency of individuals. Emerson's
description of the uses of eloquence and argumentation appropriately integrates
the social and personal process in which individuals participate in coming-to-
know truth and work to apply those truths to provoke political change.

NOTES

* Editors' Note: Anthony Petruzzi passed away while writing this chapter. We are
grateful to his family and friends for making sure his work was able to be included
here.

1. Mark Bauerlein also argues that the classical pragmatists develop their ideas
around a conception of mind: "in the writings of Emerson, James, and Peirce [there
is] a close relation between method and mind" and their pragmatic `method' devel-
ops from "a sophisticated model of cognition" (1997, p. 5).

2. James says, "We find this mode of protecting the Self by exclusion and denial very
common ... All narrow people entrench their Me, they retract it, from the region of
what they cannot securely possess" (1955, p. 201).

3. Self-projection is what James calls self-seeking, one "of our fundamental instinc-
tive impulses": "by self-seeking we mean the providing for the future as distinguished
from maintaining the present" (1955, p. 198).
4. As a discipline, Psychology separates from Philosophy in the mid-19th century.
Robert Danisch aptly notes, in Pragmatism, Democracy, and the Necessity of Rhetoric,
that James and Dewey both wrote key texts and played significant "roles in the bur-
geoning science of psychology" (2007, p. 5). Current discussions of pragmatic rhet-
oric exclude Emerson, who, of the three, is the only practicing rhetorician; Crick
and Danisch's recent books suggest that pragmatism helps us to retrieve a sophistic,
proteagorian, rhetoric for the 21st century. Neither book distinguishes classical prag-
matists from neo-pragmatists, who tenuously claim that pragmatism is postmodern
sophistry (Mailloux, 1998, pp. 1ff; Smith, 1988, p. 86; Crick, 2010, pp. 14 and
22ff; Danisch, 2007, pp. 7ff).

5. Emerson has several terms for what I am calling the "public mind"; he refers to
it as "the universal mind," "the mind of humanity," and "the absolute mind" (or
what Dewey would call the continuity that interanimates nature's power and "the
constitution of things."

6. Carol Synder puts it this way:

          all too frequently students merely rehearse categories and repeat
          standard distinctions. The absence of argument in these papers
          suggests that students typically misunderstand the provisional
          status of classifications and their dependence on disciplinary con-

                                                                                                 239
Petruzzi

          ventions, tending to regard them as though they were as reliably
          permanent .... What such writers need, it seems clear, is a more
          challenging introduction to division and classification, one that
          can at once spur the interest that makes for engaged, purpose-
          ful writing and promote a better understanding of division and
          classification as scholarly tools. (1984, p. 209)

7. Classical pragmatists understand that the brain, consciousness (or mind), and lan-
guage are evolutionary adaptions; they have what Pierce calls "the scientific attitude"
(1955, p. 42ff); evolutionary science is a method they use to define pragmatism as
a new form of philosophical cultural criticism (Dewey, 1958, p. xvi). The classical
pragmatists all considered themselves, as Pierce states, driven by the "impulse to
penetrate into the reason of things" (1955, p. 42) through scientific inquiry; how-
ever, they want alternatives to modernist claims, which creates a dualism between
subject-object, that truth is only valid when disclosed objectively by a neutral and
impartial observer.

8. For Rorty, Emerson and the classical pragmatists are also strongly linked together
because of their emphasis on self-reliance and their support a uniquely American
form of social democracy (Rorty, 1991a, p. 2).

9. Emerson continuously emphasizes the importance of seeing relationships:

          A [hu]man does not see ... that relation and connection are
          not somewhere and sometimes, but everywhere and always; no
          miscellany, no exemption, no anomaly, but method, and an even
          web; and what comes out was put in .... In the human mind,
          this tie of fate is made alive. The law is the basis of the human
          mind. (1983, p. 1065)

10. Lopez notes, "in essay after essay Emerson further elaborates and refines his
fundamental perception of a universe in which all varieties of relationships ... may
be defined in terms of our capacity to use or be used" (1996, p. 57). For Lopez,
Emerson's most mature exposition of his "new gospel of pragmatism" is most clearly
articulated by the final sentence of Representative Men: human beings can continue
to evolve and realize life "first, last, midst, and without end, to honor every truth by
use" (1983, p. 761).

11. Contrary to the received view, it is hard to reconcile statements like this and
claim that Emerson is a romantic exponent of solipsistic self-expression and asocial
political action.

12. Both human consciousness and language are relatively new evolutionary adap-
tations, generally thought to have developed between 50,000 to 100,000 years ago.
Language is an innate or fixed action (not taught) mechanism; for example, speech
is a universal human instinct, while literacy, whether reading or writing, universally

240
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

needs to be taught to each individual. Speech is important for the survival of the
species; it is specialized practice that gives an advantage to the species. Through the
continuity of thousands of generations, the species undergoes an adaptation that
became instinctual, but language demonstrates not just continuity but wherever the
species is found we find a random plurality of diverse, contextual, contingent varia-
tions practiced. It is this unity within plurality that is central to pragmatist ontology.

13. Locke's original intent was, probably, to challenge the political structure of his
day, which was based on the notion that human nature was unalterable and the
political order, the divine right of kings, was based on this foundational principle.

14. Similarly, Pinker argues that an ethic of morality runs across all human emotions
to provide stability and plasticity. He claims there are two streams of morality: an
ethic of autonomy, which frames judgments about individuality, their interests and
cares, and an ethic of community, which frames judgments about following social
conventions, deferring to authority, and duty towards tribe, nationality, or political
affiliation (2002, p. 271).

15. For Cavell, Emerson prefigures post-modern positions:

          We are by now too aware of the philosophical attacks on system
          or theory to place the emphasis in defining philosophy on a
          product of philosophy rather than on the process of philosophiz-
          ing. We are more prepared to understand as philosophy a mode
          of thought that undertakes to bring philosophy to an end, as,
          say, Nietzsche, and Wittgenstein attempt to do, not to mention,
          in their various ways, Bacon, Montaigne, Descartes, Pascal,
          Marx, Kierkegaard, Carnap, Heidegger, or Austin .... Ending
          philosophy looks to be a commitment of each of the major mod-
          ern philosophers" (1991, pp. 129-130).

16. To Berlin's credit, in Writing Instruction in Nineteenth-Century American Col-
leges, he reverses his interpretation of Emerson. Berlin rejects the received view that
Emerson is a neo-Platonist who claims that truth is a "private vision" (1988, p. 15).
Berlin states, "I am convinced that those who find in Emerson a rhetoric of self-ex-
pression are mistaken, even though this reading may be used in support of modern
expressionist rhetoric" (1987, p. 55). However, Berlin's later of Emerson's work has
been ignored because his argument that Emerson is a "post-Kantian" (1987, p. 48),
who finds the "ground of reality is the ideal" (1987, p. 46), does little to counter the
clichés that frame Emerson as a Romantic.

17. Lopez states

          I am not suggesting that the familiar features of the Transcenden-
          talist Emerson are not there or that are merely critical construc-
          tions imposed on him. They are there .... The problem is ...

                                                                                                 241
Petruzzi

          this way of approaching him leaves out radically contradictory
          tendencies, tendencies that seem to me not only equal but ulti-
          mately greater in extent and importance. (p. 9)

For Patterson, "Emerson's writings exhibit a consistent pattern of contradiction that
is fundamental to his critical reassessment of democratic values" (p. 5).

18. Roskelly and Ronald aptly describe Ross Winterowd, as a typical critic of Em-
erson and romanticism; his response, in general, is "less well articulated and more
stereotypical" than received view: "He defines romanticism in predictably tradition-
al ways" (1998, p. 36). They reinterpret and defend Expressivism and Romanticism
from the oversimplifications of the social constructionists.

19. By 1988, Michael Lopez, who does an excellent job of summarizing previous
scholarly interpretations of Emerson (1996, pp. 19-52), states that the "major, cur-
rent trend in" Emerson scholarship is "de-transcendentalizing" his work (p. 77).

REFERENCES

Bauerlein, M. (1997). The pragmatic mind: Explorations in the pyschology of belief.
   Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Bercovitch, S. (1993), Rites of Assent. New York: Routledge, Chapman, and
   Hall.

Berlin, J. A. (1984). Writing instruction in nineteenth-century American colleges.
   Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Berlin, J. (1987). Rhetoric and reality: Writing instruction in American colleges,
   1900-1985. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Berlin, J. (1988). Contemporary compostion: The major pedagogical theories.
   In G. Tate & E. Corbett (Eds.), Writing teachers sourcebook (pp. 47-59). New
   York: Oxford University Press,.

Bizzell, P., & Herzberg, B (2001). The rhetorical tradition: Readings form clasi-
   cal times to the present. New York: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Brinkmann, S. (2013). John dewey: Science for a changing world. NJ: Transaction
   Press.

Cavell, S. (Winter, 19991). Aversive thinking: Emersonian representations in
   Heidegger and Nietzsche. New Literary History, 22(1), 129-160.

Churchland, P. S. (2002). Brain-wise: Studies in neurophilosophy. Cambridge,
   MA: MIT University Press.

Crick, N. (2010). Democray and rhetoric: John Dewey on the arts of becoming.
   University of South Caroline Press.

Danisch, R. (2007). Pragmatism, democracy, and the necessity of rhetoric. Univer-
   sity of South Carolina Press.

242
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

Dauber, K. (1994). On not being able to read Emerson, or `Representative man.'
   boundary 2, 21(2), 220-242.

Decartes, R. (1968). Discourse on method and the meditations (F.E. Sutcliffe,
   Trans.). New York: Penguin.

Dewey, J. (1916). Essays in experimental logic. New York: Dover.
Dewey, J. (1922). Human nature and conduct: An introduction to social psycholo-

   gy. New York: Modern Library.
Dewey, J. (1958). Experience and nature. New York: Dover.
Dewey, J. (1966), Democracy and education: An introduction to the philosophy of

   education. New York: The Free Press.
Dewey, J. (1980). Art as experience. New York: Perigee.
Doidge, N. (2007). The brain that changes itself. New York: Penguin.
Emerson, R. W. (1929). Thecollected works of Ralph Waldo Emerson (12 vols.).

   New York: Wise and Co.
Emerson, R. W. (1972). The early lectures of Ralph Waldo Emerson (S. E. Which-

   er, R. Spiller, & W. E. Williams.) (3 vols.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
   versity Press.
Emerson, R. W. (1983). Essays and lectures (J. Porte, Ed.). New York: Library of
   America.
Faigley, L. (2009). Competing theories of process: A critique and a proposal.
   In S. Miller (Ed.) The Norton book of composition studies (pp. 652-666). New
   York: Norton.
Fish, S. (1989). Doing what comes naturally: Change, rhetoric, and the practice of
   theory in literary and legal studies. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Fishman, S., & McCarthy, L. P. (1995). Community in the expressivist class-
   room: Juggling liberal and communitarian visions. College English, 57(1), 62-
   81.
Fishman, S., & McCarthy, L. P. (1992). Is expressivism dead? Reconsidering its
   romantic roots and its relation to social constructivsim. College English, 54(6),
   647-661.
Flynn, E. A. (1997). Rescuing postmodernism. College Composition and Com-
   munication, 48(4), 540-555.
Fulkerson, R. (2009). Four philosophies of composition. In S. Miller (Ed.), The
   Norton book of composition studies (pp. 430-435). New York: Norton.
Gale, X. L. (1996). Teachers, discourses, and authority in the postmodern composi-
   tion classroom. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Gradin, S. (1995). Romancing rhetorics: Social expressivst perspectives on the teach-
   ing of writing. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton Cook Heinemann.
Heidegger, M. (1996). Being and time: A translation of sein und zeit (J. Stam-
   baugh, Trans.). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

                                                                                                 243
Petruzzi

James, W. (1955). The principles of pyschology (R. M. Hutchins, Ed.) (Vol. 53.).
   Chicago: Encyclopaedia Brittannica.

James, W. (1975). Pragmatism: A new name for some old ways of thinking. Cam-
   bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

James, W. (1992). Writings: 1878-1899 (G. E. Meyers, Ed.). New York: Library
   of America.

Jones, D. C. (2002). John Dewey and Peter Elbow: A pragmatist revision of
   social theory and practice. Rhetoric Review, 21(3), 264-281.

Judd, D. (2005). Critical realism and composition theory. New York: Routledge.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind

   and its challenge to western thought. New York: Basic.
Lakoff, G. (2010, December). Untellable truths. Truthout.org. Retrieved from

   http://truth-out.org/archive/component/k2/item/93342:untellable-truths
Lopez, M. (1996). Emerson and Power: Creative antagonism in the nineteenth

   century. Dekalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
Mailloux, S. (1998). Reception histories: Rhetoric, pragmatism, and American cul-

   tural politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Marzluf, P. P. (2006). Diversity Writing: Natural Languages, Authentic Voices.

   College Composition and Communication, 57(3), 503-522.
O'Brien, K. (2000). Romantism and rhetoric: A question of audience. Rhetoric

   Society Quarterly, 30(2), 77-91.
O'Donnell, T. G. (1996). Politics and ordinary language: A defense of expressiv-

   ist rhetorics. College English, 58(4), 423-439.
Olson, G. A. (1988.May). Social construction and composition theory: A con-

   versation with Richard Rorty. JAC Online. Retrieved from http://www.jacon-
   linejournal.com/archives/vol9/olson-social.pdf
Patterson, A.H. (1997). From Emerson to King: Democracy, race, and the politics
   of protest. Oxford University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1955). Philosophical writings of Peirce (J. Buchler, Ed.). New York:
   Dover.
Petruzzi, A. P. (1996). Rereading Plato's rhetoric. Rhetoric Review, 15(1), 5-25.
Petruzzi, A. P. (1999). The effects of the hegemony of the idea upon the under-
   standing of Plato's rhetoric. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 32(4), 368-380.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York: Norton.
Pinker, S. (2002). The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. New York:
   Viking.
Poirier, R. (1992). Poetry and pragmatism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
   Press.
Ratey, J. J. (2002). A user's guide to the brain: Perception, attention, and the four
   theatres of the brain. New York: Vintage.

244
                                                       Emerson's Pragmatic Call for Critical Conscience

Richardson, J. (2007). A natural history of pragmatism: The fact of feeling from
   Jonathan Edwards to Gertrude Stein. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Rorty, R. (1979). Philosphy and the mirror of nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
   University Press.

Rorty, R. (1982). Consequences of pragmatism: Essays 1972-80. Minneapolis,
   MN: Minnesota University Press.

Rorty, R. (1991a). Essays on Heidegger and others: Philosophical papers (Vol. 2.).
   New York: Cambridge University Press.

Rorty, R. (1991b). Objectivity, relativism, and truth: Philosophical papers (Vol.
   1.). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Rorty, R. (1999). Philosophy and social hope. New York: Penguin.
Rorty, R. (2007). Philosophy as cultural politics: Philosophical papers (Vol. 4.).

   New York: Cambrdge University Press.
Rose, M. (1989). Lives on the boundary. New York: Penguin.
Roskelly, H., & Ronald, K. (1998). Reason to believe: Romanticism, pragmatism,

   and the possibility of teaching. Albany, NY: SUNY University Press.
Singer, W. (2011). Epigenesis and brain plasicity in ducation. In A. M. Battro,

   K. W. Fisher, & P. J. Lena (Eds.) The educated brain: Essays in neuroeducation
   (pp. 97-109). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, B. H. (1997). Belief and resistance: Dynamics of contemporary intellectual
   controversy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, B. H. (1988). Contingencies of value: Alternative perspectives for critical
   theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Snyder, C. (1984). Analyzing classifications: Foucault for advanced writing. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication, 35(2), 209-216.
Unger, M. R. (2007). The self awakened: Pragmatism unbound. Cambridge, UK:
   Cambridge University Press.
West, C. (1989). The American evasion of philosophy: A genealogy of pragmatism.
   Madison, WI: Wisconsin University Press. JAC 16, 27-40.
Wilson, E.O. (1979). On human nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
   Press.
Winterowd, W. R. (1996). Emerson and the death of pathos. JAC 16(1), 27-40.
Yager, K. (1996). Romantic resonances in the rhetor of Peter Elbow's writing
   without teachers. Composition Studies/Freshman English News, 24(2), 144-
   159.

                                                                                                 245
SECTION FOUR:
  PEDAGOGIES
PLACE-BASED GENRE WRITING
AS CRITICAL EXPRESSIVIST
PRACTICE

David Seitz
Wright State University

    In response to students' changing literacy practices within the digital age
in contrast to the traditional expectations of academic print literacy, many first
year writing programs have rejected expressivist approaches to teaching academ-
ic reading and writing. Instead, these programs tend to emphasize rhetorical
analyses of written and visual texts, especially in the first course of an academic
writing sequence. As economist Robert Reich pointed out, our global knowl-
edge economy requires this focus on analysis. He identified the need for sym-
bolic analysts who "wield equations, formulae, analogies, models, and construct
categories and metaphors in order to create possibilities for reinterpreting and
rearranging" the deluge of textual and visual data (quoted in Johnson-Eilola,
2004, p. 229).

    Yet too often conventional rhetorical analysis relies more on having students
consume academic texts (or public criticism in the form of op-ed pages) and
only reproduce their discourse and generic forms. Rarely do these approaches
aim to mediate the culture and languages from students' communities as a major
pedagogical goal. So most often students remain alienated from an academic
identity and purpose in these courses. As a graduate professor on the periphery
of our official writing program, I hear from frustrated new graduate student
teachers who wisely come to identify this problem with the program's suggested
assignments. The first course in our program focuses more on analyzing adver-
tisements and commentary pieces. Yet the program's most inexperienced teach-
ers, unequipped with a more expansive pedagogical toolkit, inevitably revert to
teaching conventional academic forms rather than creative critical inquiry.

    As an alternative to these conventions of textual analysis, another small-
er group of teacher-scholars have stressed rhetorical approaches through mul-
tigenre projects. As Tom Romano, Nancy Mack, Cheryl Johnson and Jayne
Moneysmith, and Robert Davis and Mark Shadle have shown, multigenre ped-
agogy can definitely foster students' creative inquiry. While I admire much
of these multigenre approaches, particularly the work of Romano and Mack,
they tend to use genres to help students understand complexities of research

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.15  249
Seitz

writing (Romano, Mack, Davis and Shadle) or argumentation (Johnson and
Moneysmith). In contrast, I wanted to draw on genre pedagogy to focus on
analysis to meet our writing program's outcomes for the first semester writing
course in ways that might be more internally persuasive to our students. In
my upper-level undergraduate rhetoric course, students learned to analyze dis-
course by rewriting political commentaries in other genres and then analyzing
the rhetorical effects of their choices (see Seitz "Mocking Discourse"). Now I
wanted to create a similar approach to analysis that could motivate and engage
most first year writing students.

    In this chapter, I will show how the genre writings project in my first year
writing course, supported by principles of place-based education and theories of
genre as textual sites of social action, helps create a more inductive approach to
rhetorical analysis focused on students' languages and values. In contrast to con-
ventional rhetorical analysis of a text, the students analyze the rhetorical choices
they make when they compose in diverse genres that respond to the rhetorical
situations of local place and community. I believe this approach can help open
up a dialectical space through a process of "purposeful mediation" between ac-
ademic rhetoric and collective rhetorics of local place. Through this approach,
students often invest more in the process of their analysis, analyzing what they
have accomplished rhetorically through their genre writings.

GOALS, ASSIGNMENTS, AND INTERVIEWS
FROM A PLACE-BASED WRITING COURSE

    To better show my motives for the rhetorical moves within this project, what
follows are the key goals of this course which I designed in accordance with a
place-based genre writing pedagogy, an overview of the assignment sequences,
and a look at genre connections drawn from interviews.

Course Goals

    Students were expected to foster and articulate critical analyses of everyday
rhetoric within social and historical contexts. They were also expected to gain
awareness of how any place could be analyzed in relation to three conditions:
community bonds, local history, and global influences. And I wanted students
to understand how written, oral, and visual genres help enact, respond to, and
complicate these three connections.

Sequence of Assignments

    Throughout the course students were required to research and write an "In-

250
                                             Place-Based Genre Writing as Critical Expressivist Practice

terview Analysis Paper." I wanted them to identify connections between place
and community, and develop a genre writing for each of these connections (i.e.
community bonds, local history, and global influences). Finally, they were to
analyze rhetorical situations of their genre writings and their connections.

    In my course, students conducted ethnographic interviews about how a place
or community has responded to change. The students' choice of place could be
a neighborhood, town, or workplace. I borrowed this emphasis on change from
Julie Lindquist's own writing course on place, which helped inspire my own.
By emphasizing change, the interviews tended to focus on how the interviewee
drew upon the collective rhetorics of the place and community to respond to
physical and historical forces as well as the changing rhetorical influences on the
place and people. These forces and influences might come from outside groups
and institutions, such as the decision to move NCR (National Cash Register,
a home industry in Dayton Ohio), to Atlanta. Or they might have come from
smaller groups inside the larger community, such as efforts of rural towns to
revitalize their downtowns during the recession in a global economy. But the
project also allowed for students to demonstrate when the place and community
had not changed and how, why, and to what effects. In this manner the project
left open the possibility of social affirmation and critique (see Seitz, 2004). We
cannot assume before ethnographic research how the interviewee and others in
the community view change and stability within this place. Through the work
of the interview analysis paper, students then locate three connections from their
interviews that respectively address community bonds, local history, and global
influences related to this place or community.

GENRE CONNECTIONS DRAWN FROM INTERVIEWS

    With regard to community bonds, some of the possible connections could
be specific actions people conducted in order to create ties or social networks;
specific common traditions, values, and beliefs that brought individuals togeth-
er; or issues that related directly to the well-being of the local place and its
residents. As for the local history of the place and community, these might be
major events taking place in the community or place during a specific period
and which resulted in some change. These could be political, economic, news-
worthy (at least, in the eyes of the community members), or historical--that is,
referencing the history of particular groups within the community. And where
global influence was concerned (whether considered from state, national, or
international perspectives), students were encouraged to explore the political,
economic, technological, or cultural influences on the place and community.

    For instance, Chelsea Presson interviewed her uncle, one of 15 remaining

                                                                                                 251
Seitz

employees at NCR (which he describes now as a ghost office). From her inter-
views and analysis paper, she identified the community bonds of strong em-
ployee relationships that NCR once nurtured through company programs and
abandoned over ten years before the decision to move the company. For the
local history, she emphasized the deterioration of NCR's long-standing support
of Dayton's communities and small businesses. And for the global influences,
she focused on the impact of the national economy that acted as the backdrop
for NCR's decision to move. This analysis encourages an historical and global
perspective toward the local place. Moreover, rather than the course providing
pre-packaged issues, most students come to see that any place or institution is
both sustained and impacted by these three connections.

    Then for each connection they have identified from their analysis, the stu-
dents write a text in a non-academic genre that responds to a local rhetorical
situation they learned about in their interview research. This approach helps de-
velop greater rhetorical facility (one of the main Writing Program Administrators'
outcomes) expanding beyond academic genres in the larger knowledge economy.
I provide the students with a vast list of possible genres to choose from, but also
suggest they consider what genres community members would more likely write,
read, and watch as well as what genres outsiders (state, national, international)
whose actions affect this place would write, read, and watch. Through in-class
activities, I get them to consider how their genre choices can help show some-
thing about each of their three connections. In this way, the activity gets students
thinking about how genres enact the social roles and situated action tied to their
three genre connections. Students need to also consider the rhetorical situation
(considerations of audience, purpose, stance, genre, and medium/design), as de-
fined by Richard Bullock's Norton Field Guide to Writing (2009) for each genre
connection. When they must consider the fit of the genre choice to rhetorical
situation, they begin to analyze the affordances of each possible genre choice.

    So for community bonds, Chelsey composed an email dialogue between a
surviving Dayton NCR employee and one who moved to the new Atlanta of-
fice, elaborating in detail on their past exploits in better company times. For
the local history, she took on the voice of a Dayton restaurant owner in the
city paper, addressing concerns of small business bankruptcies in Dayton since
the pulling out of NCR and General Motors (supported by data drawn from
secondary sources). And for the global influences connection, she took on the
sunny authoritative tone of NCR CEO Bill Nuti in a slickly designed company
newsletter assuring employees that the economy was turning around compared
to previous recessions.

    The students also had to incorporate secondary sources in the text and foot-
notes of their genre writings to help them relate the local situations they enacted

252
                                             Place-Based Genre Writing as Critical Expressivist Practice

to similar concerns of other communities (or workplaces) and larger issues at
the state, national or international level. For teaching strategies of incorporating
research from secondary sources in genre writings, I have learned much from
Nancy Mack's scholarship and pedagogy. Finally, as a metacognitive reflection,
the students analyze and articulate all these rhetorical choices in an extensive
cover letter.

    When I designed this course, I knew I wanted students to address place as
a generative theme, but I hadn't read much on theories of place-based pedago-
gy, which is mostly a rural K-12 movement. Now I look back at the students'
projects over four years of classes and see how much these theories support my
approach.

PREMISES OF A CRITICAL PLACE-BASED
WRITING PEDAGOGY

        Illuminate the concept of Intradependence (of place, community, and self ).
                                                                                --Paul Theobauld

        Support sustainability of civic life at local levels (not migratory culture and
        rhetoric).

                                                                                 --Robert Brooke

        Examine, celebrate, and critique the literacy practices that create local knowl-
        edge, culture, and public memory.

                                                                                --Charlotte Hogg

        Foreground connections to global, national, and regional development trends
        that impact local places.

                                                                             --David Gruenwald

    Robert Brooke has asserted pedagogical approaches of place-based education
share common ground with the tradition of expressivist pedagogies that explore
self and society (2003). As defined and articulated by Paul Theobauld, place-
based education should illuminate the concept of intradependence, the connect-
ed relationship of place, community and self. To seek intradependence means to
"exist by virtue of necessary relations `within a place'" (quoted in Brooke, 2003,
p. 7). Brooke claims "Theobauld wants an education that immerses learners into
the life of human communities while they are still in school, thereby teaching
the practice of civic involvement" (2003, p. 6).

    Most of the students who work on this project in my class begin to prac-
tice forms of intradependence when they choose to interview their grandpar-

                                                                                                 253
Seitz

ents about the losses of a viable, walkable downtown life; their parents about
the relationship of their workplaces to their home communities; people with
institutional roles in the town, such as teachers, coaches, or ministers, about
the local effects of demographic shifts; or people in professions that motivated
some students, such as law enforcement and nursing, where they learn about
the positive and negative impact of new technologies on employee interaction
in these workplaces.

    Brooke rightly maintains that writing classes which emphasize rhetorical
forms and argumentative strategies regardless of local cultures and community
issues encourage a migratory culture that disconnects the self from place and
does not support sustainability of civic life at local levels. "As educators," Brooke
writes, "all of us are implicated in the destruction of small communities" 2006,
p. 147). Most American education now serves to create an "identity not linked
to a specific place, community, or region but instead to the identity of the skilled
laborer, equipped with the general cultural and disciplinary knowledge that will
enable the person to work wherever those skills are required"; paraphrasing the
naturalist writer Wallace Stegner, Brooke stresses how this kind of migratory
living can lead to "harsh exploitation of natural and cultural resources--if you
don't plan to live somewhere more than a decade, it doesn't matter in what con-
dition you leave it in" (2003, p. 2).

    Instead, Brooke, along with other place-based educators, calls for imagining
an education that fosters regional identity of "civic leadership, knowledge of her-
itage, and stewardship" (2006, p. 153). "It is at the local level where we are most
able to act, and at the local level where we are most able to affect and improve
community" (Brooke, 2003, p. 4). While the place-based genre writing project
in my class doesn't lead to immediate civic action, it does make students think
more about establishing a regional, rather than solely migratory, identity within
their acts of writing.

    But as Charlotte Hogg's scholarship on rural literacies suggests, along with
that of her colleagues Kim Donehower and Eileen Schell, place-based education
needs to critique as well as celebrate local narratives of place. Hogg's research
of Nebraskan women's roles as informal town historians highlights alternative
narratives in contrast to the more patriarchal models of the agrarian movement
which emphasize the self and the land and tend to neglect the everyday prac-
tices of towns that sustain local community. Hogg reminds us the goal is better
models of cultural sustainability rather than preservation of a particular version
of the past: "local narratives are not static artifacts for preservation, but openings
for delving into questions of power and representation" (2007, p. 131). More-
over, the project in my course supports David Gruenwald's call for a teaching
approach that is "attuned to the particularities of where people actually live, and

254
                                             Place-Based Genre Writing as Critical Expressivist Practice

that is connected to global development trends that impact local places" (quoted
in Hogg, 2007, p. 129).

    In the course of this project, the interview analysis activities help most stu-
dents move toward the kind of analytical complexity suggested by Hogg, Gru-
enwald, and other scholars of critical pedagogies of place. The scaffolding of the
interview analysis activities, along with other analysis activities using readings
and movie clips, encourages students to discern social patterns and tensions from
their interviews related to a community's cultural values and responses to change.

    For example, Zachary Rapp comes from a working class town in southern
Ohio. As a proud high school athlete, he wanted to interview his basketball
coach. In the course of his analysis, Zach zeroed in on an unexpected tension
within the school and town community. Zach's coach explained specific ways
this working class community deeply supported the athletics programs as a
source of community pride. But he also referred to the teachers' frustration over
poor funding and repeated failed levies. In his interview analysis paper and then
his genre writings, Zach had to wrestle with another side of this multifaceted
story that he had not encountered before. As he began to question the commit-
ment of his neighbors to the full education of the town's children, he certainly
considered issues of the town's greater sustainability and the larger national issue
of funding for education. But he also recognized, and wanted to explain the
daily sacrifices that families made for the children's athletics, and he wanted to
celebrate that story, especially in contrast to the attitude of outsiders that his
town was a wasted dangerous place which he claimed was part of its local history
from the viewpoint of neighboring towns with greater wealth.

    In this regard, Zach took up the dialectical positions that Charlotte Hogg
encourages--to both celebrate and critique the literacy practices that make up
public memory of small town life. While the interview analysis paper gave Zach
a genre form to address the significance of both perspectives within an academic
frame, the genre writings gave him the opportunity to isolate and emphasize the
voices and genres that both supported and challenged the cultural values that
made up these aspects of the town's civic life. So Zach writes in the voice of an
injured local college athlete in a college application essay to show the commu-
nity bonds forged at the town football games. He addresses the local history of
rumors perpetuated by neighboring towns through a series of email exchanges
between a prospective resident who asks a longtime volunteer booster about the
town's darker reputation. The booster's replies speak to the town's working class
pride. But Zach also writes in the voice of a newspaper editor from a neigh-
boring city paper that urges this local community to put as much emphasis on
academic funding in their public schools as they do athletics.

    So when students' rhetorical choices of genres (and their purposes and au-

                                                                                                 255
Seitz

diences) derive from the ethnographic analysis of these three connections to a
local place or community, the students tend to better understand genre as situ-
ated social action. As with the place-based pedagogy, I had not read deeply into
rhetorical theories of genre when I designed the project. Now I see how these
theories support a view of students inhabiting roles and situations they have
researched first hand from their interviews.

PREMISES OF RHETORICALLY-BASED THEORIES
OF GENRE

        Genres serve as keys to understanding how to participate in the actions of a
        community

                                                                             --Carolyn R. Miller

    The work of Carolyn Miller, Charles Bazerman, Catherine Schryer, Amy De-
vitt, and Anis Bawarshi, among others, reminds us that genres work to perform
situated social actions and relations, enact social roles, frame social realities, and
mediate textual and social ways of knowing and being. When we learn genres,
we learn to inhabit "interactionally produced worlds" and social relationships,
recognize situations in particular ways, and orient ourselves to particular goals,
values, and assumptions.

    Apart from the genre pedagogy created by Devitt, Bawarshi and Reiff (2004),
many teachers emphasize genre as forms, rather than situating the writing of var-
ious non-academic genres within the study of place and community. Rhetorical
genre theorists instead view genres, such as a community newsletter or a company
brochure, as "sites of social and ideological action" (Schreyer, 1993, p. 208). As
Bawarshi sums up the importance of genres, "they embody and help us enact
social motives, which we negotiate in relation to our individual motives; they
are dynamically tied to the situations of their use; and they help coordinate the
performance of social realities, interactions and identities" (2004, p. 77). Devitt,
Bawarshi, and Reiff have stated that the term "discourse community" and the rela-
tionship of subjectivity to discourse community remain too vague. Instead, along
with Miller, Bazerman, and others, they argue that it is the process of genres (with-
in various modalities) that "organize and generate discourse communities" (2003,
p. 550) and shape strategies of social action within these rhetorical situations.

    In my course project, the interview process and the three connections help
to physically situate the cognition required to know what genres might be ap-
propriate at what points in time and space within the local rhetorical situation.
Because students encounter the use of various written genres in their interviews
and in actual community contexts, they are exposed to genres not only as indi-

256
                                             Place-Based Genre Writing as Critical Expressivist Practice

vidual forms but as what rhetorical genre theorists call systems of genre sets. As a
result, they must consider what affordances particular genres might offer within
the range of appropriate genres in a given system that can best demonstrate the
perspective of each chosen connection. As Anne Freadman and other rhetorical
genre theorists have argued, the acquisition of genre knowledge includes "up-
take"--knowing which genre to use based upon the rhetorical moves of earlier
genres in a given system. While my first-year writing students do not explicitly
study this genre knowledge or truly embed themselves in the practices of a com-
munity's genre systems in ways that lead to full acquisition of genre knowledge,
through this project they are more likely to see genres as more than just forms
and conventions, and as the "lived textualities" that enact relationships and pow-
er relations within community bonds, local histories, and global influences.

    Katie Shroyer came to understand these intersections of power relations and
genre knowledge over the course of her project. Katie interviewed her moth-
er, a pastor of a local branch of the Christian Family Fellowship Ministry. To
show the connection of local history, Katie composed a eulogy for John Shroy-
er, her grandfather, the founder of the local ministry. In this text, the speaker
recounts the specific ways John Shroyer helped build the social environment
of the congregation over forty years. What strikes me here is how much her
purpose resembles the rhetorical view of epideictic rhetoric--that is, the speech
itself is meant to develop identification and persuasion to the values of the larger
congregation. To address the connection of community bonds, she took on the
voice of her mother in the Ministry newsletter which is distributed to numerous
communities. The article addresses the growing movement advocating for home
fellowships in small groups compared to the greater anonymity of megachurch
models. In her cover letter, Katie claims that this particular genre of the news-
letter serves "as a bonding agent" to these different communities, developing a
series of "mini support systems."

    To examine global influences, Katie refers to a conflict between her mother
and the leader of the Fellowship within a semi-formal business letter. As the
church has expanded since the days of her grandfather, it has pursued inter-
national outreach. To encourage this national and global outreach, the leader
has encouraged the production and distribution of service teachings on CDs.
Katie's mother repeatedly challenges what she sees as the impersonality of this
approach and instead argues for the necessity of physical interpersonal relations
in fellowship. Taking on the role of a Congregationalist in Bristol, England,
Katie writes a letter to persuade Pastor Shroyer, her mother, to visit their fellow-
ship, so they can gain much more than they can with her CDs. Now, to some
composition scholars, this may not seem a strong critical rhetorical move, but
to me it does suggest efforts to consider sustainability of the fellowship in the

                                                                                                 257
Seitz

midst of global and technological change. I would also suggest that because the
project allowed Katie to demonstrate the strengths of this fellowship commu-
nity, she was probably more willing to reveal dissent in the church with regard
to change as well. Moreover, Katie clearly chooses these genres, in her words,
"to serve as keys to participate in the actions of a community," and she analyzes
these rhetorical choices very well in her cover letter.

    Finally, I believe this teaching approach follows in an expressive tradition be-
cause it's about mediating identity and addressing places as communities, how-
ever flawed, and recognizing a range of agency within these communities. This
pedagogy also draws on assumptions of critical teaching in that students must
examine power relations within local communities and their relations to larger
global influences.

    Genre writings can mediate academic and public rhetorics tied to place and
community, thereby creating a dialectical space. The students' interview papers
mediated an academic analysis with the interviewee's voice, which spoke from
a collective rhetoric of place and community often tied to the student's sense
of self. The students' genre writings translated academic insights of cultural,
historical and socio-economic analysis into genres and voices of public rhetorics,
often situated in place and community. And finally, their cover letters translated
the implicit rhetorical analysis behind the creation of their genre writings into
explicit demonstrations of analytical choices and use of secondary sources.

    In these ways, genre writings can act as a mediating force between the cul-
tures and communities outside and within academe as students analyze place
and change from academic perspectives, and then re-integrate those perspectives
into the language and genres of public communities. In this sense, my use of the
term "translate" is only partially accurate because when we move between these
public and academic rhetorics, there is no direct correspondence of meanings--
just as when I plug in a French phrase into a digital translator, I will not receive
an absolutely English equivalent. So while I do see the process as a kind of par-
tially accurate set of translations, the term mediation suggests a more dynamic
fluidity that often takes place. In the process of this project, students gained ex-
perience mediating identities, communities, genres, and rhetorical assumptions
and strategies--rhetorical experience that can hopefully serve them well in their
communications outside the classroom, in their dealings with academic writing,
and possibly well into their future lives.

REFERENCES

Bawarshi, A., & Reiff, M. J. (2010). Genre: An introduction to history, theory,
   research, and pedagogy. West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press and Fort Collins, CO:

258
                                             Place-Based Genre Writing as Critical Expressivist Practice

   The WAC Clearinghouse.
Bazerman, C. (1997). The life of genre, the life in the classroom. In W. Bishop

   & H. Ostrom (Eds.), Genre and writing: Issues, arguments, alternatives (pp.
   19-26). Portsmouth NH: Boynton,.
Brooke, R. (2006). Migratory and regional identity. In B. Williams (Ed.) Iden-
   tity papers: Literacy and power in higher education (pp. 141-153). Logan, UT.
   Utah State University Press.
Brooke, R. (2003). Introduction. In R. Brooke (Ed.). Rural voices: Place conscious
   education and the teaching of writing (pp. 1-20). New York: Teachers College
   Press.
Bullock, Ri. (2009). Norton field guide to writing. New York: W.W. Norton.
Davis, R. L. & Shadle, M. (2007). Teaching multiwriting: Researching and com-
   posing with multiple genres, media, disciplines and cultures. Carbondale, IL:
   Southern Illinois University Press.
Devitt, A., Bawarshi, A., & Reiff, M. J. (2004). Scenes of writing: Strategies for
   composing with genres. New York: Longman.
Devitt, A., Bawarshi, A., & Reiff, M. J. (2003). Materiality and Genre in the
   Study of Discourse Communities. College English, 65(5), 541-558.
Freadman, A. (2002). Uptake. In R. Coe, L. Lingard, & T. Teslenko (Eds.), The
   rhetoric and ideology of genre: Strategies of stability and change (pp. 39-53).
   Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Gruenwald, D. (2003). The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy of place.
   Educational Researcher, 32(4), 3-12.
Hogg, C. (2007). Beyond agrarianism: Toward a critical pedagogy of place. In
   K. Donehower, C. Hogg, & E. Schell (Eds.), Rural literacies (pp. 120-154).
   Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Press.
Johnson-Eilola, J. (2004). The database and the essay: Understanding compo-
   sition as articulation. In A. Wysocki (Ed.), Writing new media. Theory and
   applications for expanding the teaching of composition (pp. 199-236). Logan,
   UT: Utah State University Press.
Johnson, C. & Moneysmith, J. (2005). Multiple genres, multiple voices: Teaching
   argument in composition and literature. Portsmouth, NH.
Lindquist, J. (2006). ATL 150: Mapping community spaces. Retrieved from Mich-
   igan State University Web site: https://www.koofers.com/michigan-state-uni-
   versity-msu/atl/150/
Mack, N. (2006). Ethical representation of working-class lives: Multiple genres,
   voices, and identities. Pedagogy, 6, 53-78.
Mack, N. (2002). The ins, outs, and in-betweens of multigenre writing. English
   Journal, 92(2), 91-98.
Miller, C. R. (1994). Genre as social action. In A. Freedman & P. Medway

                                                                                                 259
Seitz

   (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 23-42). Bristol, PA: Taylor and Francis.
Presson, C. (2009). Genre writing project. Unpublished manuscript, Department

   of English, Wright State University, Fairborn, Ohio.
Rapp, Z. (2010). Genre writing project. Unpublished manuscript, Department

   of English, Wright State University, Fairborn, Ohio.
Romano, T. (2007). Blending genre, altering style: Writing multigenre papers.

   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton.
Schryer, C. (1993). Records as genre. Written Communication, 10, 200-234.
Seitz, D. (2011). Mocking discourse: Parody as pedagogy. Pedagogy, 11(2), 371-

   394.
Seitz, D. (2004). Social affirmation alongside social critique. Who can afford crit-

   ical consciousness?: Practicing a pedagogy of humility. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton
   Press.
Shroyer, K. (2010). Genre writing project. Unpublished manuscript, Department
   of English, Wright State University, Fairborn, Ohio.
Theobauld, P. (1997). Teaching the commons: Place, pride, and the renewal of
   community. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

260
MULTICULTURAL CRITICAL
PEDAGOGY IN THE COMMUNITY-
BASED CLASSROOM:
A MOTIVATION FOR
FOREGROUNDING THE PERSONAL

      Kim M. Davis
      Oakland Community College

    Composition is a complex, ever-changing field of study that owes its exis-
tence and continued growth to its link to the writing courses that almost all
students must take as they enter the academy. Because of how these required
courses are situated in the academy, theories and practices about student writ-
ing are constantly re-evaluated, causing multiple areas of focus. According to
Richard Fulkerson in his article "Composition at the Turn of the Twenty-First
Century" (2005), the current work in the field revolves around the following
axiologies (or theories of value): (1) critical/cultural studies, (2) expressivism,
and (3) procedural rhetoric.

    The critical/cultural studies axiology is a major movement in the field marked
by attention to cultural issues and/or the sociopolitical critique of critical peda-
gogy, which Fulkerson claims can supplant attention to the teaching of writing
(2005, p. 659-660). In this approach, "the course aim is not `improved writing'
but `liberation' from dominant discourse" (Fulkerson, 2005, p. 660). The ex-
pressivism axiology is about consciousness-raising and coming-to-voice, with
a focus on more personal writing in which "many of the traditional features of
academic writing, such as having a clear argumentative thesis and backing it up
to convince a reader, are put on the back burner" (Fulkerson, 2005, p. 666).
The axiology that pertains to the more traditional features of academic writing is
procedural rhetoric, which includes focus on argument and students' adoption
of academic discourse (Fulkerson, 2005, p. 670).

    Although Fulkerson's axiologies are important for understanding current the-
oretical and pedagogical controversies in composition studies, I take somewhat
of a departure in terms of how he has set aside the discussion of personal writing
versus academic writing. I contend that the rise of critical/cultural goals actually
reconfigures this debate in certain contexts. In particular, much contemporary

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.16  261
Davis

interest in personal writing versus academic writing can be tied to communi-
ty-based writing courses, also referred to as service learning courses. This chapter
explores how community-based courses, when linked to critical pedagogy and
multicultural goals, raise questions about the type of writing students should be
asked to produce, personal or academic (Herzberg, 1997; Rhoads, 1997).

    The intersection of community-based learning and critical pedagogy is an
example of Fulkerson's claim that the field has embraced a focus on critical stud-
ies. This convergence is viewed as an optimal strategy for promoting students'
engagement with critical course objectives because real-life experiences serve as
catalysts for learning. As Cynthia Rosenberger in "Beyond Empathy" claims,
"consensus exists in the literature that service learning is action and reflection
integrated with academic curriculum to enhance student learning and to meet
community needs" (2000, p. 24). In particular, Rosenberger argues communi-
ty-based learning resonates with Freire's problem-posing concept of education;
she contends that problem posing education "has the potential to help students
construct knowledge about economic and social complexities, and with this
knowledge, to begin to entertain alternatives to the present reality" (2000, pp.
41-42). In this way--if the context of the community-based classroom is used
inductively to help students explore alternative ways of knowing--critical ped-
agogy can be introduced without reinstating the banking model of education
that Freire denounces by setting up an "I know" and "you don't know" binary
(Dobrin, 1997, p. 141). In Constructing Knowledge, Sidney Dobrin argues that
"like most of the theories that come to composition, Freire's theory of radi-
cal pedagogy creates tensions when converted from theory to practice" (1997,
p. 139). More specifically, Dobrin questions applications of critical pedagogy
where "teachers seem to appropriate the very agency they claim to wish to return
to students by prescribing a particular set of values as to what and how students
should think `critically'" (1997, p. 141). Instead, Dobrin encourages attention
to the context in which teaching takes place, encouraging a more culturally-cen-
tered form of writing instruction (1997, p. 145).

    Combining context and content as a pedagogical strategy, Robert Rhoads
argues for a cultural studies approach to community-based learning to promote
the postmodernist charge to foster dialogue across difference, which exemplifies
Fulkerson's claim that the field has turned to cultural studies. Rhoads calls for
students to develop an ethic of care that results from an exploration of the self in
relationship to diverse others. He argues that "fostering a sense of self grounded
in an ethic of care is a necessity as our society becomes increasingly diverse and
diffuse" (1997, p. 2). This approach falls under what Thomas Deans argues is
the reigning "social perspective" in the field of composition students and which
provides the theoretical reasoning for the growth of community-based programs

262
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

(2000, p. 9). It is a perspective which, according to Cy Knoblauch and Lil Bran-
non, "presumes that American citizens should understand, accept and live ami-
cably amidst the realities of cultural diversity--along axes of gender, race, class,
and ethnicity" (1993, p. 6). More specifically, according to Gregory Jay in "Ser-
vice Learning, Multiculturalism and the Pedagogies of Difference,"

         service learning reinforces the necessity that students analyze
         their own ethnoracial and cultural identity formation, becom-
         ing consciously aware of how their identity affects others and
         how their perception of others is shaped by their identities. The
         experiences of cross-cultural collaboration promoted by service
         learning encourage such reflection, which is done formally in
         directive writing assignments and online postings or through a
         variety of student-centered projects. (2008, p. 260-261).

Students' reflexive writing, informed through a Freirean lens situating action
and reflection as praxis, is, as Jay contends, at the heart of community-based ini-
tiatives because it provides students with opportunities to think critically about
them/us binaries and other culturally specific issues they encounter in their com-
munity contexts. However, questions about the type of reflexive writing students
should be asked to produce in community-based writing classroom is why I
maintain that the context calls for a renewed discussion about personal writing
versus academic writing.

    Three theorists whose work raises question about the type of writing students
should be asked to produce in the community-based writing classroom--per-
sonal or academic--are Robert Rhoads, Bruce Herzberg, and Linda Flower. On
opposite sides are Rhoads and Herzberg. Rhoads advocates a theoretical lens
that involves personal reflection and explores the self and the self in relation-
ship to the social (1997, p. 4). Herzberg, on the other hand, argues that the
use of more traditional, abstract academic writing in lieu of personal, reflexive
writing is necessary to promote students' critical thinking about sociopolitical
issues (1997, p. 58). However, it is Flower's work that suggests a more nuanced
approach. Her noted research mentions students' assignments based on hybrid
genres that include personal, academic, and community discourses. Although
the focus in the field on her work has primarily been regarding hybrid texts that
university students produce collaboratively with community members (Flower,
2003; Flower, 1997; Deans, 2000, p. 132), her scholarship hints at a type of
student writing that is both reflexive and critical in ways that address the claims
of both Rhoads and Herzberg.

    While I do not dispute the value of having students produce more traditional
academic writing, I do believe Herzberg's movement away from the personal in

                                                                                                 263
Davis

students' writing in connection with community-based learning limits the pos-
sibilities of critical pedagogy by not taking into account changing definitions of
academic writing. First, a movement away from the personal in the experience
and a return to the abstraction of academic discourse (Bizzell, 2002) could min-
imize an important claim about the impact of community-based learning; i.e.,
it promotes an understanding and critique of the self in relationship to a larger
community (Flower, 1997; Rhoads, 1997). Secondly, the type of writing Herz-
berg describes as academic discourse, particularly when it is defined as working
with the works of others (Bartholomae 2003), can be produced without the
exclusion of the personal. Peter Elbow opens this collection with a discussion of
the complexity--and dare I say expansiveness--of what is considered person-
al writing. According to Elbow, there is a continuum associated with personal
writing in which the "topic can be personal or not; the language can be personal
or not; and the thinking can be personal or not." In Elbow's claims, I hear the
openness of Deans' assertion about community-based writing classrooms. Ac-
cording to Deans, the "options available for writing about the community are
almost without limit, ranging from the personal/affective to the social/analyti-
cal" (2000, p. 104).

    The following sections in this chapter are based on a larger study that ex-
plores the efficacy of using an expanded notion of personal writing--one that
foregrounds the personal yet contains elements of more traditional academic
texts--in four sections of a community-based classroom with a multicultural
approach to critical pedagogy (henceforth referred to "multicultural critical ped-
agogy"). The progression of writing assignments throughout each term prepared
students to produce end-of-term projects that reflected personal yet academic
writing. Using Elbow as an inspiration, sudents initially wrote personal "think-
ing" texts in which they explored their reactions to the site; shifting to a more
Bartholomae-inspired approach, they then produced more traditional academic
texts about the works of others before moving to the creation of the hybrid texts
that were both personal and academic. I undertook a study of the students'
texts as artifacts of the type of work that gets done in the writing classroom and
to support the claim that writing that foregrounds the personal is essential for
providing students with opportunities to work through the emotional issues of
border crossing.

    I focus on students' texts because, according to Susan Wells in Sweet Reason,
pedagogy can be understood as the production of particular texts; "what students
write provides us with a way to think about the knowledge that we are creating
with them" (1996, p. 219-20). To set the groundwork for my study, I collected
and coded four semesters' worth of students' papers, although I ultimately focus
on two semesters since external factors at the community site for the other two

264
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

semesters fundamentally changed the overall scope of my classroom and context.
Nevertheless, to get a sense of what all students wrote for all key assignments be-
fore honing in on just two terms, I entered extended excerpts from 266 student
essays so that I could sort and review the content of their texts by assignment. I
then created coding categories based on Thomas Newkirk's work on performa-
tive responses, and Rochelle Harris' concept of inductive "emergent moments;"
I then noted all references to race as this was central to my sense of a multicultur-
al critical pedagogy. I subsequently re-analyzed student essays to look for specific
features in these areas and entered information into 342 new data fields.

    I touch upon the specifics of this intense process of data coding and analy-
sis because of two driving rationales that underlie my study. First, I wanted to
conduct an analysis that went beyond a theoretical debate about the efficacy of
personal writing versus academic writing, especially as it relates to the multicul-
tural course goal. Secondly, I wanted to look at the impact of an enactment of
critical pedagogy given what instructors actually have at the end of the term--
students' writing--against the temporality of a college semester. It might not be
possible over the course of a fifteen-week term to see the emergence of a student
version of a Nelson Mandela or César Chávez. What is more likely to occur is
social change at the incremental level as "small, fleeting, [and] local" moments"
that represent the tinkering of progress in the lives of both teachers and students
(Gallagher, 2002, p. 87).

    Given the site of my study--the Greater Detroit area--I recognized that the
exploration of issues of race and place issues could not be fully unpacked within
the scope of a single semester. The narratives of negativity about Detroit and its
African-American residents are deeply entrenched, and it was not easy for stu-
dents to discard ingrained messages. Still, the process of constructing personal
texts about such prevailing negative sentiments opened up the possibility of in-
cremental changes in the students' perceptions of the other. I contend that their
racialized narratives allowed the students to create critical distances between
themselves and their constructed beliefs in such a way that those beliefs became
open for investigation and potential change. As Patricia Web Boyd claims in her
chapter in this collection, "students need to begin with their own experiences in
order to be active participants in the larger society." Their experiential, personal
texts provided them with opportunities "to see how the personal already inter-
sects with and is embedded within cultural narratives, to study how their texts
write them as they write the texts, and to understand how they name the world
around them" (Harris, 2004, p. 405). As an assent to the Freirean claim that the
world must be named before it can be changed (2003, p. 88), the study in this
chapter investigates how personal writing helped students name their struggles
with border crossing as part of the community-based program.

                                                                                                 265
Davis

BEFORE THE STUDY: A QUESTION OF ETHICS

    Before moving to the specifics of this study about a multicultural enactment
of critical pedagogy in a community-based classroom, I think it is necessary to
address an ethical question tied to such an initiative: is it ethical to take students
to communities they may otherwise not wish to enter under the guise that doing
so might eventually help them become more civic minded? Because the Great-
er Detroit region in which my study was conducted is highly segregated, why
should White university students be forced to interact with African-American
middle schools students? University students might have a vested interest in
maintaining the status quo (Bickford, 2002; Trainor, 2002)--the racial distance
separating them from the African-American students and also marked by eco-
nomic disparity. And what about the middle school students? Should they be
forced to interact with university students who may view them as charity cases,
individuals who are sub par by virtue of their race and economic standing (Bick-
ford, 2002; Himley, 2004)? According to Beverly Tatum, a psychologist who
explores racialized identify development, African-American youth can display
hostility toward Whites in response to their growing awareness of racial inequal-
ities (1997, p. 60). Thus, should either of the student groups be placed in a
setting in which any group could be hostile toward the other? As Deans asserts,
"Many teachers are wary, and rightly so, of the dangers of community service,
and in particular the habit of casting individuals and communities in the uneven
roles of `server' and `served'" (2000, p. 21).

    Answers to these questions are important and reflect that community-based
learning always entails risk. While focusing on the answers to these difficult
questions via exhaustive theoretical and philosophical deliberation could "ul-
timately lead to intellectual detachment, fatalism, or paralysis" (Deans, 2000,
pp. 23; 24), I nevertheless believe that ethical issues should be considered and
addressed on a case-by-case basis with the understanding that "perfect balance,
perfect dialectic, perfect consideration will ever be elusive" (Deans, 2000,p. 24).
Yet, I also believe any possible ethical issues regarding the project explored in this
study should be subsumed under compelling reasons for implementing commu-
nity-based learning within the context, a highly segregated region of the country.
As Tatum and Thomas Sugrue both claim, segregation is costly, and any effort
to address its effects is worth pursuing. Tatum makes the following statements
about the impact of racial distances on White individuals in general:

         When I ask White men and women how racism hurts them,
         they frequently talk about their fears of people of color, the
         social incompetence they feel in racially mixed situations,
         the alienation they have experienced between parents and

266
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

         children when a child marries into a family of color, and the
         interracial friendships they had as children that were lost in
         adolescence or young adulthood without their ever under-
         standing why. (Sugrue, 2005, p. 14)

    While Tatum calls attention to these general intangible costs, Sugrue, a na-
tive Detroiter and historian, focuses on the more identifiable impacts of racial
segregation in the greater Detroit area. He argues the distance between Whites,
African Americans, and other racial groups translates into separate but not equal
school systems and "limits the access of many minorities to employment op-
portunities, particularly in predominantly White areas (largely rural and sub-
urban areas) that have experienced rapid development and economic growth
over the last half century" (1999, p. 6). Given these costs of segregation, com-
munity-based initiatives are important programs because of their attempts to
help collapse them/us binaries between university students and community
members. Although these programs cannot completely eradicate a history of
separation and inequality that is reflected in the lives and minds of both groups,
they represent a small and positive step toward a more socially just society. Ad-
ditionally, the pedagogical cost of possibly grappling with a few ethical issues in
a community-based classroom pales in comparison to the cost of doing nothing.
In the context of pervasive regional segregation, the primary question of ethics
should not be about issues that arise within the community-based classroom; the
primary concern should be whether or not it is ethical to do nothing to address
this social problem although doing so can be emotionally taxing.

A STUDY ABOUT PERSONAL WRITING
AND BORDER CROSSING

    In the context of a qualitative, ethnographic research study I conducted in
Detroit, Michigan--where racial segregation is the norm--personal writing be-
came the vehicle to help bridge the connection between students' lived realities
regarding race and place and the critical pedagogy goal of multiculturalism. For
two and a half years that began in January 2002, I participated in a communi-
ty-based initiative in which intermediate writing students worked with Detroit
middle school students as part of an after-school program. For my first term in
the site, I was merely as a participant observer, studying the dynamics in prepa-
ration to teach and looking for possible areas of research. When I began teach-
ing in the site, the community-based school was a charter institution associated
with the university. During my last two terms, the school underwent a change
in location, administration, and student population as its classification shifted

                                                                                                 267
Davis

from that of a charter institution to a Detroit public school. Because of this shift,
which created a fundamentally different community site, my research focuses on
my last two semesters, Fall 2003 and Winter 2004.

    The writing that university students produced was tied to a semester-long
ethnographic project that included a range of assignments that began with per-
sonal writing, moved to more traditional academic writing, and ended with a
hybrid genre which included elements of both academic writing and personal
writing but foregrounded the personal. David Seitz presents this type of eth-
nographic student research as particularly effective when using a multicultural
critical pedagogy in urban settings. According to Seitz

         many critical writing teachers in urban schools design their
         teaching practices on a process of "defamiliarizing the famil-
         iar," making the familiar strange, urging students to look at
         experience through sociological or anthropological lenses.
         This approach can be persuasive especially for urban students
         who have experienced various forms of sociocultural conflict.
         (2004, p. 67)

The text used to help the university students conduct their research, H. L. Good-
all's Writing the New Ethnography (2000), presents a type of ethnographic work
that foregrounds critical thinking about one's own positioning--i.e., gender,
race, ethnicity, social class, regional particularities, etc.--and how that position-
ing affected interpretations of various cultures and contexts.

    Because my ethnographic study centers on students' texts as a key data source
for artifacts of the pedagogy, I relied on the work of Charles Bazerman, Thomas
Newkirk, and Rochelle Harris to inform my methodology. To better understand
the efficacy of instruction in critical pedagogy along with personal writing and
academic writing, I synthesized their approaches so that I could evaluate stu-
dents' texts in terms of how the moves in those texts represented possible chang-
es in thinking and how those moves correlate to the type of writing students
produced, both personal and academic. Bazerman's work was useful for viewing
pedagogical strategies and texts as exerting influence upon students' writing.
Newkirk's and Harris' scholarship was useful for investigating elements within
students' texts that reflected, or did not reflect, pedagogical goals.

    In particular, I used Bazerman's concepts of genre systems and genre sets
that he outlines in What Writing Does and How It Does It (2004). Within the
ethnographic research of a classroom, Bazerman claims analyses of genre systems
(pedagogical practices and the flow of course documents) and genre sets (the
specific course documents) can help one see "the range and variety of the writing
work"; "how individuals writing any new text are intertextually situated within a

268
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

system and how their writing is directed by genre expectations and supported by
systemic systems"; "the effectiveness of the total systems and the appropriateness
of each of the genred documents in carrying forward that work"; and "wheth-
er any change in any of the documents, distribution, sequence, or flow might
improve the total activity system." (2004, p. 326). Regarding the work in this
study, the combining of Bazerman's concepts of the genre system and the genre
set of a classroom were used as a method to analyze how the differences between
pedagogical texts and practices and the contexts of the writing classrooms and
the community-based setting impacted students' writing.

    While Bazerman's work was useful for analyzing the systemic factors of the
classroom on students' writing, I used Newkirk's and Harris' work to investigate
what took place within students' writing to hint at how they grappled with the
course's multicultural goal of border crossing. Newkirk's work in The Perfor-
mance of Self in Student Writing (1997) was used to analyze the choices students
made in their writing that reflected the critical pedagogy aim of multicultural-
ism. Confronting issues of race, ethnicity, etc., can be an emotionally loaded un-
dertaking in the writing classroom (hooks, 1994; Jay, 2008; Trainor, 2002), and
it has been argued that personal writing allows students to make the emotional
connections necessary to reflect upon and process moments of border crossing
(Kamler, 2001; Micciche, 2007; Rhoads, 1997).

    Newkirk, a proponent of personal writing, identifies performative responses
in students' texts that reflect the possibility of progressive movement or personal
development (1997, p. 22), which in the case of this research, is movement
toward a more critical, multicultural worldview. He identifies several perfor-
mances of the self frequently present in students' personal writing: the "turns,"
also known as before-and-after conversion narratives; expressions of emotion;
student optimism; heroes and antiheroes, or testimonials (for the living) and eu-
logies (for the dead); and pleasure, or more specifically, hedonism. Of the perfor-
mances that Newkirk identifies, it is two--the "turns" and optimism--that are
relevant to this investigation. Turns are before-and-after conversion narratives
that show "the writer as someone open to the potentially transforming effect of
a life sensitively encountered" (Newkirk, 1997, p. 13). Optimism is a youthful
belief in the "ability to transform the disagreeable" (Newkirk, 1997, p. 42). I
coded student essays looking for these turns as part of a critical pedagogy aimed
at student movement toward more multicultural awareness and border crossing.
Although these turns in students' writing might otherwise be easily dismissed
(Newkirk, 1997, p. 10), a reading of students' texts through the lens of critical
pedagogy counters such a stance.

    To investigate students' texts for the critical pedagogy goal of movement
toward critical consciousness, I used Harris' concept of "emergent moments."

                                                                                                 269
Davis

The term "emergent moments" "names the point at which the personal, the
critical, and the rhetorical intersect in a text, a point at which the student can
hold multiple perspectives simultaneously and reflexively," "allowing them to
become authors of their own experiences, to resist or revise cultural narratives,
and to see opportunities to critique and transform themselves and the cultural
systems around them" (Harris, 2004, p. 403). Or stated another way, it is at that
textual moment when students consider themes and/or see issues as part of larg-
er cultural realities. I analyzed students' texts for the "emergent moments" that
represented responses to the pedagogical goal of critical consciousness as critique
of issues tied to the community site.

    The story of the community that constitutes the setting of the course is one
of segregation. The Detroit metropolitan area is one of the most segregated areas
of the country, and as a result, many individuals live in isolated pockets of racial
groups. Regarding the community-based writing course, this segregated region
1) affected who entered the writing classroom and, in particular, the lived expe-
riences of those students in relationship to the curricular goal of critical pedago-
gy, and 2) was central to the systemic issues embedded in the course design, i.e.,
the selection of the site, course readings, and course assignments.

    Often, these community-based experiences represented the first time many
of the university students had sustained contact with individuals who were Af-
rican American. Although Wayne State University is located within the city
of Detroit, which has a large African-American population, its student body
does not reflect the demographics of the city (about 80% of Detroit's popula-
tion is African American, but over 70% of Wayne State's student population
is not (U.S. Census Bureau, 2008; WSU Student Profile, 2006). Many of the
students who attend the university come from surrounding counties that are
predominantly White. Or in a few cases, they come from communities that
are non-White but also non-African-American; for example, the greater Detroit
area includes enclaves of racially segregated communities of Middle Eastern and
Hispanic peoples.

    This racial segregation is exacerbated by a prevailing sentiment portrayed re-
peatedly in local media: Detroit is a "bad place to be" and its African-American
residents are to be feared. Because of this, it was advantageous to enact a cultural
studies approach to critical pedagogy that provided writing students with an
opportunity to address these emotional commonplaces. About 74% of the stu-
dent participants, or 17 out of 23, included negative statements about Detroit
in their beginning-of-the-term assignment in which they explored their initial
reactions to the community site. The six students who did not do so included
four of the six African-American students, all Detroit residents, and two other
students who attended European schools during their middle school years. The

270
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

following comments made by a White male student in a beginning-of-the-term
assignment exemplifies the impact of anti-Detroit messages that are a part of the
daily realities of regional residents:

         I thought, there was no way I was going to a public school,
         and especially in downtown Detroit. That's where all the
         black people live. I had heard many stories about the danger
         in such urban neighborhoods, and I wasn't about to put
         myself in any situation like that. Not only that, but I didn't
         have anything in common with these people. Even the color
         of our skin wasn't the same. I don't listen to hip-hop music
         and I can't even understand the idioms they use, or their
         slang. I had heard many stories where black people were
         considered illiterate and lazy. Most of them were thought
         to be involved in criminal activities and don't value fam-
         ily, honesty and respect. Women are viewed as objects of
         sexual satisfaction and are often abused. As I was told, the
         neighborhoods that these people live in, after a while, would
         turn into slums or ghettos. In their families, in quite a few
         instances, children don't even know their fathers. Even their
         style is different from what I am used to. They like flashy
         gold or platinum chains, bright color clothing and like to
         wear hats and have different hairstyles. As some White peo-
         ple believe, they are supposed to be inferior to them and, as
         in the past, they should be restricted to a separate territory,
         in order to be controlled.

    This excerpt may seem like an exaggeration to anyone who is not famil-
iar with the greater Detroit area, and those who are teachers of college writing
might immediately want to question the student's sweeping generalizations re-
garding African Americans. However, few who live in the region would discount
the reality that many, if not all, of the perceptions or misconceptions that this
student holds are expressed by many individuals who live in and around the
city of Detroit. While I do call attention to this phenomenon as it relates to
students' comments in their essays, I am not doing so to reify the dichotomies,
or the them/us barriers, between students and community members. Commu-
nity-based initiatives are designed to challenge and ideally change such dichot-
omies (Rhoads, 1997; Trainor, 2002). Rather, I underscore students' statements
about Detroit in recognition that the pervasiveness of the perceived dichotomies
between the city and its suburbs impacted what students wrote about the com-
munity-based experience.

                                                                                                 271
Davis

    Harris claims critical work can occur in such personal texts about topics and
issues that are significant to individuals because "the texts we choose to write are
important sites to understand the self, the world, and culture" (2004, p. 402).
She focuses on the "composing and recomposing of reality and the self through
language that happens in personal essays, autobiographies, and memoirs--to
name a few genres" as critical work necessary for developing Freirean praxis
(Harris, 2004, pp. 402; 405). From Harris' perspective, critical pedagogy is im-
plicitly personal because "a person has first to move to a knowledge of the world
being named for him or her and then do the intellectual and emotional work
necessary to rename his or her world" (2004, p. 405). In the critical classroom,
then, storytelling becomes a medium for change (Harris, 2004, p. 407). Because
of the widespread negative sentiments associated with place and race--inner city
Detroit and its African-American citizens--students' established beliefs and/or
emotional responses were not overlooked but elicited, regardless of whether the
responses were positive or negative.

    Without opportunities to explore negative emotional responses, Jennifer
Seibel Trainor claims that white students in particular might resist a multicul-
tural-based critical pedagogy where whiteness is essentialized in discussions of
racism and class. White students are presented with a worldview that situates
them, solely by virtue of birth, "as perpetrators of injustice who must be taught
to disavow whiteness" (Trainor, 2002, p. 634). In such instances, Trainor argues,
many students will "read multicultural texts about difference in essentialist and,
thus, defensive terms" (2002, p. 642). Instead, educators should be critically
aware of this unintended outgrowth--e.g., essentialized whiteness and an "angry
white identity"--and provide space for discourse that allows white students to
structure identities outside of a limited rhetorical framing (2002, p. 647).

    The progression of writing assignments throughout the term, from person-
al to academic to hybrid, which included elements of both but foregrounded
the personal, was essential to providing students with opportunities to work
through the emotional issues of border crossing. It was necessary for students to
begin at the personal juncture of emotion as a route to engagement with the site
and the course content related to the multicultural course aim because, as Mary
Helen Immordino-Yang and Antonio Damasio claim in "We Feel, Therefore
We Learn: The Relevance of Affective and Social Neuroscience to Education,"
minimizing the emotional aspects would have been "encouraging students to
develop the sorts of knowledge that inherently do not transfer well to real-world
situations" (2007, p. 9).

    The move to more traditional academic writing (i.e., article summaries and
annotated bibliographies) as an exploration of issues that grew out of students'
ethnographic investigation of the community-based context was key to helping

272
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

students develop broader worldviews regarding sociocultural issues. It gave
them practice with what David Bartholomae identifies as academic writing,
i.e., the ability to "work with the past, with key texts ... with others' terms ...
with problems of quotation, citation, and paraphrase" (1995, p. 66). Bartholo-
mae argues that producing such writing helps students adopt an insider stance
that reflects "the peculiar ways of knowing, selecting, evaluating, reporting,
concluding, and arguing that define the discourse" of the academic community
(2003, p. 623). While having students write both personal and more tradition-
al essays were central to carrying forward the work of the term as part of the
classroom genre system (Bazerman, 2004), it was the hybrid genre that students
used in their final project that most helped them consider the complex work
of border crossing that was embedded in the multicultural, critical pedagogy
course goal.

    In my analysis of students' final projects, I used Harris' identification of
"emergent moments" of critical praxis, reflection and action (Freire, 2003, p.
79). I looked at that textual moment when students consider themes, see is-
sues in their texts as part of larger cultural issues but with recognition that the
"emergent moment "cannot be imposed (although it certainly can be facilitat-
ed)" (Harris, 2004, pp. 403; 413)--an important claim given the inductive pro-
cess of ethnographic writing and meaning making. Sometimes they were brief
glimpses of students' critical thinking embedded in longer narratives. However,
these moments are worthy of analysis and consideration as part of a progres-
sive process of change; they reflected Newkirk's "optimistic turns" that hinted
at possible steps toward change. As Chris Gallagher claims, mainstream critical
pedagogy calls for grand, sweeping gestures of change, but this is not the stuff
of everyday writing classrooms (2002, p. 87). In "the unpredictable and messy
terrain of pedagogy, we are not likely to find many grand moments of social
transformation, but we are likely to find important (though small, fleeting, and
decidedly local) moments" (Gallagher, 2002, p. 87). Thus, I looked at the stu-
dents' essays for "emergent moments" of critical thinking as a way to investigate
the efficacy of a multicultural critical pedagogy.

    From my analysis of students' essays from the Winter 2004 term, I focus
in this chapter on the essay of 47-year-old Eva. Her entire essay is about the
interpersonal connections made, and not made, during the term as she explores
the distance and hostility between the university students and the middle school
students and the ways in which she believed university students contributed to
the environment.

    Eva wrote two distinct drafts of her final project because she was initially hes-
itant about whether she had the license to write about the emotionally charged
atmosphere she perceived in the community-based site. Eva stopped me after

                                                                                                 273
Davis

one class session and asked if she could write about the problematic, interper-
sonal dynamics of the after-school class. I recorded some of our conversation in
my fieldnotes for the day:

         Eva wanted to write about the racial divide that had occurred
         this term between the middle school students and the non-Af-
         rican-American Wayne Students. We had talked the previous
         week about the topic. I communicated to her that she had
         an excellent topic; she just needed to go ahead and make the
         analysis she alluded to in her first draft.

         She was hesitant to set up the dichotomy between her and
         the other non-African-American university students. It was
         as if doing so, even in her paper, would be politically incor-
         rect ... Why did she feel silenced in her desire to express this
         racially-related dynamic? Had she previously been silenced?
         Was she oppressed (Freire)? Had she not had the experience of
         presenting her own voice in text?

         Because Eva had difficulty putting her positionality in the be-
         ginning of her paper, the text was choppy and disconnected.
         It seemed as if she felt compelled to maintain a distance from
         the issue, from the text.

    I talked to Eva about the discussions we had earlier in the term about po-
sitionality and the ethics of ethnography versus what could be considered the
more traditional, anthropological telling of the other. "You have to put yourself
on the page. If you talk about your positionality, your age, your race, how they
affected what you saw and how you reacted to the setting, then I think it will be
easier for you to move into what you really want to talk about," I stated.

         "You mean I can go there?" she grinned, tilted her head.

         "Yes, you can." I smiled in reply.

         "Alright!" Eva smiled ecstatically, "You told me I could, so I'm
         going there."

    Eva's response to my statement that she could write about what she felt was
problematic affirms Barbara Kamler's claim that "to be authorized by the acad-
emy to write about one's life is a powerful and often startling experience for
university students" (2001, p. 157). Her initial hesitancy about addressing a
sensitive topic reflects that, given her age, Eva more than likely attended school
at a time when academic writing comprised a constructed worldview that spoke

274
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

"through an academic persona who is objective, trying to prevent any emotions
or prejudices from influencing the ideas in the writing" (Bizzell, 2002, p. 2).
Nevertheless, Eva did revise her essay to take a more personal and ethnographic
stance. Following is an extended excerpt from her text:

         I have been privileged to mentor in the [after-school program]
         with several bright enthusiastic African-American middle
         school students ... I intend to investigate information on the
         mentor/students relationships that I observed at [the middle
         school] .... There are four African-American female mentors.
         Our ages range from 20-47. We all seem to be straight-for-
         ward, generous, and thoughtful. These three characteristics
         impacted our roles as mentors and we seem to have a good
         rapport with the students. The students like us. There are
         several male/female White mentors. While listening to their
         conversations, it seemed evident that they all live outside of
         the city of Detroit. They reside in the Tri-county area, namely
         the suburbs. There is one mentor who is always making some
         negative comment about Detroit and the people that they see
         on their way to UPS. He is a White male mentor who always
         seems to have the right answer and is occasionally humorous.
         He would talk quietly and could draw other White mentors
         into his conversations. However, when a Black mentor inter-
         vened, he would draw up and be quiet. I threw a flag up in
         my mind and I thought, "He needs to be watched."

         I spend a lot of time tutoring urban Black students. I am very
         much attuned to the interaction between the young mid-
         dle school students and the mentors .... The middle school
         students ... need to be monitored by their mentors; otherwise
         I've noticed that the whole time spent in the session [the
         middle school students] will be playing games and listening
         to, or watching, videos on the computers .... As I observed
         throughout the room, some [middle] students, especially
         some male students, were isolating themselves from their
         mentors, mostly by being preoccupied on the computers.

         I overheard this conversation with two male middle school
         students as they were waiting for their mentors ... "I know
         he does not like me. I don't know why we have to do this. I
         could probably show him more about the computer than he

                                                                                                 275
Davis

         can show me. He never does anything. They don't even talk to
         us. He probably doesn't even know my name."... As I turned
         to observe the mentor that they were discussing, it was the
         White male mentor, the White male that always had the right
         answer and was occasionally humorous. And then my flag
         went up. Maybe, I thought all parties involved were having a
         culture shock reaction ...

         I believe the students felt the mentor's communication skills
         represented a problem. As I observed the mentor, the men-
         tor never approached the students with a "hello." He always
         waited for the instructor to tell everyone to group up with
         [their] mentees ... Although, there were no African-American
         male mentors, I believe they would have settled for one of us.
         Maybe the students thought the mentor was not willing to
         work and was afraid to ask questions because they were Black.
         Maybe the students thought that he was going to make it
         hard for them and try to set them up to fail. When I looked
         at the mentor, I thought, "Where was his sense of humor, the
         I'm the man kind of attitude?" His facial expression was like,
         "I really don't want to be here."... I noticed a vicious cycle
         had taken place that had pitted the two male students against
         their mentor. It seemed like they were never going to resolve
         their differences. I believe that until the mentor begins to
         see his problem and seek out a solution, he will continue to
         engage in a struggle interacting with Black students.

         Many problems attributed to "Children of Color" are actually
         the result of miscommunication at school and other people's
         children struggle with the imbalance of power and the dy-
         namics of inequality plaguing our system (Delpit, 1995) ....
         The person in the role of a mentor, especially if the person is
         from another ethnic and cultural background, must be keenly
         aware of the miscommunication that can result from cultural
         diversity. Every effort must be made to keep communication
         open and free from prejudice .... I made a promise to myself
         to share this information with the White mentor especially if
         he planned to teach in a predominantly Black school district.

    This excerpt from Eva's essay shows her attempts to make sense out of the
hostility and distance between university and middle school students that per-
sisted throughout the term. Her reasoning explores the reality of the racially

276
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

segregated region in which the university and middle school students reside. Her
essay also demonstrates the course's pedagogical goal of having students pro-
duce texts that could be called hybrid, including elements of the personal and
the academic. Eva cites Lisa Delpit and others in her argument about ways to
create connections with African-American youth. Throughout Eva's essay is the
theme that the interpersonal distance between university and middle students
was problematic for her, particularly given the reason why she had returned to
academia: to become a teacher.

    Eva's move to critical consciousness--echoing Freire's praxis, "the action and
reflection of men and women upon their world in order to transform it" (2003,
p. 79), or the "emergent moment,"--happens at the end of her essay when she
claims, "I made a promise to myself to share this information with the White
mentor especially if he planned to teach in a predominantly Black school district."
In this claim to action is praxis; she has seen the impact of the interpersonal and
often hostile distance and is willing to take action against it if faced with a similar
situation. What Eva produced is an essay in which she immerses herself in ways
that clearly foreground her personal connection to the middle school students.
For example, she begins her essay by recounting what she believes are the personal
characteristics that she and the other three African-American university students
possess: "We all seem to be straight-forward, generous, and thoughtful." She then
spends the bulk of her essay explicating why she and the other females were
liked by the middle school students and some of the White university students
were not. Eva's essay demonstrates a central claim regarding enactments of crit-
ical pedagogy: emotions matter. As Laura Micciche reminds us, "emotion mat-
ters drive motives for action, speech, judgment, and decision-making" (2007, p.
105), important elements given a pedagogical goal of student movement towards
a consciousness that leads to change. The absence of emotional connections can
lead to objectified analyses of critical issues that are more intellectual games than
potential steps toward individual or collective action (Barnett, 2006, p. 361).

    Given these assertions about emotion driving action (Micciche, 2007; Bar-
nett, 2006), it is not surprising that Eva's essay ends with a claim to individual
action. She maintains she will take future action against "miscommunication
that can result from cultural diversity." I believe this action was arrived at in-
ductively because Eva was able to establish an emotional connection to her essay
topic. Because Eva felt strongly about what she had observed, she was willing to
take the writerly risk to tell her story, one that I believe was aided by the fact that
students throughout the term were invited to write in a genre that foregrounded
the personal. As Jane Danielwicz claims in her essay, Personal Genres, Public
Voices, "writing in personal genres fights alienation (common to academic pur-
suits from the student's point of view) and instead promotes connectivity: `You

                                                                                                 277
Davis

are a part of this world'" (2008, p. 443). Eva took the risk to express her desire
to be a change agent because of her experiences in the community-based course
in which multicultural critical pedagogy had been enacted. Her response hinted
at ways in which she could promote border crossing in diverse settings.

A FEW FINAL WORDS

    Emotions matter in general regarding all learning but are particularly central
when course content asks students to do the socially complex work of border
crossing. As Immordino-Yang and Damasio claim, "emotion-related process-
es are required for skills and knowledge to be transferred from the structured
school environment to real-world decision making because they provide an
emotional rudder to guide judgment and action" (2007, p. 3). Thus, in a com-
munity-based-writing classroom or any writing classroom in which multicultur-
al critical pedagogy is implemented, students must be given an opportunity to
write in ways that allow them to be emotional. Reflexive, personal writing al-
lows students to emote about their experiences of border crossing and construct
themselves as influencing, and being influenced by, contexts. When elements of
academic writing are added in such texts where the personal is foregrounded, the
end result is a hybrid text where emotions meet critical concepts and students
are given an opportunity to move from having knowledge about difference to
making real-world, incremental steps toward embracing difference.

REFERENCES

Barnett, T. (2006). Politicizing the person: Frederick Douglass, Richard Wright,
   and some thoughts on the limits of critical literacy. College English, 68(4),
   356-381.

Bartholomae, D. (2003). Inventing the university. In V. Villanueva (Ed.), Cross-
   Talk in Comp Theory (2nd ed., pp. 623-654). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Bartholomae, D. (1995). Writing with teachers: A conversation with Peter El-
   bow. College Composition and Communication, 46(1), 62-71.

Bazerman, C. (2004). Speech acts, genres, and activity systems: How texts orga-
   nize activity and people. In C. Bazerman & P. Prior (Eds.), What Writing Does
   and How It Does It: An Introduction to Analyzing Texts and Textual Practices
   (pp. 309-339). Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Bickford, D. M., & Reynolds, N. (2002). Activism and service learning: Re-
   framing volunteerism as acts of dissent. Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to
   Teaching Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture, 2(2), 229-252. Re-
   trieved from Duke University Press Web site: http://pedagogy.dukejournals.
   org/content/2/2/229.citation

278
                                Multicultural Critical Pedagogy in the Community-Based Classroom

Bizzell, P. (2002). The intellectual work of "mixed" forms of academic discours-
   es. In C. Schroeder, H. Fox, & P. Bizzell (Eds.), Alt Dis: Alternative Discourses
   and the Academy (pp. 1-10). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton Cook Heinemann.

Danielwicz, J. (2008). Personal genres, public voices. College Composition and
   Communication, 59(3), 420-450.

Deans, T. (2000). Writing partnerships: Service learning in composition. Urbana,
   IL: NCTE.

Delpit, L. (1995). Other people's children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New
   York: New Press.

Dobrin, S. (1997). Constructing knowledge: The politics of theory building and
   pedagogy in composition. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Flower L. (1997). Partners in inquiry: A logic for community outreach. In L.
   Adler-Kassner, R. Crooks, & A. Waters (Eds.), Writing the Community: Con-
   cepts and Models for Service Learning in Composition (pp. 95-117). Urbana, IL:
   NCTE/AAHE, 1997.

Flower L. (2003). Talking across difference: Intercultural rhetoric and the search
   for situated knowledge. College Composition and Communication, 55(1), 38-68.

Freire, P. (2003). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. (M. B. Ramos, Trans.). New York:
   Continuum.

Fulkerson, R. (2005). Composition at the turn of the twenty-first century. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication, 56(4), 654-687.

Gallagher, C. (2002). Radical departures: Composition and progressive pedagogy.
   Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Goodall, H. L. (Bud). (2000). Writing the new ethnography. Lanham, MD: Row-
   man and Littlefield.

Harris, R. (2004). Encouraging emergent moments: The personal, critical, and
   rhetorical in the writing classroom. Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teach-
   ing Literature, Language, Composition and Culture, 4(3), 401-418. Retrieved
   from Duke University Press Web site: http://pedagogy.dukejournals.org/con-
   tent/4/3/401.citation

Herzberg, B. (1997) Community service and critical teaching. In L. Adler-Kass-
   ner, R. Crooks, & A. Waters (Eds.), Writing the community: Concepts and
   models for service learning in composition (pp. 57-69). Urbana, IL: NCTE/
   AAHE.

Himley, M. (2004). Facing (up to) "the stranger" in community service learning.
   College Composition and Communication, 55(3), 416-438.

hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New
   York: Routledge.

Immordino-Yang, M. H., & Damasio, A. (2007). We feel, therefore we learn:
   The relevance of affective and social neuroscience to education. Mind, Brain
   and Education, 1(1), 3-10.

                                                                                                 279
Davis

Jay, G. (2008). Service learning, multiculturalism, and the pedagogies of differ-
   ence. Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching Literature, Language, Composi-
   tion and Culture, 8(2), 255-281. Retrieved from Duke University Press Web
   site: http://pedagogy.dukejournals.org/content/8/2/255.abstract

Kamler, B. (2001). Relocating the personal: A critical writing pedagogy. New York:
   SUNY Press.

Knoblach, C. H., & Brannon, L. (1993). Critical teaching and the idea of literacy.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Mead, S. (2006). Maintenance required: Charter schooling in Michigan. Edu-
   cation Sector Reports, 2006.

Micciche, L. R. (2007). Doing emotion: Rhetoric, writing, teaching. Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton Cook.

Newkirk, T. (1997). The performance of self in student writing. Portsmouth, NH:
   Boynton/Cook-Heinemann.

Rhoads, R. A. (1997). Community service and higher learning: Explorations of the
   caring self. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Rosenberger, C. (2000). Beyond empathy: Developing critical consciousness
   through service learning. In C. R. O'Grady (Ed.), Integrating Service Learning
   and Multicultural Education in Colleges and Universities (pp. 23-44). Mahway,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Seitz, D. (2004). Who can afford critical consciousness? Practicing a pedagogy of
   humility. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.

Sugrue, T. J. (1999). Expert report of Thomas J. Sugrue; Gratz, et al. v. Bollin-
   ger, et al. No. 97-75321 Eastern District of Michigan and Grutter, et al. v.
   Bollinger, et al. No. 97-75928 (Eastern District of Michigan, January 1999).
   Retrieved from University of Michigan Web site: http://www.vpcomm.
   umich.edu/admissions/legal/expert/sugrutoc.html

Sugrue, T. J. (2005). The origins of the urban crisis: Race and inequality in postwar
   Detroit. Princeton University Press.

Tatum, B. (1997). Why are all the black kids sitting together in the cafeteria? And
   other conversations about race. New York, Basic Books.

Trainor, J. Seibel. (2002). Critical pedagogy's "other": Constructions of white-
   ness in education for social change. College Composition and Communication,
   53(4), 631-50.

U.S. Census Bureau: State and County Quick Facts. (2008). Michigan. Re-
   trieved from http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/26000.html

Wells, S. (1996). Sweet reason: Rhetoric and the discourses of modernity. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press.

WSU Student Profile. (2006). Retrieved from Wayne State University Web site:
   http://about.wsu.edu/about/facts.aspx

280
THE ECONOMY OF EXPRESSIVISM
AND ITS LEGACY OF
LOW/NO-STAKES WRITING

      Sheri Rysdam
      Utah Valley University

    Nothing makes evident the inextricable link between writing and the social
quite like teaching college writing. The ways in which differences in expectations
and outcomes can sometimes be attributed to social class are often easily ignored
by educators and administrators. Used purposefully, however, expressivism can
be a pedagogical approach that helps support poor and working class students
who otherwise are often told that they are "underprepared" or not ready to fully
participate in college. Though the popularity of expressivist composition ped-
agogy as an overarching pedagogical theory has been out of favor by some for
well over a decade, the value of an important component of expressivist pedago-
gy--the practice of low-stakes freewriting--remains. Consequently expressivist
pedagogy can help struggling students find success in the writing classroom.

    That expressivism has the potential to help support poor and working class
students might come as a surprise to some, given the predominant arguments
against it--namely that it is classist, favoring an upper and middle class aes-
thetic. Linda Adler-Kassner, for example, writes that expressivism is about "the
achievement of individual success and satisfaction" (1998, p. 211). She con-
tinues, stating that "expressivists implied that writing would help students un-
earth their genuine selves" and could "fulfill their own needs and desires for
self-understanding" (1998, p. 218). However, Adler-Kassner also admits that
expressivism risks taking for granted a familiarity with what we might describe
as middle class academic discourses where students are commonly afforded the
luxury of experimenting with self-exploration and discovery. Students who are
not already familiar with such educational environments may not feel they can
afford to "find" themselves. For them, finding a job might be more important
that finding one's "self." Nevertheless, done well, expressivism has the potential
to forge intellectual connections between the personal, political, and economic.

    To invoke an economic metaphor, we might imagine that expressivism has
a certain laissez-faire quality to it. In a more conventional, current-traditional
classroom, teacher intervention might be compared to government regulation,
and the proliferation of student writing seen as equivalent to capital gain. But

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.17  281
Rysdam

in an expressivist approach, student writing is less regulated by the instructor,
just as the capital gained in a laissez-faire economic model is usually unregulated
by the government. What I wish to do now is illustrate several examples of more
prescriptive, current-traditional approaches that resemble the former, followed
by contrasting expressivist examples that illustrate the latter.

                                             *

    Using economic metaphors to describe educational models is not novel. Pau-
lo Freire did it most notably, reminding us that an educational experience is an
economic experience, both literally and metaphorically. Indeed, it is impossible
to engage the concepts of literacy and deficit thinking in education without
evoking Paulo Freire's apt metaphor for traditional education as a "banking"
model of instruction. In Freire's metaphor, the teacher makes a deposit of infor-
mation into the student, who is then richer for having received it. In Pedagogy
of the Oppressed, Freire claims that the "banking" concept works like this: "the
teacher issues communiqués and makes deposits which the students patiently
receive, memorize, and repeat. This is the `banking' concept of education, in
which the scope of action allowed to the students extends only as far as receiv-
ing, filing, and storing the deposits" (1993, p. 53). In this model, students are
not taught critical analysis, but are instead taught to memorize and regurgitate.

    Although compositionists have significantly revised the outcomes of the
composition classroom, in many current-traditional writing classes there is still
an emphasis on grammar and form at the cost of relevance and meaning for the
writer. While critical literacy and inclusion are often valued in the field of com-
position in theory, the practice does not always play out. A deficit approach to
writing pedagogy still abounds. Freire writes, "the capability of banking educa-
tion to minimize or annul the students' creative power and to stimulate their cre-
dulity serves the interests of the oppressors, who care neither to have the world
revealed nor to see it transformed" (1993, p. 54). He continues, "the banking
concept of education, which serves the interest of oppression, is also necrophilic.
Based on a mechanistic, static, naturalistic, spatialized view of consciousness, it
transforms students into receiving objects" (1993, p. 58). Freire reminds us that
while education has incredible emancipatory potential, students can also be op-
pressed in educational institutions. Current-traditional modes of composition
pedagogy all too often resemble the "banking concept" Freire describes.

    Mina Shaughnessy was not the first scholar to argue for pedagogies of inclu-
sion that seek to help students not acclimated to academic writing, particularly
those from poor and working class backgrounds. Shaughnessy's work paved the
way for recognizing that the voices in diverse student populations belong in
and enrich the classroom environment. In Diving In: An Introduction to Basic

282
                            The Economy of Expressivism and Its Legacy of Low/No-Stakes Writing

Writing, Shaughnessy concludes by stating, "teaching [students] to write well
is not only suitable but challenging work for those who would be teachers and
scholars in a democracy" (2003, p. 317). Yet as much as Shaughnessy's work
fueled an interest in basic writers, and critiqued practices that exclude certain
populations, her work is not unproblematic. In a critique of Shaughnessy's ap-
proach to basic writing, Joseph Harris points out the seeming contradictions
between her practice and her theory (1996). For example, in Errors and Expec-
tations (1977), Shaughnessy actually recreates many of the practices of exclusion
that she otherwise condemns; five of her eight book chapters are focused on tra-
ditional conventions: "Handwriting and Punctuation, Syntax, Common Errors,
Spelling, and Vocabulary." Despite her introduction, which makes it very clear
that Shaughnessy is writing about students who are very new to higher educa-
tion, much of the book reinforces dated "skills and drills" notions of teaching
writing. Harris claims that "Errors and Expectations ... argues for a new sort of
student but not a new sort of intellectual practice. It says that basic writers can
also do the kind of work that mainstream students have long been expected to
do; it doesn't suggest that work be changed in any significant ways" (Harris,
1996, p. 79). So while Shaughnessy argues for inclusion, she does not make the
crucial move to inclusive pedagogical strategies associated with critical literacy,
alternative discourse, or appeals to the student's right to her own language.

    Nor are such inconsistencies relegated to the past. Deficit thinking is still a
prominent part of current-traditionalist pedagogy. For example, a popular text-
book used for introductory composition courses, They Say/I Say: The Moves that
Matter in Academic Writing (Graff, G., & C. Birkenstein, 2009), follows a deficit
approach to writing instruction. Gerald Graff and Cathy Birkenstein send the
message that academic writing is a mysterious process that many students do not
already know, one that must be taught to the student because their current way
of writing is unacceptable. They provide fill-in-the-blank templates for academic
writing, like the following model:

         In discussions of X, one controversial issue has been _____.
         On the one hand, _____ argues _____. On the other hand,
         _____ contends _____. Others even maintain _____. My
         own view is _____. (2009, p. 222)

    Graff and Birkenstein's templates include some of the most common rhe-
torical moves made in academic arguments. In the introduction, Graff and
Birkenstein write, "often without consciously realizing it, accomplished writers
routinely rely on a stock of established moves that are crucial for communicating
sophisticated ideas" (2009, p. 1). Later they write, "less experienced writers, by
contrast, are often unfamiliar with these basic moves and unsure how to make

                                                                                                 283
Rysdam

them in their own writing" (2009, p. 1). As a result they seek to convince stu-
dent writers that they lack the proper knowledge to make these rhetorical pat-
terns found in academic writing, thus likely making students distrustful of their
own writing processes. And since many of the students Graff and Birkenstein
have in mind might be from diverse populations, their current-traditionalist
model seeks to naturalize and homogenize student writing. The negative effects
of their claim that college writing is mysterious, and that new college students
are underprepared, hardly seems worth the potential benefits.

                                             *

    In contrast to these current-traditional perspectives, Peter Elbow claims that
the composition classroom should be a place where students get comfortable
with the processes of writing. He wants students to experience writing for its
empowering potential, which is how he experiences writing. Elbow writes, "I
get deep satisfaction from discovering meanings by writing--figuring out what
I think and feel through putting down words; I naturally turn to writing when
I am perplexed--even when I am just sad or happy; I love to explore and com-
municate with others through writing; writing is an important part of my life"
(1995, p. 489). From this one can glean that teaching conventional form and
grammar is not necessarily as high on Elbow's list of pedagogical priorities as
sharing and communication. In one of his discourses with David Bartholomae,
he tells him, "I simply want to intervene much less than you do" (Elbow, P., &
Bartholomae, D., 1997, p. 507). Elbow wants to intervene less in students' writ-
ing as a way to empower and encourage. In my experience, intervention unfortu-
nately often comes in the form of finding errors and making and heavy-handed
corrections--teacherly activities that can do very little to encourage and inspire
thinking and writing. Elbow explains how he encourages students, writing that
"the most precious thing I can do is provide spaces where I don't also do their
thinking for them" (Elbow, P., & Bartholomae, D., 1997, p.508). Elbow contin-
ues: "students easily distrust their experience, and we do harm if we try to `cor-
rect' them about their own experience" (Elbow, P., & Bartholomae, D., 1997,
p.509). Elbow wants students to learn to trust their knowledge and experience.
And it has been my experience, both personally and professionally, that students
who are new to academia are particularly vulnerable to distrusting their own
experiences, their writing, and even their way of speaking.

    Ultimately, what I find most valuable about Elbow's expressivism as a counter
to deficit thinking is that his pedagogy does not assume students, especially those
who are new to academia, are empty receptacles for knowledge or too unprepared
for college writing. In this way, Elbow's contribution to the field provides us with
potentially revolutionary possibilities, and has potential emancipatory power for

284
                            The Economy of Expressivism and Its Legacy of Low/No-Stakes Writing

students. The message of a pedagogy of freewriting asks students to begin writing
and believes that all students can make valuable contributions, wherever they are,
in their lives and educational journeys. Elbow's approach is more about helping
students express themselves through writing and not about teaching them about
how bad their writing is and how much they need to change.

    For those who are concerned with the inclusion of diverse student popu-
lations, Elbow's argument is appealing. Clearly, Elbow gets satisfaction from
writing and that resonates with many teachers of writing. However, Elbow's
approach is not without limits. While it can be especially inclusive for poor
and working class student populations in that it allows these students to en-
ter the academic conversation sooner, some argue that it actually favors middle
and upper-class students who are already competent at reflection and generating
ideas and writing. Not only has Elbow argued for low-stakes writing, he actively
argues that being a "writer" and being an "academic writer" are not only two
different things, but that they are also at odds with each other. Here is what he
admits: "I choose the goal of writer over that of academic" (1995, p. 490). He
writes, "If my goal is to get them [students] to take on the role of academic,
I should get them to distrust language" (1995, p. 495). It is clear that Elbow
resists traditional, academic modes of writing, but he makes many compelling
points that provide practical approaches to being more inclusive.

    Because freewriting asks students to start writing immediately, they can nev-
er be too "underprepared" to begin. Students begin writing--now. Not only can
expressivism be used as a means for understanding social class as it plays out in
college-level writing, but it can work to address the corporate, capitalist eco-
nomic models that are increasingly at play in today's educational systems. Since
finding pedagogical ways to support diverse student populations is crucial for a
democratic educational model, I argue that there is still something to be learned
from a critical expressivist pedagogy. Expressivist pedagogies can provide models
that allow for the academic success of diverse student populations, offering a
counter to the deficit models found in current-traditional practices. Expressiv-
ism is less obsessed with how "underprepared" students are for college (especially
students from diverse, nonacademic backgrounds) and is more concerned with
the idea of facilitating writing, as well as intellectual liberation, for all students.

                                             *

    Concepts taken from expressivist practices--like freewriting, as well as much
of the emancipatory language of expressivist rhetoric in general--continue to
flourish in composition instruction today. Self-discovery, personal voice, and
expression are all tropes one finds circulating in the discourse of expressivist ped-
agogy. In expressivism, the practice of writing can be viewed as a metacognitive

                                                                                                 285
Rysdam

process that allows students to think through ideas, change their minds, and
think about process. Like other methods of writing instruction, expressivism
promotes a reflective and recursive approach.

    Admittedly, in many expressivist pedagogies, attention to an audience can be
de-emphasized; students use writing for their own means, as a way to understand
their own thinking. A critical expressivist model cannot ignore the economic real-
ities of the educational institution, and perhaps more importantly, the educational
realities of students' lives. Victor Villanueva writes that students may rightly be
interested in "literacy of the kind that leads to certification, access to high school,
maybe to college, the middle class" (1997, p. 633). As much as enlightenment
and self-discovery might be the personal pedagogical goal for some teachers, in the
end, those teachers are always still constrained by the institution or "the demands
of the local chair, or university president" (Villanueva, 1997, p. 635). Students,
especially those who are new to college culture, are often still interested in writing,
thinking, and speaking in a way that might provide the opportunity for upward
mobility if they should so choose to climb. While teaching form and academic lit-
eracy cannot be ignored, some aspects of expressivism, like low-stakes writing, can
meet the demand for increasing students' academic literacy, while simultaneously
valuing the multiple discourses and knowledge they bring to the classroom. This
is especially important for those students who do not already have the kinds of
literacy that may be conducive to class mobility and success in college.

    After all, the personal, the academic, and the economic are always simultane-
ously at work in the composition classroom. In James Ray Watkins' book, A Taste
for Language: Literacy, Class, and English Studies (2009), he argues that the evolu-
tion of a student's "sensibility" is a sensibility that can be taught, and the writing
classroom is one place where that can occur. Watkins writes, "students come to
college, the cliché goes, to get a well-paying, secure job; professors teach, in con-
trast, in order to create critical thinkers and effective democratic citizens" (2009,
p. 116). For some students, economic concerns of class mobility and employment
are unavoidable realities to their academic experience. Other students might not
have the luxury of a time-consuming contemplation and reflection traditionally
associated with higher education. Either way, the experience is always also an eco-
nomic one. If institutions of higher education are unable to achieve change, and
"if we do not begin to confront the dominance of economics over democracy,"
then Watkins argues that "we will increasingly find only the most middle-class
students in our classroom" (2009, p. 164). Without some awareness of the status
models that are formed in English studies, poor, working class, and first generation
students will likely be further alienated in the classroom.

    Today's expressivism is not about ignoring the economic, the academic, nor
the audience. While it can be about discovering the personal through the act of

286
                            The Economy of Expressivism and Its Legacy of Low/No-Stakes Writing

writing, it is not only about emphasizing self-expression of emotions. Instead, it
can be a way to teach students how to use writing as a tool for thinking and a way
for students to learn how to generate writing and familiarize themselves with acts
of writing. A new expressivist approach to writing instruction might require teach-
ers to develop strategies that allow a lot of classroom space for low-stakes writing
and give students opportunities to get used to the process of writing, which can
be especially important for poor and working class students. This is not to neglect
form altogether. In fact, as teachers allow this process of expression in class, they
can also begin to provide feedback to students and begin to teach form and genre
and other rhetorical moves that will be conducive to the academic success of a di-
verse student population beyond the first-year composition classroom. This occurs
while some elements of form (those necessary for learning the kinds of literacies
that might lead to future success) are still taught in the classroom. That way, even
if a student is not already familiar with the various modes of academic rhetoric,
they can still experience success producing writing and improving writing through
practice and exposure to academic texts.

    An expressivist position in writing instruction is all about a desire to encour-
age students to trust themselves and get comfortable with writing. In this model
of writing instruction, students learn to trust the writing process and trust that it
can be a useful way to develop their thoughts. Expressivists like myself might see
the They Say/I Say model as perpetuating student fears that their writing is not al-
ready good enough, that they are unprepared, and that there are secret templates
that must be mastered for success in college writing. If students learn to distrust
their writing, or "distrust language" in Elbow's words (1995, p. 495), then they
might be less likely to turn to writing as a mode of communication, developing
thoughts, or as a creative outlet. This potential injury to students' relationship
to writing is not conducive to perpetuating student comfort with writing or the
ability to turn to writing as a safe place to work through thoughts.

    Ultimately, the field of composition employs a diverse population of teach-
ers, with their diverse approaches to pedagogy and theory. I like that diversity.
It allows individual teachers to teach to their strengths, while considering the
goals and political climates of their institutions. In that regard, no one prescrip-
tive "how to" works for all teachers of composition. Though it has problematic
interpretations, expressivism ought not be thrown out. In my own teaching, I
emphasize the kind of low-stakes writing that Elbow promotes, where students
are able to generate writing--to get familiar with and used to writing as a mode
of creative and intellectual expression.

    Some students come to college for the improved job possibilities, some to
climb the social ladder, and some to stay for the life-changing process of re-
ceiving a higher education. Deficit thinking, which sees students as empty re-

                                                                                                 287
Rysdam

ceptacles that must be filled with the ideologies of the teacher, administrator,
institution, and culture of higher education, surely disempowers students and
fails to value different ways of writing, thinking, and approaching problems. At
the same time as a teacher I want to be careful to work toward empowering my
students, especially poor, first-generation, and working class students. I want to
teach a kind of critical literacy, while simultaneously teaching some traditional
approaches to composition that seem to be in accord with students' educational
goals--whether those happen to be personal enlightenment, or having a success-
ful career beyond higher education.

REFERENCES

Adler-Kassner, L. (1998). Ownership revisited: An exploration in progressive era
   and expressivist composition scholarship. College Composition and Communi-
   cation, 49(2), 208-233.

Elbow, P. (1995). Being a writer vs. being an academic: A conflict in goals. Col-
   lege Composition and Communication, 46(1), 72-83.

Elbow, P., & Bartholomae, D. (1997). Interchanges: Responses to Bartholomae
   and Elbow. In V. Villanueva (Ed.), Cross-talk in comp theory (1st ed., pp. 501-
   509). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Freire, P. (1993). Pedagogy of the oppressed. (M. B. Ramos, Trans.). New York:
   Continuum.

Graff, G., & Birkenstein, C. (2009). They say/I say: The moves that matter in aca-
   demic writing (2nd ed.). New York: W. W. Norton.

Harris, J. (1996). A teaching subject: Composition since 1966. Upper Saddle Riv-
   er, NJ: Prentice Hall.

National Council of Teachers of English. (1974). The students' right to their
   own language. College Composition and Communication, Fall, XXV, (n.p.).
   Retrieved from http://www.ncte.org/library/nctefiles/groups/cccc/newsrtol.
   pdf

Shaughnessy, M. P. (2003). Diving in: An introduction to basic writing. In V.
   Villanueva (Ed.), Cross-talk in comp theory. (2nd ed., pp. 311-317). Urbana,
   IL: NCTE.

Shaughnessy, M. P. (1977). Errors and expectations: A guide for the teacher of basic
   writing. New York: Oxford University Press.

Villanueva, V. (1997). Considerations for American Freireistas. In V. Villanueva
   (Ed.), Cross-talk in comp theory (1st ed., pp. 621-637). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Watkins Jr., J. R. (2009). A taste for language: Literacy, class, and English studies.
   Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

288
REVISITING RADICAL REVISION

      Jeff Sommers
      West Chester University and Miami University

        Although various aspects of the writing process have been studied extensively
        of late, research on revision has been notably absent.

                                                                               --Nancy Sommers

        In my high school days we wrote papers once and handed them in once.
                                                          --Carmen, first-year writing student

        Even as post-process theorists charge process pedagogy with ignoring context,
        erasing social differences and social forces, their own research similarly effaces
        writers and scenes of writing ... [and they] don't mention revision practices.

                                                                                   --Nancy Welch

        I asked them [my students] about revision, and they were stumped ...
                                                                                   --Nancy DeJoy

        I never appreciated revising because in my past experiences I didn't revise.
        There was only editing ...

                                                               --Bart, first-year writing student

REVISION OVER THE DECADES

    Over the years, I have told many students that "there is no great writing, only
great rewriting," and I decided to begin this essay with that quotation, wishing
to give it the proper attribution. What I have discovered, however, is that it is
not entirely clear whose words these are. The leading contender seems to be
Justice Louis Brandeis, but my most recent search uncovered variations on the
theme of the primacy of revising ascribed to Nabokov, Tolstoy, Oates, Michener,
Dahl, Crichton, et al. This next citation, however, is accurate: "Teaching writing
is teaching re-writing" (Fulwiler, 1992, p. 190).

    The need to teach revision to student writers has not lessened over the
years as the epigraphs to this essay, drawn from three decades, suggest. Nancy
Sommers' study described student revision practices of the time as "scratch-
ing out," "marking out," and "slashing" (1980, pp. 380-381). Toby Fulwiler
described his students' revision practices at that same time in terms similar to
Sommers'.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2014.0575.2.18  289
Sommers

         All too often, students in first-year composition and fourth-
         year literature alike believed that revision meant shuffling
         around a few commas on last night's paper before handing
         it in. While this generalization does disservice to serious stu-
         dents writers, it remains true for many who completed our
         classes with far less language proficiency that we had hoped
         for. (1982, p. 100)

I was in the composition classroom during that same period of time. Thanks
to the expressivist theorists of the 1970s and 1980s, I had become convinced
that teaching revision was vital, given that my students, by and large, seemed
unfamiliar with that stage of the writing process. As the 1990s began, Donald
Murray made the observation that

         "Revise," we command, and our students change some of the
         punctuation, often trading new grammatical errors for old;
         choose a couple of long words they don't really know from
         Roget to "profound it up" as one of my students said; misspell
         a number of words in a more innovative way; catch a few
         typos; and pass back essentially the same paper. It is all they
         know. (1991, p. vii)

    In the mid-1990s I was in my fifteenth year of full-time teaching at Miami
University Middletown (Ohio) and had been emphasizing revision in my writ-
ing courses as part of a portfolio approach to writing instruction. I decided to
find out whether the emphasis on revision in my first-year writing courses had
had any impact, so I compiled a list of 85 former students who had taken my
first-year writing course anywhere from four to fourteen years earlier to survey
them about their experiences and recollections. My list was not random: I de-
liberately chose memorable students, the ones whom I felt had "gotten it." I
received a 29% response rate: twenty-five students completed my survey. The
fourth survey question read, "What specific activities in which you participat-
ed as a student in freshman composition stand out in your memory? Why?"
Despite the open-ended nature of the question, 36% (9) students identified
revision as a memorable feature of the course. Their comments were intriguing
in that they did not describe their revision process so much as their affective
reaction to revising. One student commented, "of the various writing habits I
acquired ... the habit of revising my work has proven to be the most valuable,"
and then she discussed how the habits she had developed persisted after gradua-
tion. Another student wrote that the course

         made me feel okay about rewriting ... For some reason I had

290
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

         this other mistaken belief that people should be able to write
         perfectly, and that all writers had this inherent talent to
         choose words. Never once did you make me feel stupid ...
         You simply suggested a better way. Sometimes I agreed and
         sometime I didn't, but no matter what, it was okay either
         way.

    A third student wrote that, "the positive experience I received from freshman
comp was the ability to learn how to revise. Also, I became extremely confident
in my writing." Another student, however, one who later became an English
teacher herself, made a telling comment when she wrote, "I like the fact that we
used THE WRITING PROCESS and were guided through each phase, rather
than rushed. Re-vision was seeing the writing's meaning come to life."

    The conclusion I draw from this survey, in retrospect, is that some students
who had come of age in the 1980s and early 1990s were receptive to an empha-
sis on revision as a complex and vital activity because they had previously had,
as Sommers, Fulwiler, and Murray assert, a very limited sense of what revision
could be. By the end of the 1990s, Nancy Welch was advocating that the process
movement's methodology itself for teaching revision was in need of revising. She
too looked back to the 1970s and 1980s and noted that there was not much
research done into revision. She also observed, however, that while post-process
theorists leveled a critique at process pedagogy for "ignoring context, erasing
social differences and social forces, their own research similarly effaces specific
writers and scenes of writing." In sum, these post-process theorists, she pointed
out, "don't mention revision practices" (1997, p. 24).

    And, indeed, throughout the next decade of the 2000s, commentary con-
tinued to suggest that revision, if taught and studied at all, was not presented
as a complex and vital activity but more as a mechanical cleaning up of faulty
prose. Lisa Costello has recently reviewed revision articles of the decade and
reports that research appears to focus on collaboration, on contrastive studies
with experienced writers, and on ESL and tutoring. She concludes that "a sur-
vey of recent literature on revision ... suggests that teaching individual revision
might still remain an `afterthought' except as it applies to remedial or struggling
writers" (2011, p. 154).

    The difference between the discussion of revision and writing in the most
recent decade and the discussion of the 1980s and 1990s may be that the new
"millennial generation" of college students itself has come under fire. Mark Bau-
erlein points the finger at students who rely upon electronic chat and no longer
care about capitalization and spelling, who do not expect writing to be clearly
composed and coherent, and who spend more time playing video games than

                                                                                                 291
Sommers

reading books (2008). While I find Bauerlein's jeremiad unconvincing thanks
to its shrill exaggerations, I also note that his observation that the millennial
generation of students brings a new set of challenges to the writing classroom
is worth considering: contemporary students may not, in fact, have a limited
conception of revision so much as a limited interest in it. In a quite different
take from Bauerlein's, Andrea Lunsford argues that college students now may,
in fact, be writing more and with a greater awareness of audience than the stu-
dents in the previous decades, thanks to social networking and electronic media.
However, she also reports that college students' writing errors have not changed
over the past twenty-five years. The inference I draw is that the majority of the
"life-writing," in Lunsford's phrase (Haven, 2009), that contemporary students
are doing does not necessarily have as its goal the kind of complex and polished
final texts expected in the academy. Notably, Lunsford does not say anything
about revision and what role it might play in the "life-writing" of the students
in the Stanford study.

    Nancy DeJoy's research also tends to confirm that revision, for many stu-
dents in the 2000s, was not even on the radar. DeJoy analyzed more than 600
student placement essays in response to this prompt:

         The faculty of our first-year writing program is busy prepar-
         ing for your arrival, and you can help by writing an essay
         in which you explain your strengths as a reader and writer.
         Conclude by stating both what you will contribute to your
         first-semester Critical Writing, Reading and Researching class
         and what you hope to gain from that class. (2004, p. 26)

DeJoy listed two dozen responses in the essays that explored what the students
hoped to contribute (2004, p. 33) and 546 responses to what they hoped to gain
from the course (2004, p. 35). Not a single student referred to revision by name
as either a potential contribution or a hoped-for gain.

    The silence about revision continues. Rebecca S. Nowacek's 2011 study of
transfer of learning concludes that "good writing is not a skill that can be extract-
ed from the complex social contexts for writing and applied unproblematically.
Rather, writing knowledge is actually a complex constellation of knowledges
and abilities linked together by a writer's understanding of genre" (p. 100). She
continues by discussing "writing processes and analytical approaches" that the
students she studied had learned and transferred into other situations, "most of-
ten to their invention process" (2011, p. 100). This section of the book does not
refer to revision. Nowacek refers to invention on six other occasions in her book,
offering several examples. By contrast, according to the book's index, revision is
not mentioned once in the study.

292
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

A NEW PATH: RECONCILING POST-PROCESS
AND PROCESS PEDAGOGY

    The larger question may be where does that leave process pedagogy? Lad
Tobin's take is that the fundamental beliefs of the writing process movement
included the idea that "a premature emphasis on correctness can be counter-
productive" (1994, p. 7). And Fulwiler, a decade after his earlier observations,
argued in the 1990s that after twenty years of both teaching writing and writing
professionally himself, "I have come to believe that knowing when, where, and
how to revise is the greatest difference between my own good and bad writing as
well as between the practices of experienced and inexperienced writers" (1993, p.
133). But by the end of the 1990s, a post-process approach to teaching composi-
tion had begun to hold sway. Robert Yagelski's view, however, is that process and
post-process approaches are not "entirely incompatible" and that teachers "still
routinely speak of planning, drafting, and revising--terms that suggest individ-
ual agency--in our conversations about writing and teaching writing" (1994,
p. 204). He explains why this language is still useful because "the idea of com-
posing as a process is a powerful way to understand what writers actually do."
The composing process, he continues, "makes simple the complicated activity of
writing. It allows us to talk about, study, and teach writing in ways that make the
complexity of the act manageable" (1994, p. 205). Of course, post-process the-
orists' criticism of process pedagogy suggests that it offers too simplistic a view
of a complex set of processes, but Yagelski, I believe, has something valuable to
contribute in his final sentence--process provides tools to make discussions of
writing "manageable."

    Nancy Welch agrees that process pedagogy offers something of value in that
it presents revision through the concept of dissonance that provides the starting
point for revision. She objects, however, to a view of dissonance as a "problem
to be corrected" (1997, p. 30) and confesses to being "troubled by constructions
of revision that emphasize craft, technique, tidying up, and fitting in" (1997,
p. 6), later defining the form of revision to which she objects as "the systematic
suppression of all complexity and contradiction" (1997, p. 135). In other words,
she wants to find a pedagogy that encourages dissonance, feeling that process
approaches do not. In such a critique, Welch echoes James A. Reither's earlier
concerns that "composition studies does not seriously attend to the ways writers
know what other people know or to the ways mutual knowing motivates writ-
ing--does not seriously attend, that is, to the knowing without which cogni-
tive dissonance is impossible" (1985, p. 622). These are powerful--and persua-
sive--arguments. But the recent history of teaching writing/rewriting is rooted
in process pedagogy, and to be more specific, in what has come to be known as

                                                                                                 293
Sommers

expressivism, and expressivist pedagogy has long offered an approach to teaching
revision that requires dissonance rather than attempting to squelch it.

    Post-process critiques of process, Yagelski says, "problematize the notion of
`individual' or `subject' as often conceived in expressivist discussions ... ," but he
concludes that "these critiques of expressivism have less to say about the com-
posing process per se than about the political implications of particular `expres-
sivist' approaches to teaching that process" (1994, p. 207). To Nancy DeJoy the
shift that James Berlin's groundbreaking work encouraged was a "methodologi-
cal move" away from teaching writing "mastery" to teaching "analysis" (2004, p.
51). DeJoy sketches out an ambitious and exciting pedagogy that involves her
writing students in rethinking the composing process, in a sense redefining in-
vention, drafting, and revising into rich, complex acts. However, by emphasizing
analysis over mastery, her approach does not offer concrete, usable strategies for
less experienced writers so that they might engage in productive revision of their
drafts in progress.

    Yagelski, Welch, and DeJoy work diligently to find a path that does not set
up process and post-process as antagonistic models of writing instruction. Welch
and DeJoy in particular seek to offer enriched approaches to understanding and
teaching revision in opposition to the spare and underdeveloped models famil-
iar to many students. But, as I hope to show, some "expressivist" approaches
to teaching revision are entirely compatible with postmodern notions of the
writing process and do indeed offer a rich conception of revising, one that em-
phasizes the value of dissonance.

A NEW FAMILIAR PATH: PROVOKING REVISION

    Nancy Welch's concept of "getting restless" is also designed to promote a
complex, complicated, and problematized form of revision, but the voices of
expressivist teachers had also been advocating a richer conception of the role of
revision, before Welch's book was published in 1997. Kim Korn, in an essay that
appeared in the same year as Welch's book, advocated teaching revision as "an
act of invention rather than editing" (1997, p. 88) through the use of "strategies
that encourage us to step out of our writing comfort zones" (1997, p. 89). Years
earlier, Donald Murray had asserted that "Writers are born at the moment they
write what they do not expect and find a potential significance in what is on the
page" (1991, p. ix), and both Toby Fulwiler and Wendy Bishop were advocating
revision pedagogies designed to shake up student writers. Fulwiler's Provoca-
tive Revision (1992) and Bishop's edited collection Elements of Alternate Style:
Essays on Writing and Revision, which presents her concept of "radical revision"
(1997), offered an expressivist-derived approach that encouraged students to

294
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

work toward mastery of revision by unsettling their more routinized approaches
to rewriting as editing.1

    What Fulwiler and Bishop present is an assignment that calls upon students
to revisit a completed essay, requiring them to reconceive of the piece by revising
it in a major way. Fulwiler outlines four processes that might be employed to
provoke a new text related to but different from a previously-completed text; he
terms them "adding" (expanding the scope of the piece), "limiting" (narrowing
the focus of the piece), "switching" (finding a new perspective for the piece, e.g.
switching from first to third person), and "transforming" (changing the genre
of the piece, e.g. transforming a narrative into an argumentative essay). Bishop
requires her students to produce a "radical revision" of a completed text, accom-
panied by a reflective commentary on the experience of revising the draft. Her
assignment suggests that students consider changes in voice/tone, syntax, genre,
audience, time, physical layout/typography, or even medium as a means of pro-
ducing a radical revision.

    I have found Fulwiler's and Bishop's presentations convincing and have been
using them, on and off, ever since first learning about them. Most recently, I
have used the radical revision assignment in the early part of my semester2 to
conclude a unit of the course that focuses on teachers. We read about teach-
ers, we brainstorm lists of the qualities of good teachers, we analyze video clips
of teachers at work in fictional films. The students then write a paper about a
memorable "teacher" (as they define the term) in their own lives. I use the topic
because first-year students are experts when it comes to this subject, having had
a lifetime of experience in dealing with teachers. Once this paper has been com-
pleted, the course shifts into a discussion of revision, wherein the students be-
come self-consciously aware of the process of revision through assigned readings.

    In a similar fashion, Nancy DeJoy designs her first-year writing course to
invite students into the discussion of the writing process that has been ongoing
in the composition field. At one point, she observes that in focusing on the
role of audience, there are key essays in the field that the students ought to read
(2004, p. 29). Although she does not make a similar claim about revision essays,
I want to make that assertion. So my classes begin a discussion of revision by
reading Nancy Sommers' study contrasting the revision practices of experienced
and student writers (1980) and discussing the students' own backgrounds in
revision in contrast to the student writers and experienced writers in Sommers'
study. I then assign the radical revision and present an overview of possibilities
by sharing Fulwiler's four processes with examples. Like Bishop, I include several
reflective pieces in conjunction with this process, and I would like to focus on
those reflections as a means of making a point about what the students gain from
engaging in a radical revision assignment.

                                                                                                 295
Sommers

    At the end of the semester, the students produce a final letter to me in which
they are invited to reflect on the activities and experiences during the course that
they found meaningful. In the last three semesters in which I taught first-year
writing, 190 students completed this letter. I find it striking that eighty-three
of them (44%) chose to discuss the radical revision as a key experience in the
course. Korn claims that the radical revision assignment provides an opportuni-
ty for writers to gain "thoughtful insights" not only into their own composing
processes but also into their "motives and choices" as writers. The letters in my
course often illustrate such insights.

    For example, one young woman remembers that the radical revision prod-
ded her into experimenting with the structure of her writing.3 She says,

         When the class was assigned the radical revision, I was pleasantly
         surprised and relieved to see that there are ways to move away
         from the five-paragraph essay format. Going from assignment
         one to assignment two helped me open my eyes to the fact that I
         was being close-minded and that there are other options for my
         writing ... Changing my essay to a letter of nomination forced
         me to write to a new audience: to the person who would be
         choosing whether my nomination deserved the award.

    It is hard to say which decision came first: a new purpose, a different audi-
ence, or a new genre, but her commentary makes clear that she has become quite
aware of how those decisions moved her away from her previous comfort zone
of the five-paragraph form.

    Another student focuses on how the radical revision assignment affected her
belief system about revision

         Before taking this course, I believed that revising a paper
         meant to fix grammatical and punctuation errors. Now, I
         agree with the credo statement "I believe revising helps a
         writer step back, look at the paper from a different perspective
         and make changes ..." For assignment number two, I revised
         my paper from being a narrative to a letter. The narrative just
         told the reasons why my teacher had good qualities and had
         stories to support them, but in the letter I explained why
         these qualities made my teacher deserving of an award.

    This student has not only transformed the genre of her essay, but she has
switched her intended audience of readers, and the dissonance of these transfor-
mations has produced a change in her conception of the possibilities available
in revising.

296
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

    I also required students to compose a Writer's Memo to accompany each rad-
ical revision, a metacommentary on the new draft. These reflective pieces reveal
the impact of the radical revision on the students' understanding of the writing
process. One student had transformed her personal essay into the first chapter
of a hypothetical self-help book. Her memo explains why. "I have a very hard
time writing personal things ... it is really hard for me to talk about myself in my
writing." The self-help book approach resolved her issues by sharing the same
information about her influential teacher (she had chosen Buddha) by couching
the discussion in terms of how readers might benefit from his teachings instead
of revealing her own personal experiences.4

    Several students chose to transform their personal essay tributes to a favorite
teacher into more public pieces of writing, learning along the way how choosing
a genre and audience can affect the impact of a draft. As Daniel Collins writes
elsewhere in this collection, "the writer is not separate from larger social con-
texts, and so the writing process does not end until such inquiry is used to in
the making of meaning for the writer and for others." One student converted
a personal narrative into a newspaper feature story about her teacher and de-
scribed one of her major changes as reconfiguring her introduction. She chose
to incorporate "quotations" from her teacher, primarily remembered as favorite
comments the teacher had made, in order to give the new version the sound of
a human interest feature story, demonstrating her understanding that readers of
newspaper articles have expectations of the genre, expectations that she felt it
important to meet.

    Harlan's narrative essay became a commencement speech. "By doing this,"
the memo reveals, "I still shared memories, but directed them in a way that
showed everyone how great a teacher she was and how she helped me grow as
a student ... I selected this approach because I knew she was a great friend to
many students in my grade. I felt that this would have been a good tribute to her
and a collective farewell." While the genre has changed in this radical revision, it
is important to note that the author has also learned that a single piece of writing
can have multiple purposes.

    In a similar move, Wanda decided to revise her narrative about her favorite
instructor into an open letter addressed to younger students at her old high
school, the intent of which was to encourage them to take classes with this fine
teacher.

         The organization of this paper works better because as a
         student, I could determine which traits were more important
         to other students than other traits. Therefore, I could organize
         the paper from less important traits to most important traits.

                                                                                                 297
Sommers

         It worked better than in the last paper because my audience
         was clearer so I could really organize my paper in a way that
         would be interesting to students.

    For Wanda, the radical revision had led to her exploring organizational pat-
terns and considering herself as a member of a specific discourse community:
present and former high school students.

    For at least two other students, the radical revision increased the complexity
of the writing task as they faced decisions about which of their two teacher es-
says to include in our final course portfolio. Brady decided to transform his film
review of a recent movie about a teacher into a report written by the school's
principal that collected several first-person eyewitness accounts of a controversial
incident documented in the film. He notes "I think that this paper shows the
personality of the characters better than the first [paper] ... because it's easier to
show personality through what a person says than it is to explain their person-
ality ... I think that the first paper does a better job of showing my analysis of
the movie." Brady has made a discovery about the complex relationship of genre,
audience, and purpose through his radical revision; the revision has not simpli-
fied his writing task, but actually complicated it as he has realized that there are
both advantages and disadvantages to his revision decisions.

    Natalie also experienced the problematic outcome of radical revision. She
began by writing a personal essay about a teacher with whom she had had a com-
plicated relationship. The teacher was a leader in the transcendental meditation
(TM) community in the student's hometown, but she was, at the same time, a
difficult and challenging person with whom to have a personal relationship. In
her radical revision, Natalie chose to rewrite her personal narrative as an imag-
ined obituary for the teacher in the local paper. "I went from writing an essay
to writing an obituary, and I went from writing to, well, an audience of whom I
wasn't too sure ... but which I think ended up being my fellow classmates, to an
audience of two communities [the TM community and her hometown]." She
describes how she did "a little research" by reading a number of obituaries, but
then she concludes,

         An obituary can be a hard thing to keep interesting! The only
         thing that I didn't get to express is my negative feelings and
         criticisms of Kathy, simply because it's not right to be negative
         in an obituary. That was the only thing that didn't work as
         well. I almost felt like I wasn't telling the whole story, because
         I was leaving out that entire side of my opinion of her.

    Natalie's reflections make clear that she did not experience revision as how
to "correct moments of dissonance" (Welch, 1997, p. 6), but instead ended up

298
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

facing a difficult choice between two pieces that do different things better (and
worse) than one another.

    These students' testimonies show how engaging in radical revision required
them not only to wrestle with the challenges of reconceiving their previously
finished work but also encouraged them to consider how they wanted to define
revision and how they chose to learn to deal with its limitations. Nancy DeJoy
objects to students' "consuming and applying heuristic processes they had no
part in developing" (2004, p. 62), but these students, I want to argue, have in-
deed developed their own heuristic processes for revision.

BEING CRITICALLY EXPRESSIVIST

    The examples I have shared demonstrate that radical revision often encour-
ages students to move away from personal writing into more overtly public writ-
ing: newspaper stories, commencement speeches, open letters. In several cases,
moves like this led students to engage with the politics of public education and
the challenges of writing in a situation where the balance of power resided with
the readers. Interestingly, these students had all chosen to write about a memo-
rably bad teacher. Carlee changed her narrative about how a teacher had let her
down into a personal letter directly to that teacher. Her Writer's Memo com-
ments on the challenges in this revision: how can she be honest yet still encour-
age the reader--her former teacher--to read her entire letter? She strikes upon
the idea of first praising some of the teacher's methods and then offering advice,
showing that she cares about her successors as students in the teacher's class.
This approach, she writes in her memo, "gave me the ability to offer suggestions
on how she could improve her negative teaching qualities." The radical revision
forced her, in other words, to strategize rather than simply venting her feelings,
as she had done in the original narrative.

    Several other students chose to write formal letters to administrators, voicing
their concerns about a teacher's ineffectiveness. One memo explains her thinking:

         Since my new audience would be my teacher's boss I was able
         to instill a purpose in my writing. Before I felt that my paper
         lacked a true purpose. I confused many of my ideas into one
         paper and therefore the paper had no direction. With this
         paper I was able to give it a purpose, that purpose being to
         initiate a revision of the way teachers can behave with their
         students on school trips off of campus. I want my reader to do
         something about what happened to me on my trip so that no
         other student can feel this way again.

                                                                                                 299
Sommers

    Once more, however, the task has been more complicated than her first
narrative paper was--a story that emphasized her hurt feelings in a somewhat
rambling manner. The tone of the new piece is a tricky one lest she alienate her
reader and thus undermine her purpose. This student's experience reminds of
comments made by Daniel Collins, elsewhere in this collection, who writes,
"expressivist writing theory, it seems to me, upholds the idea that to write is to
discover oneself amidst an array of others. It honors the importance of the stu-
dent engaging and making sense out of the world." I see this student explaining
how her revision was borne out of an enhanced understanding of her ideas in
the context of the larger world that included her anticipated reader, an "other"
whom she wished to convince. This "engaging and making sense out of the
world" was prompted by the radical revision assignment.

    I find Nancy Welch and Nancy DeJoy persuasive when they argue for a more
nuanced and problematized conception of revision and of teaching revision.
Their theoretical arguments are convincing. Welch urges that "border-talk" be-
tween process and post-process pedagogies needs to take place in teaching revi-
sion (1997, pp. 163-164). The radical revision assignment, I contend, represents
that border talk. Radical revision offers the possibilities of presenting revision in
the richer, more complex ways that Welch and DeJoy advocate. In fact, Welch's
descriptions of how revision is enacted in her classroom sounds like a description
of the radical revision assignment (1997, p. 165).

    What I want to argue is that less experienced writers may not yet understand
all of the rich possibilities open to them through revision.5 The "first phase mod-
el" of composition instruction, what DeJoy terms "process pedagogy"(2004, p.
4), offers an opportunity to experience revision in writing so that it can be ap-
plied in the way that she advocates. DeJoy's empirical data (2004, pp. 34-35)
show that the students' placement essays had very little to say about revision, and
she later discovers a similar silence when she directly asks her students questions
about their revision knowledge (2004, p. 74). DeJoy's notion of "revision" is
about a way of thinking--assuming that writers are always "revising the world"
by presenting their ideas about the world (in the Burkean sense of joining a con-
versation and changing it by doing so). To learn to revise texts, however, requires
an attention to developing a series of texts, and that is what process pedagogy
offers. The radical revision assignment, born out of an expressivist approach
to writing instruction, provokes students into discovering that "finished" texts
may not be "finished" at all and can be "refinished" into new texts. By being so
provoked, students also experience a conception of revision that means more
than mere fiddling with commas and word choices, preparing them to continue
learning what a rich, complex, and rewarding part of the writing process revision
can be.

300
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

NOTES

1. It's noteworthy to point out that Welch's book does not cite either of these sources.

2. I chose Bishop's terminology because it seems very direct in telling students what
is expected of them: they will produce a second paper that is different while clearly
growing out of their first paper. They are not to produce an entirely different text
that is only tangentially related to the first--which is not a revision at all--but a
recognizable version of the first paper that has been "radically" changed.

3. This student expressed her delight in discovering that the five-paragraph formula-
ic structure she had learned in high school was not the only effective way to organize
a piece of writing. Because she had decided to change her first draft, a traditional
five-paragraph theme extolling the virtues of her favorite teacher, into a letter nom-
inating that teacher for an award, she realized that she had to focus on her new
readers: the awards committee. That realization freed her to ignore the prescriptive
five-paragraph approach, instead concentrating on building a strong and convincing
argument for her candidate.

4. Thomas Newkirk notes a potential resemblance between the "traditional, teach-
er-directed classroom" and pedagogies that rely upon social constructivism and cul-
tural studies (1997, p. 89) and attempts to reclaim personal narrative for the first-
year writing classroom, offering an analysis of what expressivism still has to offer
in a social-constructionist composition environment. Expressivist classrooms often
began with personal narrative, but my initial assignment merely asks the students
to write about a memorable teacher. More often than not, this general prompt leads
to narrative writing, most likely because it is familiar to the students and because
they want to explore a personal relationship, for good or ill, with a specific teacher.
I deliberately leave the assignment rather open-ended, however, because I expect the
radical revision will lead students to re-examine their initial choices anyway. And it
does so--their reexaminations have led students to incorporate self-reflection into
personal experience, explore other points of view, modify their purposes, and, as was
the case with the self-help book and other examples to follow, even leave personal
narrative behind altogether. My examples illustrate a point that Nancy Mack makes
elsewhere in this collection when she argues that "writing should open the author
to the possibility of agency through the interpretation and representation of mem-
ory." In the open-endedness of my original assignment, I would argue that I follow
an expressivist pedagogy, and in the required metacognitive reflection that follows,
I would argue the assignment presents the students with opportunities to exercise
agency by interpreting their own representation of memory.

5. See Lea Povozhaev's "Essai--A Metaphor: Perception of Possibilities and Writing
to Show Thinking" in this collection. Povozhaev argues that "the critical, searching
spirit of pragmatism encourages trying new things," offering a different path to a
similar conclusion reached in this essay.

                                                                                                 301
Sommers

REFERENCES

Bauerlein, M. (2008, March 14). Eight reasons why this is the dumbest generation.
   Retrieved from Boston.com Web site: http://www.boston.com/lifestyle/gal-
   lery/dumbestgeneration/

Bishop, W. (1997). Elements of alternate style: Essays on writing and revision.
   Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Bishop, W. (2002). Steal this assignment: The radical revision. In C. Moore & P.
   O'Neill (Eds.), Practice in context (pp. 205-222). Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Costello, L. A. (2011). The new art of revision: Research papers, blogs, and the
   first-year writing classroom. Teaching English in the Two-Year College, 39(2),
   151-167.

DeJoy, N. C. (2004). Process this: Undergraduate writing in composition studies.
   Logan, UT: Utah University Press.

Fulwiler, T. (1993). A lesson in revision. In W. Bishop (Ed.), The subject is writ-
   ing: Essays by teaches and students (pp. 132-149). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
   Cook-Heinemann.

Fulwiler, T. (1992). Provocative revision. The Writing Center Journal, 12(2), 190-
   204.

Fulwiler, T. (1982). Teaching teachers to teach revision. In R. A. Sudol (Ed.),
   Revising: New essays for teachers of writing (pp. 100-108). Urbana, IL: ERIC/
   NCTE.

Haven, C. (2009). The new literacy: Stanford study finds richness and complex-
   ity in students' writing. Stnanford Report, 12 October. Retrieved from http://
   news.stanford.edu/news/2009/october12/lunsford-writing-research-101209.
   html

Korn, K. H. (1997). Distorting the mirror: Radical revision and writers' shifting
   perspectives.In W. Bishop (Ed.), Elements of alternate style: Essays on writing
   and revision (pp. 88-95). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers-Heine-
   mann.

Korn, K. H. & Bishop, W. (1997). Two instances of the radical revision assign-
   ment. In W. Bishop (Ed.), Elements of alternate style: Essays on writing and revi-
   sion (pp. 172-174). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers-Heinemann.

Lunsford, A. (n.d.) Our semi-literate youth? Not so fast. Retrieved from Stanford
   University Web site: Retrieved from https://ssw.stanford.edu/sites/default/
   files/OPED_Our_Semi-Literate_Youth.pdf

Murray, D. M. (1991). The craft of revision. Ft. Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart, and
   Winston.

Newkirk, T. (1997). The performance of self in student writing. Portsmouth, NH:
   Boynton/Cook Publishers-Heinemann.

302
                                                                                 Revisiting Radical Revision

Nowacek, R. S. (2011). Agents of integration: Understanding transfer as a rhetor-
   ical act. Carbondale and Edwardsville, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Reither, J. A. (1985). Writing knowing: Toward redefining the writing process.
   College English, 47(6), 620-628.

Sommers, J. (2011). Reflection revisited: The class collage. Journal of Basic Writ-
   ing, 30(1), 99-129.

Sommers, N. (1980). Strategies of student writers and experienced adult writers.
   College Composition and Communication, 31(4), 278-388.

Tobin, L. (1994). Introduction: How the writing process was born--and other
   conversion narratives. In L. Tobin & T. Newkirk (Eds.), Taking stock: The
   writing process movement in the 90s (pp. 1-14). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
   Cook Publishers-Heinemann.

Welch, N. (1997). Getting restless: Rethinking revision in writing instruction.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers-Heinemann

Yagelski, R. P. (1994). Who's afraid of subjectivity? The composing process and
   postmodernism or A student of Donald Murray enters the age of postmod-
   ernism. In L. Tobin & T. Newkirk (Eds.), Taking stock: The writing process
   movement in the 90s (pp. 203-217). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Pub-
   lishers-Heinemann.

APPENDIX: RADICAL REVISION ASSIGNMENT SHEET

Assignment #2 (Radical Revision)

What's Expected?

    For this assignment, please produce a radical revision of Paper #1. This re-
vision will count as a separate assignment. For example, let's suppose that for
paper #1 I've written an essay about my most influential teacher, my high school
11th grade English teacher. I could continue to work on that paper (Assignment
#1), telling some new stories about my experiences that show the reader why I
hold the opinion that I do. For Assignment #2, however, I might transform that
essay into an editorial for the journal that I edit in hopes that it would influ-
ence teachers, I might build on it by interviewing some of my old classmates to
see what they think about our old teacher, I could limit my topic by focusing
entirely on a single interaction I'd had with my teacher as I wrote a major term
paper, or I could switch the essay into a third-person description of his teaching
prowess. Any one of those four papers would be sufficiently different to count
as a radical revision while still being recognizably about the same specific topic,
my old English teacher, so I'd now have two different papers on a closely related

                                                                                                 303
Sommers

topic. In your case, you'll have to pick either Asst #1 or Asst #2 for a final grade
just before our midterm break.

    For suggestions on how to transform your first paper into something suffi-
ciently new to count as Assignment #2, check the Radical Revision Powerpoint.
The genre for this paper is up to you: essay, letter, diary, editorial, film critique,
etc.

    Length requirement: 3 or more pages
Memo #2 (250 words)

      1. How is this paper radically revised from your original paper? Why did
         you select this approach instead of another one? What other radical
         revisions did you consider?

      2. What works better in this paper than in the original paper? What
         doesn't work as well? Why? What genre is this paper and has that
         changed from your first paper?

      3. What is your purpose in writing this paper? That's another way of
         asking, "What are your readers supposed to get out of reading your
         draft?"

      4. What questions do you have for me about your draft? (Remember: No
         yes/no questions ... )

304
CONTRIBUTORS

Jean Bessette is an Assistant Professor at the University of Vermont, where she
teaches rhetoric and writing courses that address issues in gender and sexuality,
historiography, and multimodality. Her essays have appeared in Rhetoric Society
Quarterly and College Composition and Communication.

Patricia Webb Boyd is an Associate Professor at Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona. Her work has appeared in College English and Computers and
Composition.

Daniel Collins is an Associate Professor at Manhattan College, where he teaches
courses in composition and composition theory. He also directs the Center for
Excellence in Learning and Teaching.

Kim M. Davis is an English faculty member at Oakland Community College,
where she serves as a coordinator in the school's College Readiness Division. Her
work on critical approaches to the teaching of writing includes a contribution
to the edited collection Activism and Rhetoric: Theories and Contexts for Political
Engagement (In S. Kahn & J. Lee (Eds.), 2011, New York: Routledge).

Peter Elbow is Professor of English Emeritus at UMass Amherst. He directed
the Writing Program there and earlier at SUNY Stony Brook, and taught at
various colleges. He recently published Vernacular Eloquence: What Speech Can
Bring to Writing (2012, New York: Oxford University Press).

Roseanne Gatto is an Associate Professor with the Institute for Writing Studies
at St. John's University. She earned her doctorate in composition and rhetoric
at Indiana University of Pennsylvania in 2011. Her research interests include
archival research methods and social justice in composition/rhetoric.

Eric Leake is an Assistant Professor of English at Texas State University, where
he teaches rhetorical theory and composition pedagogy. His research focuses on
empathy and nonrational rhetorics.

Nancy Mack is a Professor of English at Writing at Wright State University,
where she teaches undergraduate courses for preservice teachers, as well as grad-
uate courses in composition theory, memoir, and multigenre writing. Her publi-
cations include articles in College English, JAC, Pedagogy, The Writing Instructor,
Pretext, Teaching in the Two Year College, and English Journal. She edited a special
issue on Bullying for the English Journal.

                                                                                                 305
Contributors

Thomas Newkirk is a Professor of English at the University of New Hampshire,
where he teaches writing and directs the New Hampshire Literacy Institutes, a
program for teachers now in its 33rd year. He has written on literacy at all levels,
most recently, The Art of Slow Reading (2012, Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann).

Derek Owens is Vice Provost of Undergraduate Education at St. John's Univer-
sity, where he directs the Institute for Writing Studies. He is author of Memory's
Wake, Composition and Sustainability (Teaching for a Threatened Generation), and
Resisting Writings (And the Boundaries of Composition).

Anthony Petruzzi received his Ph.D. in Rhetoric and Composition from the
University of Connecticut. He was the Director of the Writing Assessment Pro-
gram at UMASS Boston, where he taught courses in Rhetoric and Composition.
A former Fulbright Scholar in Turin Italy, Dr. Petruzzi is the author of several
articles in Hermeneutics, Rhetoric and Composition, and Writing Assessment.

Lea Povozhaev earned her Ph.D. in 2014 from Kent State University. She re-
searches medical rhetoric, and her scholarship appears in Rhetoric Review. Her
memoir When Russia Came to Stay was published in 2012. Currently, her work
with narrative weds her passion for writing and healing and its various manifes-
tations in her creative, spiritual, and academic writing.

Tara Roeder is an Associate Professor with the Institute for Writing Studies
at St. John's University. She earned her doctorate in English from the CUNY
Graduate Center in 2014. Her research focuses on feminist theory and women's
memoir; non-oedipal psychoanalytic theory and pedagogy; and queer theory
and pedagogy.

Hannah J. Rule is an Assistant Professor of Rhetoric and Composition at Uni-
versity of South Carolina where she teaches courses in first-year writing and
writing pedagogy. Her research, which focuses on the sensory and material di-
mensions of writing and reading processes, has appeared in Composition Forum
and Computers and Composition Online.

Sheri Rysdam is Assistant Professor of Basic Composition at Utah Valley Univer-
sity. In addition to her scholarship on strategies for teacher response to student
writing, her publications are on the rhetoric of political economy, issues surround-
ing contingent faculty, and the impact of social class in the composition classroom.

David Seitz is a Professor of Composition and Rhetoric at Wright State Uni-
versity, where he teaches writing courses, rhetorical theory, composition and lit-
eracy studies, and ethnography. He has published Elements of Literacy with Julie
Lindquist, and Who Can Afford Critical Consciousness?: Practicing a Pedagogy of

306
                                                                                                 Contributors

Humility, in addition to articles in Pedagogy, College English, and Composition
Studies and other book chapters.
Jeff Sommers is an Associate Professor of English at West Chester University.
He is editor of Teaching English in the Two-Year College and 2012 winner of NC-
TE's Nell Braddock Service Award.
Scott Wagar received his Ph.D. in Composition and Rhetoric from Miami Uni-
versity, where he teaches courses in rhetoric and writing. His research examines
composition theory and pedagogy as well as the rhetoric of contemporary spir-
ituality.
Chris Warnick is an Associate Professor at the College of Charleston, where
he teaches courses in first-year writing, writing in the disciplines, and literacy
studies. His research has appeared in The Journal of Basic Writing and Across
the Disciplines, and he is among the founding editors of the journal Literacy in
Composition Studies.
Maja Wilson is the author of Rethinking Rubrics in Writing Assessment (2006,
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann) which won the 2007 James Britton Award.
She has taught high school English, college composition, and literacy methods
courses for pre-service and practicing teachers.

                                                                                                 307
CRITICAL EXPRESSIVISM

Critical Expressivism: Theory and Practice in the Composition Classroom is an
ambitious attempt to re-appropriate intelletual territory that has more often
been charted by its detractors than by its proponents. Indeed, as Peter Elbow
observes in his contribution to this volume, "As far as I can tell, the term `ex-
pressivist' was coined and used only by people who wanted a word for people
they disapproved of and wanted to discredit." The editors and contributors to
this collection invite readers to join them in a new conversation, one informed
by "a belief that the term expressivism continues to have a vitally important
function in our field."

Tara Roeder is an Associate Professor with the Institute for Writing Stud-
ies at St. John's University. She earned her doctorate in English from the
CUNY Graduate Center in 2014. Her research focuses on feminist theory
and women's memoir; non-oedipal psychoanalytic theory and pedagogy;
and queer theory and pedagogy.

Roseanne Gatto is an Associate Professor with the Institute for Writing
Studies at St. John's University. She earned her doctorate in composition
and rhetoric at Indiana University of Pennsylvania in 2011. Her research
interests include archival research methods and social justice in composi-
tion/rhetoric.

Perspectives on Writing         W
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse

Fort Collins, CO 80523-1052
http://wac.colostate.edu

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 29621
w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-1-64215-057-5
