       DESIGN
DISCOURSE

Composing and Revising
Programs in Professional

      and Technical Writing

                                 Edited by
                           David Franke

                                 Alex Reid
                     Anthony DiRenzo
DESIGN DISCOURSE:
COMPOSING AND REVISING
PROGRAMS IN PROFESSIONAL
AND TECHNICAL WRITING
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editor, Mike Palmquist

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print
editions. The publishers and the Series editor are teachers and researchers of
writing, committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate.
We see the opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing
knowledge. And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means
for all to articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment
of literacy.

Other Books in the Series

Charles Bazerman and David R. Russell, Writing Selves/Writing Societies (2003)
Gerald P. Delahunty and James Garvey, The English Language: from Sound to

    Sense (2010)
Charles Bazerman, Adair Bonini, and Débora Figueiredo (Eds.), Genre in a

    Changing World (2009)
DESIGN DISCOURSE:
COMPOSING AND REVISING
PROGRAMS IN PROFESSIONAL
AND TECHNICAL WRITING

Edited by
David Franke
Alex Reid
Anthony Di Renzo

The WAC Clearinghouse
wac.colostate.edu
Fort Collins, Colorado
Parlor Press
www.parlorpress.com
Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523
Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621

© 2010 David Franke, Alex Reid, and Anthony Di Renzo. This work is released under a Cre-
ative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States License.

ISBN 978-0-97270-234-8 (pdf) | 978-1-64215-110-7 (epub) | 978-1-60235-165-3 (pbk.)

DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348

Produced in the United States of America

                             Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication

Design discourse : composing and revising programs in professional and technical writing /
   edited by David Franke, Alex Reid, Anthony DiRenzo.
   p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-60235-165-3 (pbk.: alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-60235-166-0 (hardcover: alk.

   paper) -- ISBN 978-0-97270-234-8 (adobe ebook) -- 978-1-64215-110-7 (epub)
1. English language--Rhetoric--Study and teaching (Higher)--United States. 2. Academic

   writing--Study and teaching (Higher)--United States. 3. Technical writing--Study and
   teaching (Higher)--United States. 4. Writing centers--Administration. I. Franke, David, 1960-
   II. Reid, Alex, 1969- III. DiRenzo, Anthony, 1960-
PE1405.U6D47 2010
808'.0420711--dc22

                                                2010001091

Copyeditor: Annabelle Bertram
Designer: David Doran
Series Editor: Mike Palmquist

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted by Colorado
State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as well as resources for
teachers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in digital format for free down-
load at wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and multime-
dia formats. This book is available in paperback, cloth, and Adobe eBook formats from Parlor
Press on the World Wide Web at www.parlorpress.com. For submission information or to find
out about Parlor Press publications, write to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson,
South Carolina 29621, or e-mail editor@parlorpress.com.
This volume is dedicated to all those who are delighted by the
study, teaching, and practice of writing.
Contents

Preface                                                                  ix

Composing                                                                3

1 The Great Instauration: Restoring Professional and

Technical Writing to the Humanities                                      5

Anthony Di Renzo

2 Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started:

(Mis)understanding the Naming of a Professional Writing Minor            19

Michael Knievel, Kelly Belanger, Colin Keeney, Julianne Couch,

and Christine Stebbins

3 Composing a Proposal for a Professional / Technical Writing Program  41
    W. Gary Griswold

4 Disciplinary Identities: Professional Writing,

Rhetorical Studies, and Rethinking "English"                             63

Brent Henze, Wendy Sharer, and Janice Tovey

Revising                                                                 87

5 Smart Growth of Professional Writing Programs:

Controlling Sprawl in Departmental Landscapes                            89

Diana Ashe and Colleen A. Reilly

6 Curriculum, Genre and Resistance: Revising Identity in a Professional

Writing Community                                                        113

David Franke

7 Composing and Revising the Professional Writing Program

at Ohio Northern University: A Case Study                                131

Jonathan Pitts

                                                                         vii
Contents

Minors, Certificates, Engineering                                            151

      8 Certificate Programs in Technical Writing: Through Sophistic Eyes 153
          Jim Nugent

      9 Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications

          Minor: A Multidisciplinary Approach                                171

          Carla Kungl and S. Dev Hathaway

      10 Reinventing Audience through Distance                               189

          Jude Edminster and Andrew Mara

      11 Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

          into a Canadian School of Engineering                              203

          Anne Parker

      12 English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics                      219

          Brian D. Ballentine

Futures                                                                      241

      13 The Third Way: PTW and the Liberal Arts in the

          New Knowledge Society                                              243

          Anthony Di Renzo

      14 The Write Brain: Professional Writing in the

          Post-Knowledge Economy                                             254

          Alex Reid

Post-Scripts by Veteran Program Designers                                    275

      15 A Techné for Citizens: Service-Learning,

          Conversation, and Community                                        277

          James Dubinsky

      16 Models of Professional Writing / Technical Writing Administration:

          Reflections of a Serial Administrator at Syracuse University       297

          Carol Lipson

      Biographical Notes                                                     317

viii
Preface

         David Franke

         This book grew out of the challenges of starting and sustaining a Profes-
sional and Technical Writing program at the state college where Alex Reid and
I were hired (nearby, co-editor Anthony Di Renzo began his program at Ithaca
College in New York a few years before us). We found ourselves building our
program at the intersection of several academic and semi-academic discourses--
rhetoric, English, new media, business, publishing, composition and others.
We had plenty of theory from these fields and personal experience as students,
teachers, writers, and freelancers. Yet as we established our identity as a major,
we found that our interactions with other departments (especially English), our
entanglement with the long-standing academic tensions between "liberal" and
"vocational" education, the demands of staying abreast of new technology, the
way our resources and students were distributed across many disciplines--all
these pressures and others combined in unexpected ways, presenting us with a
bit of a paradox in that we were compelled to make sense of the whole while we
struggled with the day-to-day work of running a new program; simultaneously,
most day-to-day decisions depended on a sense of our whole--our mission,
rhythms, audiences, and strengths. Seen from a purely analytical perspective,
what we were trying to do seemed impossible.

         But of course it wasn't impossible. Our experience beginning a PTW
program at the State University of New York at Cortland was typical in many
ways. The undergraduate program we were hired to bring to fruition, like many
others, was simply hard to define, lacking a deep sense of tradition that English
and even rhetoric programs often enjoy. Our program was defined more by what
it was not than what it was: not literature, not journalism, not composition. De-
spite this, the program grew, in part because we were able to invent an attractive
curriculum, and our success introduced a new problem in that we were quickly
understaffed: we had only three Professional and Technical Writing faculty in an
English department of 50-odd full-time and part-time faculty. The demands on
the three of us, all in new jobs, were sometimes intimidating. Actually, they were
often overwhelming, as several authors in this volume have also experienced in
their own schools. In front, we met the challenge of teaching new classes. At our
back was an avalanche of paperwork. Struggling to keep moving forward, we
found ourselves grasping for information and models. Like any academic in a
new situation, we depended on our research skills first, and started reading.1 The
WPA (Writing Program Administrator) listerv (http://lists.asu.edu/archives/

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.1.1  ix
Design Discourse

wpa-l.html) gave us valuable clues to how writing programs run on a day-to-
day basis, though its focus is of course more on Freshman English. National
conferences, especially ATTW (Association of Teachers of Technical Writing)
and CPTSC (Council on Programs in Technical and Scientific Communica-
tion), provided invaluable information about internships, key courses, recent
theory--and at these conferences we found something the readings did not pro-
vide: warm, anecdotal, human stories. I sought first-person narrative accounts
that presented the PTW administrator's logic and commitments, a constructive,
sustained, intelligent set of discussions in relation to which we could shape our
own history. To complete and understand our own program, we needed reflective
stories that demonstrated and reflected on the process of making key, high-stakes
decisions in the unfamiliar situation of running a professional writing program.

         This narrative gap is what prompted my colleague Alex Reid and me
to put out a call for papers that would, we hoped, assemble a community of
narratives. Alex and I asked that PTW curriculum designers discuss how they
composed and revised their PTW sites. We emphasized that we were looking
for case studies in first person that revealed how designers made sense of and
organized their particular location--in other words, how they historicized their
work. Their stories would reveal the praxis of those in PTW programs work-
ing simultaneously as both teachers and administrators, often from the margins
of English, Engineering, Composition/Rhetoric, and on the line between the
liberal arts and professional schools. The focus was not to be pedagogical, but
architectural, with an emphasis on design problems.

         In its final form, each of the essays was to examine the complexities of
developing, sustaining, or simply proposing non-literature curricula, from entire
programs to individual classes. The authors were generally new assistant professors
when these essays were written, and their contributions reflect an acute sensitivity
to the practical contexts within which they worked--the political, historical, and
financial realities--as well as a sense of vitality, a sense that something untested
and unique could emerge and succeed at their respective locations. In the best
pragmatic tradition, these essays explain how to both picture and perform a task,
in this case the task of developing communities and curricula in PTW, with the
belief that other designers might benefit from their narratives.

         We experimented in this volume. Our always-supportive publisher
Mike Palmquist encouraged us to go ahead with a form of peer review that
helped us make the entire process as useful as possible to the authors and you,
the book's audience. After outside readers gave the thumbs up to the book pro-
posal, we solicited the essays. Alex Reid and I wrote responses to each essay we
accepted and mailed our comments back to the author. Simultaneously, each es-
say was mailed to another contributor in the book for further response and com-

x
                                                                                                         Preface

ments. The results were strongly positive. Invested in the volume, peers generally
commented critically and generously on one another's work and appreciated the
additional feedback they received while revising. Doing so also helped contribu-
tors minimize overlap with other essays and gain a better picture of the volume
as a whole. Conscious that many of our contributors are new to the field, we also
invited several well-known figures in the field to read a grouping of essays and
write "Post-Script" pieces based on their experience as program designers. Michael
Dubinsky and Carol Lipson, experienced members of the field, graciously agreed
to reflect on their careers in a way that gives context to the essays collected here.

         Many of the articles collected here address what Robert Connors calls
the "two-culture split" between the art and science of writing. That is, many of
us struggle with practical answers to a question asked in various ways: are we to
encourage insight or technique, liberal or vocational education, good citizens or
good workers? This question is of course addressed by our theory, but has to be
confronted also in even the most bureaucratic decisions about program require-
ments, a semester's course offerings, or even class sizes. This tension is also pres-
ent every time a PTW faculty member sits down to write for publication. What
balance does one provide for the reader between theoretical speculation and
practical orientation? To put it another way, when we write for our colleagues in
PTW, are we to provide interesting questions or interesting answers, the prob-
lematics of a course of inquiry or the results of a course of action?

         The chapters here provide both, taking a stance that bridges the two
cultures and often explicitly addresses the tensions between them. Faculty un-
der the gun to organize a program do not have the luxury of waiting for the
conclusion of big-picture arguments about the history, nature, and status of
the field; likewise, short-term best-guess decisions won't sustain a program for
very many semesters. Bringing together problem posing and problem solving is
exactly what a program designer must do in order to begin and sustain his or her
PTW program. This both/and thinking has direct application to the students'
learning. The PTW programs here refuse to choose between teaching students
to reflect or teaching them the skills to "succeed" - with "success" a term that
teachers tend to think about even more critically than their students.

         The 16 essays of Design Discourse are arranged in five sections. The first
four chapters are grouped together under the heading of "Composing." Anthony
Di Renzo's "The Great Instauration" addresses the practical and rhetorical chal-
lenges of setting up a PTW program in the humanities, addressing the chronic
tension between liberal and practical arts. Drawing from Francis Bacon's Ad-
vancement of Learning in the opening essay, Di Renzo provides a theoretical and
ethical framework in which "technical" subjects can serve as sites for the devel-
opment and improvement of "social good." Di Renzo (like Bacon) appreciates

                                                                                                   xi
Design Discourse

the practical uses of knowledge, and eloquently turns Bacon's insights to prag-
matic advice for those facing the challenge of beginning and beyond. Turning
then to the concerns at a specific site, collaboratively written "Starts, False Starts,
and Getting Started: (Mis)understanding the Naming of a Professional Writing
Minor" (Michael Knievel, Kelly Belanger, Colin Keeney, Julianne Couch, and
Christine Stebbins) historicizes the process of naming their minor as it unfolds
at their particular institution over several decades. By tracing the various impli-
cations of their program's name, they present a nuanced study of how various
stakeholders choose to interpret--and misinterpret--their program. They pres-
ent the process of naming as an inquiry, guided by a set of ethical and practical
questions, into their identity and audience: "are these expectations [raised by the
program's name] at odds with each other? Which expectations can realistically
be met given resources like faculty, funding, and goodwill?"

         Two other articles in this first section discuss the process of designing in
PTW in the face of serious challenges. As W. Gary Griswold puts it in "Compos-
ing a Proposal for a Professional / Technical Writing Program," writing the RFP
(Request For Proposals or grant) for his program was a matter of "one week and
five pages." A case study of the under-represented (and over-feared) process of
submitting a grant application, Griswold's essay includes the original request for
proposals and his response.

         Completing this section, Brent Henze, Wendy Sharer and Janice Tovey's
piece on "Disciplinary Identities: Professional Writing, Rhetorical Studies, and
Rethinking `English'" narrates their attempt to establish their proposed program
in Rhetorical Studies and Professional Writing. The proposal itself was not well
received. As they put it, they had inadvertently "thrown open the floodgates of
disagreement about what a degree in `English' means." Their candid narrative
examines with equanimity not only the choices they made, but also what they
might have done differently, making it useful to program designers who simi-
larly have to traverse disputed academic territory.

         "Revising," the second section of Design Discourse presents strategies
for sustaining PTW programs. In "Smart Growth of Professional Writing Pro-
grams: Controlling Sprawl in Departmental Landscapes," Diana Ashe & Col-
leen A. Reilly develop an extended metaphor that draws on "systems thinking"
from ecotheory and "smart growth" from city planning, using these schools of
thought to guide their program's development. Their model promotes interde-
pendence, change, and diversification as key principles that shape "sustainable
and resilient programs." Presenting their attempt to strike a balance between
specialization or succumbing to "the academic equivalent of urban sprawl," Ashe
and Reilly's essay shows how a program can be both dynamic and principled as
it develops an identity over time and in concert with various academic commu-

xii
                                                                                                         Preface

nities. My own essay studies change in our undergraduate PTW program in a
small New York college. I draw from genre theory, which argues that established
types of written texts, though they may appear "frozen" or inert, are in fact pow-
erful and dynamic forces shaping a community. Yet I began the program with a
fairly naïve understanding of how the curriculum-as-genre, as a published docu-
ment, would function. I describe learning to work with that curriculum as an "en-
abling constraint," one that pushed us to evolve while also restraining our growth.
Change is also the theme of Jonathan Pitts' "Composing and Revising the Pro-
fessional Writing Program at Ohio Northern University: A Case Study. Charged
with developing, sustaining, and creating coherence for his nascent major, Pitts
shows how he deliberately planned for change without sacrificing coherence. His
chapter includes the specific course offerings in his program and a vivid narrative
of his experiences; it concludes with snapshot essays of several graduates from his
program. In "Foundations for Teaching Technical Writing," Sherry Burgus Little
explains that the "design and development" of certificate programs "crystallizes"
the pervasive and long-standing debate over the ends of education (283). They
inevitably raise questions about what sorts of knowledge is essential for students
to do their work as PTW professionals.

         The chapters in the third section of this book, "Minors, Certificates,
Engineering," certainly confirm Little's insight. Though smaller than four-year
undergraduate programs, these more concentrated sites introduce significant ar-
guments to this volume, posing special problems for the program administrator.
First in this section, Jim Nugent's essay "Certificate Programs in Technical Writ-
ing: Through Sophistic Eyes," the result of a survey of 62 certificate-granting
sites, finds contemporary programs value "situated and contingent" knowledge
that is both flexible, reflective, and socially engaged. Carla Kungl and S. Dev
Hathaway present an adroit response to the pressure to professionalize in "Ship-
pensburg University's Technical/Professional Communications Minor: A Mul-
tidisciplinary Approach." Recognizing the pressures on academic institutions to
develop a "practical" writing degree, but lacking the resources or students to sus-
tain a full-fledged program, they show how an interdisciplinary minor can gain
a foothold. Their essay reveals how they juggle competing educational goals in
their college, creating a "career-enhancing program for students while maintain-
ing a meaningful liberal arts backdrop." Similarly, Jude Edminster and Andrew
Mara in "Reinventing Audience through Distance" discuss the development of a
program tailored to their situation, one with a large number of international stu-
dents yet lacking local high-technology jobs. Their creative solution is to create
a graduate certificate program that meshes with the graduate programs in Scien-
tific and Technical Communication at Bowling Green State University. Rather
than trying to prepare students for every specific technical task, these faculty

                                                                                                  xiii
Design Discourse

teach their students to make decisions situationally. They draw from Thomas
Kent and post-colonialist theory to articulate their approach, one in which stu-
dents learn to "participate in meaning-making and to recognize their role in
meaning-making."

         The relationship between the humanities and the sciences is developed
in Anne Parker's reflective essay, "Introducing a Technical Communication
Course Into a Canadian School of Engineering: A Case Study of the Professional
and Academic Contexts." There, she discusses developing a coherent and persua-
sive model for teaching writing that draws on the habits of thought internalized
by engineering. Holding a position on the faculty in the Engineering school, she
presents working as an "insider" to effect change there. Her chapter tacitly traces
strategies for dealing with a complex and gendered institutional context. She
also gives a helpful and detailed discussion of how to keep various elements of
her course vital and interactive: her team, the collaborative process, and product.
Also concerned with Engineering, Michael Ballentine of Case Western Univer-
sity shows us a successful approach for developing a writing pedagogy for engi-
neers at his university. Dealing both with the graduate practicum course and the
particular course for engineers that it prepares teachers for (over 350 students
take it each year!), his "English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics" dis-
cusses the political and practical negotiations necessary to embed successfully an
engineering program into an English department.

         The penultimate section of the book, "Futures," is composed of two
forward-thinking essays: "The Third Way: PTW and the Liberal Arts in the New
Knowledge Society" by Anthony Di Renzo and "The Write Brain: Professional
Writing in the Post-Knowledge Economy" by Alex Reid. Di Renzo's essay ar-
gues that PTW programs are a much-needed bridge for educational institutions
torn between traditional liberal arts educational values and new pre-professional
imperatives. PTW can provide an urgently needed social service by graduating
rhetors with the know-how and eloquence to communicate between the vari-
ous professions and disciplines, adept at responding to the demands of the new
knowledge economy. Di Renzo's essay is essentially promoting a new image of
what an "educated person" might look like, free of an affected disdain for world-
ly affairs or for intellectual play, and he argues persuasively that PTW programs
are an apt site in which to begin education's "third way."

         Likewise, Alex Reid's piece entitled "The Write Brain: Professional Writ-
ing in a Post-Knowledge Economy" confirms the centrality of technology for all
PTW programs, placing it at the intersection of human and technical concerns.
That is, Reid advocates for developing technical educational programs that draw
from a vast range of intellectual and creative skills. He argues that several influ-
ences compel PTW programs to re-think their programs: the "knowledge econ-

xiv
                                                                                                          Preface

omy" that has gone "offshore"; the consequent need for writers with rhetorical
and critical skills; the rise of new Web 2.0 technologies which demand we teach
students how to think "in" new media; the linked demands that Web 2.0 puts on
us as faculty to teach and use such media to build knowledge webs and the like
(Reid mentions wikis, blogs, and podcasts along with del.icio.us and flickr.com).
His is not a repudiation of the humanistic, rhetorical tradition, but a reinscrip-
tion of it (or "remediation" as Jay David Bolter might have it), accomplished in
new media. Reid gives us a conceptual and pragmatic sketch of how these sea
changes can and will affect our working lives in PTW programs.

         Finally, in "Post Scripts" we have reflections from two experienced pro-
gram designers, Carol Lipson of Syracuse University and Jim Dubinsky of Virgin-
ia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Dubinsky's "A Techné for Citizens:
Service-Learning, Conversation, and Community" reflects on the decade-long
process of creating an undergraduate PTW curriculum that is both practical and
reflective, rewarding not only for the student but also for the student's communi-
ty. He lays out the choices, both theoretical and practical, of designing a program
that supports constructive civic action. The goal here is setting up students who
can work with others on common problems, a harmony he likens to a form of
reverence. Developing detailed and workable solutions to common problems is
both a humanistic and technical commitment in Dubinsky's program, articulated
clearly in this helpful reflective essay. Whereas Jim Dubinsky's essay addresses the
process of getting up to interstate speed, Carol Lipson's reflective essay "Models
of Professional Writing/Technical Writing Administration: Reflections of a Serial
Administrator at Syracuse University" traces her journey through several differ-
ent incarnations of professional and technical writing, stretching nearly three
decades, at Syracuse University in New York. Her experience clearly contrasts
two paradigms. In the first, program leaders are segregated and pursue somewhat
independent paths in a clearly defined hierarchy; in the second, the leaders of
various initiatives are (ideally) peers who share a complex and intertwined set of
partially overlapping agendas. Hierarchy is less explicit, if not absent. Lipson's
essay is candid about the complex institutional and administrative challenges
that faced her as a PTW program designer, and gives a trajectory of her academic
career which new PTW leaders will find useful and interesting.

         We believe new program designers engaged in the process of sowing and
cultivating their own programs will find in this volume's narratives something
parallel to a reflective community, one that can help them develop their own pro-
gram's identity, habits, and goals. We believe PTW programs can and do function
at the intersection of the practical and the abstract, the human and the technical.
It is our hope that the essays reveal these binaries working dialectically for the
better.

                                                                                                   xv
Design Discourse

                                notes

1 We found the following texts particularly helpful: Katherine Adams' A His-
tory of Professional Writing Instruction in American Colleges: Years of Acceptance,
Growth, and Doubt (Southern Methodist U.P., 1993); Teresa C. Kynell and Mi-
chael Moran's collection Three Keys to the Past: The History of Technical Commu-
nication (ATTW, 1999); New Essays in Technical and Scientific Communication:
Research, Theory, and Practice, edited by Paul Anderson, R. John Brockman, and
Carolyn Miller (Baywood, 1983); Katherine Staples and Cezar Ornatowski's
Foundations for Teaching Technical Communication: Theory, Practice, and Program
Design (ATTW, 1998); Coming of Age: The Advanced Writing Curriculum, edited
by Linda K. Shamoon, Rebecca Moore Howard, Sandra Jamieson and Robert A.
Schwegler (Boynton/Cook Heinemann, 2000).

                           works cited

Bolter, Jay David, Writing Space: Computers, Hypertext, and the Remediation of
   Print, Second Edition. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001.

Conners, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing in America."
   In Three Keys to the Past: The History of Technical Communication. Teresa C.
   Kynell and Michael G. Moran. Vol. 7 ATTW Contemporary Studies in Tech-
   nical Communication. Ablex: Stamford, CT., 1999. 173-195.

Little, Sherry Burges. "Designing Certificate Programs in Technical Writing." In
   Foundations for Teaching Technical Communication: Theory, Practice, and Pro-
   gram Design. Katherine Stapes and Cezar Ornatowski, eds. Vol. 1, ATTW
   Contemporary Studies in Technical Communication. Ablex: Greenwich, CT.,
   1997. 273-285.

xvi
DESIGN DISCOURSE:
COMPOSING AND REVISING
PROGRAMS IN PROFESSIONAL
AND TECHNICAL WRITING
composing
1 The Great Instauration: Restoring Professional and
  Technical Writing to the Humanities

   Anthony Di Renzo

"I hold every man a debtor to his profession; from which as men of course do seek to
receive countenance and profit, so ought they of duty to endeavor themselves, by way
of amends, to be a help and an ornament thereunto. This is performed in some degree
by the honest and liberal practice of a profession . . . ; but much more is performed if a
man be able to visit and strengthen the roots and foundation of the science itself."(546)

                                   - Sir Francis Bacon, "Preface," Maxims of the Law (1596)

         Perhaps Giambattista Vico was only half right when he proposed his cy-
clical theory of history. Besides returning to the same key ideas, civilizations tend
to suffer from the same nagging headaches.1 This is equally true, on a smaller
scale, of academic disciplines. They are defined less by their innovations than by
their recurring problems and dilemmas.

         This paradox certainly applies to professional and technical writing. At
the dawn of the new millennium, our discipline faces the same vexing questions
it confronted fifty years ago: Are we primarily practitioners and consultants or
scholars and teachers? Do we train or educate students? Should we situate our
practice in the classroom or the workplace? Is our subject closer to rhetoric and
communications or the natural and social sciences?

         These questions have become more urgent on college campuses, as pro-
fessional and technical writing undergoes another turn on Vico's spiral of his-
tory. The traditional liberal arts paradigm of higher education is being displaced
by a new emphasis on professional and technical training, and emerging PTW
programs--especially at small liberal arts colleges--find themselves caught in
the middle of the culture wars, simultaneously welcomed and resented, courted
and resisted. During this time of risk and opportunity, of breakdown and break-
through, what is our role and where is our place?

1. This article originally appeared in The Journal of Technical Writing and Communica-
tion, Vol. 32. No. 2 (Fall 2002). Reprinted with permission.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.01                                      5
Di Renzo

         The answer may lie in a Vicoan ricorso, a circling back to something old
to create something new---a turn-around that is also a turn-about. In the case
of professional and technical writing, this means again proposing that our prac-
tice is essential to the humanities. However, I am not simply repeating Carolyn
Miller's ideas, already twenty years old, for a more humanistic professional and
technical writing practice, much less updating Frank Aydelotte's humanities-
centered engineering curricula from the early twentieth century. Instead, taking
a cue from Beth Tebeaux's scholarship, I want to suggest returning to the instruc-
tional roots of our discipline by re-examining the educational ideas of one of its
founders, Sir Francis Bacon (1561-1626).

         As a scholar and a rhetorician, Francis Bacon straddled three worlds: the
literary and philosophical, the administrative and professional, and the scientific
and technical---the same mixed audience facing any proponent of professional/
technical writing in today's academy. But Bacon is our contemporary in more
important ways. Unlike most Renaissance humanists, he located the New Learn-
ing (what we now call the humanities) within the related contexts of scientific
discovery and invention and professional training and development. Conse-
quently, his proposed educational reforms challenged both the Scholastics, who
adhered to the cloistered ideal of the medieval university, and the Ciceronians,
who slavishly imitated models of classical rhetoric for imaginary audiences in
make-believe situations.

         In contrast, Bacon---a believer in public service and the via activa--
wanted to draw knowledge from and apply knowledge to the natural and social
world; and his great treatise, The Advancement of Learning (1605), later revised
and expanded as De Augmentis Scientiarum (1623), is a gigantic curricular blue-
print to achieve that end. True education, Bacon argues, should:

   · Enhance the professions to make them more ethical, more historically
        conscious, and more civic-minded.

   · Emphasize the material and political conditions of knowledge for the
        sake of concrete, pragmatic application in the real world.

   · Stress the rhetorical underpinnings of organizational and disciplinary
        discourse, both oral and written.

   · Study the media and technologies of science and communications to
        better government, to reform public and private institutions, and to im-
        prove quality of life.

         Bacon called his project the Great Instauration, the restoration of true
knowledge after centuries of obscurity and neglect, and it went beyond his
educational treatises to include his scientific, philosophical and literary works.

6
                                                                                       The Great Instauration

Updated and revised, Bacon's proposal can be a useful model for creating and
defending professional and technical writing programs within the humanities.

         To show how, let me gather some of Bacon's educational ideas from his
various writings and apply them to the five stages of undergraduate program
development: planning, implementation, mission, design and development, staff-
ing and administration. Following Bacon's example, I will use aphorisms, since
such maxims, he said, force a writer to distill abstract information into concrete
principles and to resist the kind of systematic, a priori thinking that shuts down
inquiry before one examines the facts.

        aphorisms for building ptw programs
            in the humanities and sciences

                                         Planning

"He that builds a fair house upon an ill seat, committeth himself to prison."(193)
                                     Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Building" from The Essays (1625)

   · To minimize the possibility of failure, construct your program on a solid
       foundation of research. Just because you build it, doesn't mean they will
       come, pace Kevin Costner. Before you draft a blueprint, do some basic
       marketing. If you already offer one or two basic PTW courses, study their
       enrollment patterns going back five years minimum and note how these
       classes fulfill the requirements of outside majors. If you start from scratch,
       interview departments in the natural and social sciences and the profes-
       sional schools, determine their academic and professional writing needs
       and curricular restrictions, and design fitting and responsive courses. These
       steps will prevent your field of dreams from becoming a bog of screams.

"There are in nature certain fountains of justice, whence all civil laws are derived but
as streams; and like as waters do take tinctures and tastes from the soils through which
they run, so do civil laws vary according to the regions and governments where they are
planted, though they proceed from the same fountain." (287)

                         Sir Francis Bacon, Book Two, The Advancement of Learning (1605)

                                                                                                    7
Di Renzo

   · Study the PTW programs of comparable schools, map and analyze pat-
       terns of staging and sequencing, then adapt and apply them to your own

       program. Use induction to discover the fundamental principles under-
       lying most PTW curricula. Generally, most have five stages, each with
       specific developmental goals and their corresponding courses. For illus-
       tration, the following table feature courses from the proposed PTW con-
       centration within Ithaca College's general BA in Writing:

stage           goal                              courses
1. Initiation
2. Orientation  Use first-year college            WRTG-16300
3. Application  writing to prepare for            Writing Seminar:
                professional writing.             Business
4. Reflection
                Teach the building blocks of      WRTG-16400
                professional and technical writ-  Writing Seminar:
                ing at the sophomore level.       Science

                                                  WRTG-21100
                                                  Writing for the
                                                  Workplace

                Develop and fine-tune skills      WRTG-21300
                through practice and              Technical Writing
                specialization at the lower
                junior level.                     WRTG-31100
                                                  Writing for the
                                                  Professions

                                                  WRTG-31300
                                                  Advanced Technical Writing

                                                  WRTG-31400
                                                  Science Writing

                                                  WRTG-31700
                                                  Proposals, Grants, and
                                                  Reports

                Frame discipline and practice     WRTG-3600
                through history, theory, and      Composition Theory
                rhetoric in upper junior- and
                senior-level seminars.            WRTG-41500
                                                  Senior Seminar (PTW)

8
                                        The Great Instauration

5. Action  Consult for or intern at an  WRTG-45000
           actual company.              Internship

         Significantly, these stages correspond to Bacon's four divisions of logic
and rhetoric in The Advancement of Learning: (1) inquiry and invention, (2)
judgment, (3) memory, (4) delivery.

"Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief use for delight, is in
privateness and retiring; for ornament is in discourses; and for ability, is in the judgment
and disposition of business." (209)

                                     Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Studies" from The Essays (1625)

· Be comprehensive. A hearty education, Bacon believed, should feed the
   three faculties of the human mind: reason, which sees patterns in the
   world, analyzes data, and posits general principles; memory, the mental
   storehouse of experienced events and material facts; and imagination,
   which channels and articulates the passions and makes intuitive leaps.
   Even professional and technical training, therefore, should include phi-
   losophy, history, and literature.

                                Implementation

"The ripeness or unripeness of the occasion . . . must ever be well weighed: and generally
it is good to commit the beginnings of all great actions to Argus with his hundred eyes,
and the ends to Briareus with his hundred hands, first to watch, then to speed." (125)

                                      Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Delays" from The Essays (1625)

· Although curricular planning should be slow and painstaking, implemen-
   tation should be relatively swift. Once you have proposed your program,
   you are obliged to deliver it. First, create a beachhead to cover your service
   component, to stake out future development, and to raise expectations.
   Begin with the nucleus of your projected curriculum, the core courses
   serving both your majors and outside students, then phase in more spe-
   cialized classes. Ideally, curricular sequencing should unfold like a paper
   flower in water.

                                                    9
Di Renzo

"As the births of living creatures at first are ill-shapen, so are all innovations, which are
the births of time." (132)

                                Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Innovations" from The Essays (1625)

   · Don't worry, however, if your program assumes a different shape and
       direction than your original proposal. Provided these changes are re-
       sponses to student and institutional need, they indicate evolution not
       devolution. Being audience-centered and market-oriented, PTW cur-
       ricula should be flexible and adaptive.

                                   Program Mission

"Expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of particulars, one by one; but the general
counsels, and the plots and marshalling of affairs come best from those that are learned."
(209)

                                     Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Studies" from The Essays (1625)

If your program is housed in the Humanities and Sciences, it should reflect lib-
eral arts values. Unlike PTW programs at polytechnics or research universities,
those at small liberal arts colleges should be dedicated less to technical specializa-
tion than to what Chase CEO Willard Butcher calls "applied humanities," using
the liberal arts to frame and to inform students' future careers (426). A broad
base of disciplines and a commitment to civics, Peter Drucker insists, are the
best foundation for young "knowledge workers" (5).

"They who have hitherto written upon laws were either philosophers or lawyers. The
philosophers advance many things that appear beautiful in discourse but lie out of the
road of use, whilst the lawyers, being bound and subject to the decrees of the laws pre-
vailing in their several countries, whether Roman or pontifical, have not their judgment
free, but write in fetters. But this task properly belongs to statesmen, who best under-
stand civil society, the good of the people, natural equity, the custom of the nations,
and the different forms of states; whence they are able to judge laws by principles and
precepts as well as natural justice and politics." (282)

                                   Sir Francis Bacon, Book 8, Ch. 3, De Augumentis (1623)

10
                                                                                       The Great Instauration

   · Always think socially and institutionally, not only in running your pro-
       gram but in teaching your students. Professional and technical writing
       occurs within a nexus of competing discourse communities (business,
       education, government, and non-profits), and program philosophy, class
       pedagogy, and curricular design should all reflect that reality. This can
       be as simple as integrating community service learning into first-year
       academic writing or as complicated as teaching the classical ideal of the
       citizen-orator to juniors and seniors.

"Exercises are to be framed to the life; that is to say, to work ability in that kind whereof
man in the course of action should have the most use." (118)

                   Sir Francis Bacon, "A Letter and Discourse to Sir Henry Savile" (1604)

   · Whatever its ideals, your program must provide students with marketable,
       transferable skills. Without this "real world" application, your curriculum
       will be useless.

                        Curricular Design and Development

"The marshalling and sequel of sciences and practices: Logic and Rhetoric should be
used and to be read after Poesy, History, and Philosophy. First exercise to do things well
and clean; after promptly and readily." (119)

                   Sir Francis Bacon, "A Letter and Discourse to Sir Henry Savile" (1604)

   · Provide your students with a clear curricular framework and a coherent
       disciplinary narrative from the very beginning. Such context will prevent
       lower-level courses from becoming too generic and upper-level courses
       from becoming too specialized.

"Reading maketh a full man; conference a ready man; and writing an exact man" (209)
                                     Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Studies" from The Essays (1625)

   · Students should progress from research and analysis, to dialogue and de-
       bate, to execution and evaluation. This curricular staging ultimately ben-

                                                                                                  11
Di Renzo

       efits all PTW students, whether they choose to become scholars or con-
       sultants in the field.

"The mechanical arts, having in them some breath of life, are continually growing and
becoming more perfect. As originally invented, they are commonly rude, clumsy, and
shapeless; afterwards, they acquire new powers and more commodious arrangements
and constructions . . . [till] they arrive at the ultimate perfection of which they are
capable. Philosophy and the intellectuals sciences, on the contrary, stand like statues,
worshiped and celebrated, but not moved or advanced." (8-9)

                                             Sir Francis Bacon, The Great Instauration (1620)

   · Stress tools, not rules. Since professional and technical writing is practice-
       driven and context-specific, shun all abstractions. Technology, document
       design, media dynamics, and institutional constraints should determine
       your program's curricular philosophy, not the other way around. "Pass
       from Vulcan to Minerva," Bacon advised (141). Move from praxis to the-
       ory. Never place theory before praxis. That, Bacon would say, is like build-
       ing a mansion from the roof down.

"Of the choice (because you mean the study of humanity), I think history the most, and
I had almost said of only use." (105)

                                        Sir Francis Bacon, "Advice to Fulke Greville" (1596)

   · Historicize your subject. That means more than teaching about the de-
       velopment of professional and technical writing. It means tracing the dis-
       cipline's roots back to classical rhetoric, studying the growth of various
       social institutions, and reviewing the evolution of different media and
       technologies. History provides your students with a formative narrative
       and connects your program to the humanities.

"Histories make men wise, poets witty, the mathematics subtle, natural philosophy deep,
moral [ethics] grave, logic and rhetoric able to content." (210)

                                     Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Studies" from The Essays (1625)

12
                                                                                       The Great Instauration

   · Use case studies to train your students. Just as young lawyers study past
       cases to learn legal precedent and to master the conventions and of the
       courtroom, young PTW practitioners should study past dossiers to learn
       documentation and to master the demands of the workplace. Case stud-
       ies are the ideal forum for argumentation and ethical speculation, where
       students can practice institutional and technological advocacy before
       multiple audiences.

"There is in human nature generally more of the fool than of the wise; and therefore
those faculties by which the foolish part of men's minds is taken are most potent." (94)

                                   Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Boldness" from The Essays (1625)

   · Be honest about the politics and absurdity of institutional writing. Most
       textbooks skirt this issue by presenting straightforward models and forms
       and ideal collaborative situations. Your program must address the rever-
       sals, rivalries, and irrational thinking that characterize most writing proj-
       ects and suggest effective countermeasures. At the very least, coping strate-
       gies. If you send lambs to the corporate sheering floor, you are guilty of
       fleecing yourself.

"For it is a rule in the doctrine of delivery, that every science which comports not with
anticipations and prejudices must seek the assistance of similes and allusions." (175)

                                     Sir Francis Bacon, Book 6, Ch. 2, De Augmentis (1623)

   · Stress the finer points of style and persuasion. Arrangement, formatting,
       even striking visuals are not enough to create a winning presentation.
       Sometimes the telling phrase, the striking metaphor, the provocative anal-
       ogy carry the day.

"It is a trivial grammar-school text, but yet worthy a wise man's consideration. Question
was asked of Demosthenes. What was the chief part of an orator? He answered, Action.
[Delivery.] What next? Action. What next again? Action." (94)

                                   Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Boldness" from The Essays (1625)

                                                                                                  13
Di Renzo

   · Aim for results. "Rhetoric," Bacon claimed, "applies Reason to the Imagi-
       nation to better move the Will" (238). An effective PTW curriculum will
       value real-life effectiveness over textbook correctness, which is why you
       must include credit-bearing internships and consultancies. Seek program
       feedback, therefore, from potential employers in industry and technology,
       as well as college administrators, promoters, and admissions officers. And
       whether or not Bacon actually wrote Shakespeare's plays, make this line
       from Act 3, Scene 2 of Coriolanus your motto:"In such business action is
       eloquence." (79).

                             Staffing and Administration

"They that have the best eyes are not always the best lapidaries [jewelers]; and according
to the proverb the greatest clerks are not always the wisest men." (105)

                                        Sir Francis Bacon, "Advice to Fulke Greville" (1596)

   · Staff courses according to experience and expertise, not seniority and ad-
       vanced degrees. This concept seems heretical but makes the best sense and
       does the most justice to both students and subjects. A full- or part-time
       instructor who worked for five years as a technical and promotional writer
       in a county hospital is better qualified to teach medical writing than an
       assistant or associate professor who graduated from RPI. Scholars can sup-
       ply practitioners with outside readings, but practitioners cannot supply
       scholars with inside knowledge.

"Surely ever medicine is an innovation, and he that will not apply new remedies must
expect new evils. For time is the greatest innovator, and if time of course alter things to
the worse, and wisdom and counsel not alter them to the better, what shall be the end?"
(132)

                                Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Innovations" from The Essays (1625)

   · Anticipate change and plan for contingencies. To keep your program open
       and flexible, be prepared to alter its focus and sequencing and to amend,
       combine, or jettison courses in response to market need and student de-
       mand. On the subject of adaptability, Bacon loved to quote Machiavelli:
       "If you can change your nature with times and circumstances, your for-
       tune will not change" (68).

14
                                                                                       The Great Instauration

"The proceeding upon somewhat conceived in writing doth for the most part facilitate
dispatch; for though it should be wholly rejected, yet that negative is more pregnant of
direction than an indefinite, as ashes are more generative than dust." (135)

                                   Sir Francis Bacon, "Of Dispatch" from The Essays (1625)

   · Compost your failures to fertilize future projects. Recycle rejected courses
       as special seminars. Transplant background material from an aborted pro-
       posal into a program report. Boilerplate unread course descriptions when
       submitting a catalog copy. Waste nothing.

"Just as some putrid substances like musk or civet yield the best scent, so base and sordid
details sometimes provide excellent light and information." (122)

                  Sir Francis Bacon, Book One, Aphorism 120, The New Organon (1620)

   · Even when things stink, welcome confusion and disappointment. If you
       can bear the temporary din of frustration, your program's elements even-
       tually will harmonize. In science as in music, Bacon said, dissonance is
       necessary to fine-tune an instrument.

A Baconian approach to curricular design and implementation offers three dis-
tinct advantages to emerging PTW programs at small liberal arts colleges. First,
Bacon's educational principles and practices make a convincing apologia for
most English departments and writing programs. The Lord Chancellor is the
best lawyer to plead your case because he appeals to so many different audiences.
Traditional humanists will be pleased to see how Bacon's ideas about professional
and technical writing fit historically within their own disciplines. Theorists and
New Historians will respect his materialism and praxis, while department chairs
and program directors will appreciate his shrewdness and practicality.

         Second, Bacon's pragmatism and social conscience wed humanistic edu-
cation to public policy and public works. As both a legislator and a jurist, James
Spedding observes, Bacon "could imagine like a poet and execute like a clerk of
works," qualities that will appeal beyond a department's curriculum committee
and will engage college administrators and representatives from research and
industry (72). Bacon was committed to achieving concrete results in the real
world. His summum bonum was the social good. Indeed, as J. G. Crowther ex-

                                                                                                  15
Di Renzo

plains, Bacon believed "the most determined statesmen are those who are deeply
versed in social philosophy, and are engaged in carrying out policies based on a
profound study of the principles of nature and society" (44). Small, liberal arts
colleges should adapt this philosophy in their humanities-based PTW programs,
using professional and technical training to bridge the gap between the quad and
the commons.

         Last, Bacon's radical rethinking of the sciences and the professions can
inspire programs to re-imagine their pedagogy while providing the necessary
theoretical scaffolding to paint the big picture. The loam of historical research
can provide rich soil to grow good programs. Bacon, an avid gardener and land-
scaper, makes this analogy in Book 6, Chapter 2 of De Augmentis Scientiarum:

   For it is in arts as in trees--if a tree were to be used, no matter for the root,
   but if it were to be transplanted, it is a surer way to take the root than the
   slips. So the transplantation now practiced of the sciences makes a great show,
   as it were, of branches, that without the roots may indeed be fit for the build-
   er, but not for the planter. He who would promote the growth of the sciences
   should be less solicitous about the trunk or body of them and lend his care
   to preserve the roots, and draw them out with some little earth about them.
   (172)

         However, we scholars and teachers of PTW should look back less to
legitimize our practice for the sake of our critics than to look around and look
ahead for the sake of our students. Bacon was no antiquarian, after all. Although
he venerated history, he believed people should use the past primarily to secure
present provisions for a future journey. The frontispiece of the 1620 edition of
The Great Instauration shows a billowing galleon returning through the Pillars
of Hercules from its voyage on unknown seas. If the latest turn in the academy
has made our discipline more valuable and necessary, if it is now our turn to
define the rules of the game, if this collective return to our intellectual past is to
be more than academic, then we must recapture our sense of wonder with our
sense of mission. In T. S. Eliot's words:

   We shall not cease from exploration
   And the end of all our exploring
   Will be to arrive where we started
   And know the place for the first time. (59)

16
                                                                                       The Great Instauration

                           works cited

Bacon, Francis. "The Advancement of Learning." The Oxford Authors: Francis Ba-
   con. Ed. Brian Vickers. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 120-299.

Bacon, Francis. Advancement of Learning and Novum Organum.Revised Ed. Ed.
   and Trans. James Edward Creighton. New York: Colonial Press, 1899.

Bacon, Francis. "Advice to Fulke Greville." The Oxford Authors: Francis Bacon.
   Ed. Brian Vickers. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 102-106.

Bacon, Francis. The Essays. Ed. John Pitcher. New York: Penguin, 1985.
Bacon, Francis. The Great Instauration and New Atlantis. Ed. J. Weinberger. Ar-

   lington Heights, IL: Harland Davidson, 1980.
Bacon, Francis. "A Letter and Discourse to Sir Henry Savile." The Oxford Authors:

   Francis Bacon. Ed. Brian Vickers. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 114-
   119.
Bacon, Francis. "Maxims of the Law." The Works of Lord Bacon. Vol. 1. Ed. James
   Spedding. London: Henry G. Bohn, 1854. 546-590.
Bacon, Francis. Novum Organum. Ed. and Trans. Peter Urbach and John Gibson.
   Chicago: Open Court Publishing, 1994.
Butcher, W. F. "Applied Humanities: They Will Pay You for the Other Five Per-
   cent." Vital Speeches of the Day (1 August, 1990): 623-25.
Crowther, J. G. Francis Bacon: The First Statesman of Science. London: Cresset
   Press, 1960.
Drucker, P. F. The Effective Executive. Harper, 1966.
Eliot, T. S. The Four Quartets. New York: Harcourt, 1971.
Machiavelli, N. The Prince. 2nd Ed. Ed. and Trans. Robert M. Adams. New York:
   Norton, 1992. Shakespeare, William. Coriolanus. Ed. Jonathan Crewe New
   York: Penguin, 1999.
Spedding, J. Francis Bacon's Personal Life Story. London: Rider and Company,
   1949.

                                                                                                  17
2 Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started:
  (Mis)understanding the Naming of a Professional
  Writing Minor

   Michael Knievel
   Kelly Belanger
   Colin Keeney
   Julianne Couch
   Christine Stebbins

        introduction: naming as rhetorical
         disciplinary/programmatic action

         After several years of planning and development, the University of Wyo-
ming Department of English now offers an undergraduate minor in professional
writing. In thinking about our program, we have become increasingly conscious
of the ways in which the name of this program, simply the "professional writing
minor," functions within our institutional context, a relatively small (approxi-
mately ten thousandundergraduates) state university and a traditional English
department offering both undergraduate and graduate (MA and MFA) degrees.

         All programs have names, but most, including our own, are not particu-
larly noteworthy. Save for some notable exceptions in recent years (for instance,
Central Florida's doctoral program in "Texts and Technology"), most writing
programs that identify their mission as distinct from composition or creative
writing, regardless of size or status, rely heavily on a familiar word bank for
their program titles: "rhetoric," "communication," "writing," "technical," and
"professional." But while this uniformity has helped fashion a quasi-recognizable
disciplinary identity in "nonacademic" writing and communication, it also de-
flects attention from the significance of signification. Awash in the hundreds
of questions and issues that come with envisioning a program, teachers and
administrators may move uncritically past this vital step in the development pro-
cess, reaching for terms in the word bank without sufficiently considering their
implications and the multiple lenses through which those words will be read.

         Much, it seems, is at stake when naming a program. Robert Johnson
points to a name's ability to make things "unforgettable"; however, he acknowl-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.02  19
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

edges that the process of naming is complex and fraught with competing mo-
tives, asking, "Is the naming of programs a determinist enterprise that takes on
a life of its own? Or are we being creative in our endeavor to associate thing to
thing, spiritual fact with embodied form?" Johnson recognizes the need to let
local factors guide naming but cautions against promising more (or less) than
can be delivered: "...should we think twice about unnaming ourselves in the
process of trying to embrace too much?" Generally speaking, the implications
of program naming have been inferred from broader conversations about con-
nections between program development and institutional politics (Cunningham
and Harris; Hayhoe, et al; Latterell; MacNealy and Heaton; Mendelson; Rentz;
Sides; Sullivan and Porter) and intersections between disciplinarity and profes-
sionalism (Faber, Savage).

         With their focus on larger programmatic and disciplinary issues, many
of the aforementioned authors typically address program naming in tangential
fashion, although some acknowledge what might be at stake when naming a
program or, in some cases, an entire field of inquiry. MacNealy and Heaton sug-
gest that the name "Professional and Technical Communication" may best rep-
resent the field's scope and hope for acceptance: "...if we want to enhance our
image among those outside the field, the term `professional' might be a better
choice than `technical' because it is more inclusive and it sounds less mechanis-
tic." (55). Dayton and Bernhardt's 2003 survey of ATTW (Association of Teach-
ers of Technical Writing) members asked respondents what the field should be
called, offering a variety of fixed-response possibilities from which to choose.
The top three choices included: "Technical Communication" (39%); "Profes-
sional Communication" (32%); and "Professional Writing" (10%). However, in
an open-ended follow-up question, respondents offered still more alternatives
and noted the importance of having a name that communicated clearly to out-
siders but that acknowledges specific contexts (29-30).

         We know, then, that naming--of the discipline, of programs--is a con-
tested process. But beyond being a critical choice in the early stages of a writing
program, we believe that a program name is a powerful site from which to begin
examining a program's history, politics, and function--a program name tells a
compelling story. We argue that any study of naming becomes, in part, a study
of 1) historically-situated program development, and 2) program execution, one
test of a name's veracity and scope, as well as the implications of its significa-
tion. Thus, in this chapter, we trace the development of the professional writing
minor at the University of Wyoming through a narrative chronology that con-
structs a constellation of the voices (writing faculty, other English department
members, administrators, and students) giving shape to the minor as it currently
stands; specifically, we examine our "starts" and "false starts" before turning to

20
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

the present challenges of "getting started." In doing so, we map the vast array
of connected and disconnected questions, concerns, and values that come into
play when a program of this kind is developed and named. We believe that the
archaeology of a program name can be uniquely generative as a site of research,
a catalyst for institutional critique, and, consequently, a means of reclaiming a
name and program. And while we acknowledge the power of more abstract con-
versation about naming, we assert that a local focus might yield more granular
insight into this highly contextualized process, insight that has the potential to
enrich--and complicate--our sense of the complexity of both naming and pro-
gram development.

    finding our own voices: windows to past,
                              present

         In approaching the question of program naming, we prioritized the
two broad currents identified above: 1) historically situated development and
2) program execution. To that end, we crafted a quasi-ethnographic approach
to researching our name and the issues and events that both precipitated and
emerged from it. In short, we compiled information and perspectives through
examination of:

   · our own personal narratives written from the perspective of writing fac-
       ulty deeply invested in planning, teaching in, and overseeing the program

   · semi-structured interviews with past and present members of the English
       Department (faculty, students, administrators), many of whom played an
       integral role in the development and launch of the program

   · files and archives containing a variety of documents pertaining to the mi-
       nor (e.g., course approval forms, meeting minutes, related grant propos-
       als, email correspondence regarding the curriculum, computer classroom,
       etc.).

         As writer-researchers, we represent both a historical cross-section of the
writing history at UW and the range of responsibilities for program execution at
our university. All of us are situated in the Department of English. Some of us
work as academic professional lecturers (APLs), which are extended-term teach-
ing positions (six-year renewable appointment and opportunity for promotion).
Others are assistant and associate professors, respectively, in writing-related
fields.1 Some of us have a significant measure of professional writing experi-
ence outside the academy in addition to experience in other fields; others have

                                                                                                  21
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

focused more specifically on writing in academic contexts. All of us have taught
a variety of courses in our department's professional writing minor, served on a
range of writing-related committees, and worked together on various writing-
related initiatives in our department or on campus.

         At UW, we have constructed a minor designed to capitalize on the
range of experience and expertise that we, as teachers, bring to the program. At
present, the professional writing minor consists of eighteen credit hours and em-
phasizes flexibility. Students are required to take two three-credit core courses:

ENGL 2035  Writing for Public Forums
ENGL 4000  21st Century Issues in Professional Writing

In addition, they choose two of the following three-credit courses:

ENGL 4010  Technical Writing in the Professions
ENGL 4020  Editing for Publication
ENGL 4050  Writer's Workshop: Magazine Writing
ENGL 4970  Professional Writing Internship

Finally, students select two writing-intensive elective courses, typically related to
their major course of study and connected to their career objectives.

        chronology: constructing our past,
                 considering our present

         In the sections that follow, a series of narratives describes the myriad
conditions, values, and beliefs that gave rise to a program named, somewhat
serendipitously, the "professional writing minor" and demonstrates some of the
consequences of this naming choice for various stakeholders within our institu-
tional context.

                                  Starts (1986-1993)

         It would be inaccurate - and unfair - to suggest that nothing occurred
toward writing development at the University of Wyoming prior to 1986. Tilly
and John Warnock began their careers at UW during the 1970s and their impact
lingers to this day. Of writing at UW and across the state, one colleague recalls,
"I think it was an outgrowth of the Warnocks ... they were a major, charismatic
force in the department, (and) not just within the department but in the uni-

22
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

versity as a whole." Another colleague recalls their development of the Wyoming
Writing Project, the Wyoming Conference, and the Writing Center during the
seventies and early eighties. Their collaborative essay, "Liberatory Writing Cen-
ters" (1984), both defined and helped establish university writing centers na-
tionwide, and Tilly's Writing Is Critical Action (1989) is still commonly cited in
composition scholarship. In essence, the Warnocks were the first real representa-
tives of composition and rhetoric--as we would define that discipline today--at
UW, and were strident advocates for its acceptance.

         The late 1970s also begat a pivotal course on campus: Scientific and
Technical Writing (ENGL 4010), the name of which, interestingly, would be
changed to "Technical Writing in the Professions" in 2001. As shall be seen,
tracking 4010's permutations constitutes a primary, connective thread through
our narrative. If nothing else, one colleague notes, "I'm sure that (4010) proved
the existence of a clientele" for an upper-level writing course beyond that era's
requirement for only two semesters of "freshman" composition. Twenty years
later, meeting the needs of that "clientele" would, in part, spawn the professional
writing minor.

         On the other hand, the advent of Scientific and Technical Writing al-
most immediately raised two counter-considerations. The course was developed
within the English department from a direct request by the College of Engi-
neering - to enhance their students' writing skills - but the College of Busi-
ness quickly came onboard and began requiring it of their majors. For obvious
reasons, the course was immediately consigned to the "service" bin, with the
result that very few English faculty members cared to teach it. This attitude was
administratively underlined when the Dean of Arts and Sciences subsequently
refused to accept work in this area for tenure or promotion deliberations. Be-
cause of this, and because the course was too advanced for graduate assistants to
teach, 4010 was progressively shunted to temporary lecturers.

         And then there was that name--"Scientific and Technical Writing."
Clearly, when marketing or accounting majors began queuing up for the course,
it lost any technical edge or scientific facet it might have contained. Indeed, one
faculty member who developed the original version of 4010 thought to himself,
at that time, "This really isn't a scientific and technical writing course ... we
ought to call it `professional writing.'"

         This brings us to our primary timeline from 1986 to present; we chose
1986 as a starting point for one simple reason: that year, two hundred attendees
of the Wyoming Conference on English (co-chaired by the Warnocks) over-
whelmingly adopted the "Wyoming Conference Resolution," arguably the most
important document concerning post-secondary writing in our professional life-
times. With its focus on personnel issues, today the Resolution seems akin to a

                                                                                                  23
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

union's grievance against management. However, by concentrating on people--
on those who teach and develop writing--the Resolution served as a cornerstone
for comprehensive writing curricula across the country. Indeed, the Resolution
helped make it possible to develop writing curricula by emphasizing improved
working conditions, such as compensation and workload, for those who would
develop and execute such programs. But as we now know, few of these achieve-
ments came smoothly or without some sort of price, and writing development
at UW was certainly no exception.

         Without fanfare - and with virtually no attention from other depart-
ment members - our assistant chair began a "cohort group" for 4010 instructors
in 1987. The group's initial function was twofold: to supply mutual support
for those teaching this demanding course, and to improve consistency without
limiting academic freedom. The cohort group's overall success was confirmed
by one colleague who joined the department a few years later: "The group...
seemed to feel a justifiable sense of ownership of the course and pride in its high
quality and had reached a (general) group consensus on standards and assign-
ments." Certainly these were no small accomplishments, but they frequently
played second fiddle to larger topics within the group. For instance, for several
years, the group maintained a running discussion of gender issues in the techni-
cal writing classroom, such as why male instructors were often evaluated as being
"tough but fair," whereas our female colleagues were raked for being "too tough,"
"unfair," or "a bitch." (Combined with being stuck in term-limited positions,
teaching a devalued course, and working in an "unscholarly" discipline, this
gender bias formed what one colleague dubbed a "quadruple whammy.") Under
the circumstances of the times, it was invisible work performed by an invisible
group, but it "... solidified and brought together the APLs (lecturers) in the
department who were working with 4010."

         More visible by far were the events of 1990-93 and the English depart-
ment's response to them. First, UW's administration mandated development of
a new University Studies Program (USP), and central to that plan was replacing
the previously mentioned two-semester "frosh comp" requirement with writ-
ing courses labeled WA (first-year), WB (sophomore/junior), and WC (senior/
capstone). After review and approval, any college, department, or program on
campus could teach any of these multi-tiered writing courses. The English de-
partment reacted by appointing a six-person Writing Committee and charged
this group with qualifying, quantifying, and separating these different levels of
written discourse.

         All of this was rather momentous. The new USP simultaneously rec-
ognized writing's central importance to a meaningful education and opened
the door to writing across the curriculum (WAC) for the first time at UW. In

24
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

the eyes of the university's administration, at least, those who taught writing
were suddenly elevated from second-class citizenship to being significant con-
tributors. And while the Writing Committee's official function was to determine
what constituted WA, WB or WC writing only within this department, it was
tacitly understood that our delineations ultimately would apply to all writing
courses, campus-wide. One lecturer remembers, "We were considered `the pros'
when it came to writing, so we got to call the shots." Therefore, through the act
of defining, this small in-house group named writing at UW.

         This section would be incomplete without mentioning a Department
of English retreat held in the fall of 1993. This gathering produced the de-
partmental decision to formulate a "writing program," that focused on neither
"academic" nor "creative" writing at its core and sparked the need for someone
to develop and direct such a program. However, individual recollections of this
event are varied. One participant remains convinced that this portion of the
retreat's agenda was orchestrated to the point of crafty manipulation ("... it was
a nifty bit of stacking the deck"); two others would contend all of this "just hap-
pened" with little to no forethought or planning; and at least one department
member can recall precisely who catered the food - and nothing else. One might
suspect that the clarity and tone of these memories depended on the individual's
proximity to writing and writing instruction, but that could be mere conjecture.

                               False Starts (1993-1998)

         By the end of this period of "starts," the value of Scientific and Techni-
cal Writing (ENGL 4010) was clear on paper, at least regarding numbers, as
evidenced by a University Studies document authored in part by the English de-
partment chair in 1991. This document focused on the fact that freshman com-
position and ENGL 4010 made up most of the department's course offerings
and helped keep the department viable in the eyes of the rest of the University;
indeed, in the eyes of our department chair at the time, 4010 helped "justify its
[the English department's] existence and size to the outsider." Thus, the worth of
these two writing courses in the larger university context was becoming clearer.

         The aforementioned WAC movement of the early 1990s played to mixed
reviews campus-wide but had significant implications for the APLs charged with
much of its implementation, as well as for the way in which the department was
perceived vis-à-vis writing on campus. A former chair, now a dean, believes that
the department's involvement in WAC showed that "...we in English are `good
soldiers'" to the university at large. She also believes that because of WAC our
writing teachers got more respect campus wide because of a heightened pres-
ence, if not necessarily in our own department. For Writing Center personnel,

                                                                                                  25
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

nearly all of whom were English department APLs, these WAC-focused years
were busy. In addition to full course loads, most APLs were assigned to the Writ-
ing Center for five hours a week to work with clients and perform extensive out-
reach for the Center, often preparing and presenting numerous workshops and
seminars each week to help guide the campus-wide implementation of WAC. In
the end, however, APLs could claim little if any meaningful professional credit
for this tremendous outlay of individual and collaborative time and effort; it was
just expected. Ironically, but politically foreseeable, it was the relatively invisible,
relatively powerless temporary writing instructors who were charged with help-
ing to improve the level of writing integration in the entire university.

         When some WAC courses around campus were later dropped, depart-
ments typically directed students to 4010 to meet graduation requirements, and
so course enrollments continued to burgeon. However, some English depart-
ment faculty felt that this type of writing was too far outside the domain of
traditional English Studies and a threat to the very identity of our department.
In consequence, English majors were not allowed to take the technical writing
course for credit in the major. One senior lecturer says, "The problem we've
always had with the perception of 4010 is that people always saw it as a service
class for people outside of the English department and of course, as you know, it
wasn't allowed to be counted for an English major... people saw it as being like
fill-in-the-blank kind of writing and I guess they didn't see it as "real writing"
... they just saw it as a real sort of pedestrian writing." Another faculty member
notes, "...the course...has always had this marginal relationship to the depart-
ment. I mean, it was so striking and odd to me that for a while that course didn't
count toward the major ...that was one 4000-level course that `non-professors'
...could teach."2

         While ambivalence toward the role of technical and scientific com-
munication remained, the department moved to build upon its decision at the
1993 department retreat to start a real writing program at UW by making a
professorial hire at the assistant level in rhetoric/composition in 1994. After a
honeymoon year to "get her feet on the ground" the department expected the
hire to open a new chapter in our freshman writing program, especially in the
development of teaching assistant (TA) training, as graduate TAs taught many
of the composition courses. Unfortunately, the professor's perceived overall re-
sistance to guiding the program and her self-confessed anger at the political
situation regarding the overall attitude toward writing resulted in her resignation
after two years. In her time here, however, this professor helped lead the techni-
cal writing instructors more fully into the world of computer technology and
computer-mediated instruction through workshops and training sessions with
her and outside consultants.

26
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

         In the ensuing two-year gap between the departure of one rhet/comp
professor and the hiring of another, there seemed to be growing consensus re-
garding the need for a "tenure track presence... to give a new writing program
legitimacy." Throughout this tough time, the technical writing cohort hung to-
gether, trying to keep spirits up, lives intact, and eyes looking forward as the pro-
fessionals that members knew they were. The cohort kept abreast of new trends,
technology developments, and the national debates about the many aspects of
the discipline. The one thing members did not formally discuss, however, was a
professional writing minor. Although the 4010 cohort group would later play a
central role in constructing the minor, at this juncture, it was just "too pie in the
sky" to have any real hope it might happen.

                             Getting Started (1998-2000)

         However, in the October 1997 MLA Job Information List the UW Eng-
lish Department publicly indicated its intention to develop a writing minor and
sought a senior faculty member to serve as a "point person" for the new minor
and the first-year writing program. The department's intention to hire at the
senior level indicated an awareness--born during the years of "starts" and "false
starts"-- of the political complications inherent in coordinating or developing
writing programs within a department holding a traditional literature view of
the English Department's curricular geography (Sullivan and Porter 393). One
senior literature professor, to whom a former department chair attributes the
idea of developing a writing minor, also points to a generational shift in the
department in which a cohort of faculty "came out [of graduate school] with a
much different notion of what "English" meant for our students, and not just
students who were going to show up in our English classes because of their great
love of literature, but students who were actually living and working in English."
She explained in an interview that "for us, thinking about writing as a part of a
student's education wasn't an add-on. We saw the integration." She believes this
integrative vision among some faculty members paved the way for the 1998 hir-
ing of an Associate Professor of Composition and Rhetoric and for a significant
store of goodwill among the literature faculty toward a possible new writing
minor.

         Perhaps understandably, considering the departmental history and hi-
erarchies, in the early stages of developing the minor, some of the department's
lecturers were more wary than their literature colleagues about the hiring of
someone who, although appropriately credentialed with a doctoral degree, had
less nonacademic experience with technical and professional writing than most
of them did. The new hire, Kelly Belanger, brought to the position a generalist

                                                                                                  27
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

background and interest in collaborative program development that proved a
relatively comfortable fit with a department whose literature and creative writ-
ing faculty had only a nascent sense of composition, rhetoric, or professional/
technical writing as fields within English Studies, each with their own bodies
of scholarship and intellectual traditions. Along with research interests in com-
position, computers and writing, business communication, and literature, she
also brought entrepreneurial experience from having developed a new writing
program for unionized steelworkers in Ohio and, with business partners, a cof-
feehouse/café. This generalist background to some extent mirrored the generalist
strengths of the department's richly experienced APLs. Even so, early on, some
members of the 4010 cohort greeted the new "point person" with skepticism
that made it difficult for the team and their appointed leader to see their com-
mon interests in advancing the status of writing in the department. One senior
APL proved a valuable intermediary, "translating" between other APLs and thus
helping to clarify their overlapping goals. As the longtime leader of the cohort
group put it, "I think we had the perception that something like [a writing mi-
nor] couldn't happen."

         Although we can't identify the particular meeting or discussion during
which we settled on the term "professional" to characterize the writing minor--
indeed it seemed a name simply "in the air" that we gravitated toward--notes
from a June 2000 Wyoming Conference on English writing workshops suggest
that some members of the technical writing cohort group pondered early on the
implications of the term "professional." One note taker mused, "Professional
writing is an umbrella term. Business writing/com, tech. writing, and scientific
writing are all subsumed under the larger term `Professional Writing.' Which of
these terms work best for what we want to teach?" A senior APL explains, "We
weren't trying really to narrow our program because first of all we're all kind of
generalists.... And I think that we felt comfortable with a more general name,
or general title, under which we could see ourselves as instructors. Professional
writing minor seemed just right."

         The scope of the minor broadened even further when the proposal for
the minor went before the department in Spring 2000. Literature colleagues ar-
gued for including literature, creative writing, and any designated WAC courses
as electives in the new program. These arguments reflect what a former depart-
ment chair identifies as the initial impetus for the minor when it was first dis-
cussed during the 1993 retreat--to draw in more students to the English De-
partment, including its literature courses. Rather than debating the boundaries
of the minor or exploring what benefits clearer articulations of what the minor
courses could offer intellectually as well as practically, the department agreed
upon a big umbrella for the minor and moved forward quickly to approve it.

28
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

         Settling on the term "professional," with its ever-expanding connota-
tions, not only reflected the generalist background of faculty teaching in the
minor, it also responded to a range of desires, anxieties, and assumptions on the
part of the English Department and its faculty. While some, even many, faculty
members might have welcomed more sustained discussion at least behind the
scenes, the department appeared willing, even eager, to approve the minor with-
out further discussion, perhaps for practical reasons of its own. Perhaps anxious
not to go the way of impoverished, diminished humanities departments with no
service course responsibilities, some faculty saw the new "professional" writing
minor as a commodity to package and sell, a product more practical and market-
able than its literature or creative writing courses. One colleague described using
the term professional as a "packaging maneuver." And in the early 1970s, teach-
ing technical writing courses had seemed a wise career move for one literature
professor we interviewed, who feared for his career in light of declining English
majors. Another literature professor interviewed denied that his support for the
minor had anything to do with concern about the viability of the English De-
partment or major. Instead, he saw the minor as a way to address the perceived
illiteracy of engineers and agronomists while potentially drawing them to take
a few literature electives and the "richer experience" those courses offered. But
his quick denial of any concern about English Department enrollments belies
the reality that more majors and minors translates to more faculty hires, a larger
budget, and more influence for the department in the university.

         Only one literature professor strongly expressed concern about "the
validity of a Writing Minor in the first place." When the proposal for the mi-
nor went before the department's curriculum committee, few wanted to debate
questions he raised about whether "the minor value[s] praxis above the quest for
pure knowledge" and whether "`writing' as defined by the minor represent[s] a
field of knowledge or a set of skills?" The discussion closed down quickly after
a counterstatement claiming that "as far as praxis goes, schools like Engineering
are already structured around the concept of praxis. As well, elements of our
literature courses can be considered to be skill-based." Minutes from the meet-
ing record that "we (committee members) did not resolve disagreements on this
issue." More to the point, the brief discussion begged the question at the heart of
the matter--whether courses in writing, rhetoric, and communication are legiti-
mate areas of intellectual study in a research university or whether these courses
and those who teach them merit the adjunct and secondary status constructed
for them by the English Department's curricular geography.

         Unfortunately, much of the intellectual work that took place in cre-
ating the professional writing minor remained invisible to the literature fac-
ulty and even to the department chair at the time. The former chair recalls

                                                                                                  29
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

that "somebody might have mentioned to me that Kelly and some of the
others - the academic professionals, I guess, were talking about [a writing
minor], but I don't recall ever getting anything official you know, and I
thought, let the discussion go. People should talk about things like that."
What the faculty didn't see, or caught only glimpses of, was two years of in-
tensive work that involved three major grant projects: one to develop a com-
puter classroom, another to develop a sophomore-level WAC course into a
foundational course for the new minor, and a third to develop the minor
itself through a Center for Teaching Excellence (CTL) Grant that funded a
retreat, a series of workshops, and an assessment survey of the English 4010
course. A senior APL remembers the English 4010 survey project as "the first
time we were really coming together as a group of 4010 teachers and realiz-
ing that we had something that was a fairly good course--very important to
the university--and the fact that we were teaching most sections meant that
it was very important to the English Department, even though our majors
weren't eligible for it."

         Meanwhile, the CTL grant application reflects the cohort group's de-
termination that courses in the minor be intellectually rigorous, grounded in
relevant discourse theories:

   As part of our Academic Plan, the Dept. of English is developing a new,
   interdisciplinary minor in Professional writing. The minor will prepare stu-
   dents from a range of disciplines for writing-related careers and deepen their
   understanding of the social, political, linguistic, and rhetorical nature of writ-
   ten discourse.

Despite this "mission statement" avowing the intellectual underpinnings of
courses in the minor, we've learned through this project that some of our lit-
erature colleagues remain unconvinced of the minor's place within a liberal arts
tradition. As one colleague observed, "a lot of us on the lit faculty had a general
sense of things that went on in professional writing overall but no sense of the
kind of intellectual history or the intellectual debates animating the field. I think
a lot of people didn't even know it existed because they thought it was more of
a `toolkit' minor." She added, "I think that was a real failure on our part for a
long time in the department to even recognize that there is an intellectual his-
tory to this stuff, not just...it's not like becoming a mechanic or wrenching or
something...it was an odd...it was a slow education for me." In truth, the failure
has been mutual. In our zeal to "get started," those of us working on the minor
underestimated the challenge and importance of bridging the gaps between our
own and our colleagues' understandings of what professional writing and, more

30
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

broadly, rhetorical education and scholarship can entail. As long as this gap re-
mains, the future of the minor rests on unsteady ground.

                            Staying Afloat (2000-present)

         Navigating the waves of resistance and tides of support, we have reached
a relatively calm harbor where our minor rides nicely in the water. We have a
strong set of courses that are well received by students, taught with competence
and creativity by our tenure-track and APL faculty. We continue to teach most
of our courses in the Humanities Resource Center, more commonly called a
computer classroom, housed in the building in which the English department
resides.

         The minor attracts students from across campus who tailor their elec-
tive choices to match their career expectations or their interests. At present we
are unable to articulate, exactly, what it is the professional writing minors as a
group expect as a career payoff for their efforts. However, many of us have heard
students express comfort with the title "professional," as it connotes what they've
studied, not what it leads them to expect. Students don't seem burdened with
questions of semantics and what role word choice plays in our department's
administrative plans, staffing decisions, or interaction with the university as a
whole. For this reason, our minor could largely be labeled a success: we have
departmental support, strong collegiality among writing faculty, and student
enthusiasm. What more could we want?

         We would not be doing a service to our various constituencies if our
answer to that question was "nothing." Instead, we continue to seek clarity in
our goals and objectives in order to foster departmental and university support.
We know the educational bazaar represented by students who chose our minor
is going to mean we'll have to deal with various expectations on the part of stu-
dents and their major departments. One teacher reports that in her recent 2035
class (the introductory course in the minor) she had computer science majors,
physics majors, a business major, and somebody in biology or botany or forestry,
and "all of them were interested in the professional writing minor. Their major
doesn't have that focus, but whatever they end up doing, they like to write and
really want these skills." One English major decided to declare the minor be-
cause "I had no idea what I wanted to do with my degree. It (the minor) seemed
to diversify my choices, instead of being limited to just teaching, which is what
you often hear is `the only thing you can do with an English degree.'"

         Faculty expectations of the minor vis-à-vis student outcomes also vary.
One colleague suggests that the minor might "get them [students] jobs, and get

                                                                                                  31
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

them prepared for those jobs. It would get them official certification that they
could carry out into the world that they had not only done some writing, but
that they'd thought about it and gotten some training in thinking about writing
for a variety of contexts in the professional world." But others in the department
are still uncomfortable that English is in the business of getting students ready
for jobs. States a former department chair:

   The worry that I had was that by creating this analogy (calling the minor
   "professional") that there would be an implicit promise of where you go
   through this and there is a profession of technical writing and you can - you
   will - get a job in it. And I began to worry that students would in a sense get
   the idea that they were entitled to a job.

He goes on to support some form of employability in the majors and minors we
turn out. He sees the role of the minor as:

   ...producing writers capable of learning to write software manuals, or ca-
   pable of learning to write grant proposals for whatever agency, or capable of
   learning to write contracts as paralegals. I don't mean that you'd have a minor
   in writing software manuals. What you would have is a certain fundamental
   grounding and awareness of writing software manuals, that there are certain
   conventions in legal writing, there are certain conventions in grant writing....

         Uncertainty over how we should prepare students inevitably spills over
into how we should hire teachers to do the preparing. In 2002 we hired a second
tenure-track rhet/comp person expected to be a major player in the minor, and
in 2004 we hired an APL expected to teach 4010 through our Outreach school
and run the professional writing internship program.

         One tenured literature professor who was involved in searches for a
second tenure-track rhet/comp position phrased the uncertainty like this:

   ...you could tell with each potential candidate, the meaning of what the
   professional writing minor would be would change because it would be, `oh,
   here's somebody who's amazing at web design, and that's what our profes-
   sional writing minor needs.' But then it would be, `Here's somebody who
   does science studies. That's what the professional writing minor is.'

During that process, which took place before we began this research, these some-
times contradictory senses of need were not sufficiently recognized or articu-
lated. The analogy of people grasping different parts of an elephant and not un-
derstanding they all have the same creature in their hand is oft-used for a reason.

32
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

Our minor accommodates many interests, but that part which we each claim as
our own causes us to claim stakes in a territory that is only part of the whole.

         The first year of our search for the second rhet/comp position produced
no job offers, but in the second we found a candidate who fit what we could
agree were our needs. Michael's degree was in technical communication and
rhetoric, and he was looking for something that would allow him to pursue that
interest. He explains what he expected from a program called "professional writ-
ing" and how that compares with what he found: "I saw a `professional writing'
minor and immediately associated it with technical writing--the terms are/were
often used nearly interchangeably in the professional literature; it was my hope
that I could participate in the minor by finding a technical communication
niche." The uncertainty the department felt was in place not only for the hir-
ing of tenure-track professors. Indeed, in the course of the recent APL hire, we
continued to disagree about what our needs were and which job candidates best
met them. Should we value technical skills? Broad training in rhetoric? Profes-
sional writing experience? In each case, the lack of consensus regarding the name
"professional writing" turned the job search into a heuristic for understanding
the field and our program.

         Some final thoughts as we reflect on where we are at this time. We've
realized through this research project that what started out as an English depart-
ment service course (4010) has turned into a viable and exciting minor for our
students. In turn, our APLs and tenure-track faculty have a stronger sense of
professional purpose. While it is true that the naming of the minor raised issues
for debate, that debate is a healthy one because it takes place among an increas-
ingly respected writing faculty within the context of the larger department's view
of its purpose and identity. The result is better integration of our once-perceived
disparate needs into a department that, for now, at the worst, accepts what we
do and at the best, celebrates it.

           uncovering a history of naming:
                   locating key threads

         We started this project with a key assumption: naming itself is a genera-
tive process, and examining a name and its historical context can yield impor-
tant insights about that context and the way in which a name functions. While
we remain somewhat unsure of the exact moment in time when "professional
writing minor" was minted as the program title, by examining our history, we
are able to reconstruct not only a rationale for the name but also the signifi-
cance of the naming context--the politics, decisions, attitudes, and actions that

                                                                                                  33
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

spawned the development of the program itself. We recognize, too, the process
of naming and investing a name with meaning as a claiming of sorts. Construct-
ing a history of our name permits a reclaiming, an opportunity to look back and
move forward mindful of this heritage.

              History and Development: A Service Course Heritage

         What does our history tell us? For one, our "professional writing mi-
nor" exists in a context where writing has, in some ways, been historically mar-
ginalized or, worse, de-professionalized. We can see that in our particular insti-
tutional context, professional writing has a lineage traceable to the early days
of a politically charged course, ENGL 4010. As a service course at the heart
of the department's commitment to writing on campus, it has long generated
credit hours and revenue for the department but has not always been fully
embraced. Given its role as the department's most prominent non-creative,
non-literary writing course outside of freshman composition, 4010's history no
doubt conditioned the development and perceptions of the professional writ-
ing minor. As noted earlier, the idea of a minor or writing program of some sort
fermented informally for years in the 4010 cohort group, and it seems possible
that the minor's historical connection to 4010, while lending credibility to the
minor campus-wide, may now consciously or unconsciously compromise how
members of our department see it and its function within the department. It is
difficult to ignore the fact that advanced non-creative writing study was tradi-
tionally offered only through 4010, a service course with all the attendant bag-
gage of such purpose. By association, the minor--which includes 4010 as an
elective--cannot help but evoke thoughts of service and utilitarianism. Con-
sequently, the specter of "toolkit" and its associations with intellectual--even
moral--bankruptcy looms.

         Service courses, as we know, are frequently taught by adjuncts and lec-
turers whose job security is oftentimes in question, and the residue of 4010's
service history lingers. At the center of the 4010 story, and by association the
professional writing minor, is the group of people who have traditionally taught
it: extended-term and temporary academic professional lecturers (APLs). While
APLs gained presence and influence around campus in the mid-1990s with the
emergence of WAC on campus, much of their work was done through the Writ-
ing Center (housed outside of English); thus, much of the APLs' work was ren-
dered largely invisible, which, in turn, failed to raise their profile or the profile
of devoted writing instruction in the English department. The staffing situa-
tion was only further complicated by the elimination of funding previously ear-
marked (in the wake of the Wyoming Resolution) for additional extended-term

34
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

APLs; when these funds disappeared, the department turned to a growing roster
of temporary lecturers working on one-year contracts. Until Kelly arrived in
1998, then, the segment of the faculty with the least "professional" status in the
traditional academic hierarchy--regardless of teaching success or professional
writing experience--conducted the vast majority of advanced writing instruc-
tion in the department.

   Naming and Program Execution at Present: Our Faculty, Our Students

         This history has implications for the present and future success of the
minor. In terms of our most immediate teaching needs, we continue to rely
heavily on APLs, mostly extended-term, but occasionally--and more and more
frequently in 4010--temporary lecturers. Again, concerns arise about "profes-
sionalism," as these temporary lecturers--although typically outstanding, if in-
experienced teachers--often bring indirectly related or unrecognized profession-
al and academic credentials to professional and technical writing instruction,
in addition to having no job security and thus little time or incentive to seek
additional credentialing, experience, or professional development. As a depart-
ment, then, we need to think honestly and creatively about staffing solutions.
And given the aforementioned uncertainty that many of those charged with
hiring faculty in professional writing have brought to previous job searches, it
seems clear that the challenge remains for our department to continue to raise
the question of what "professional" means in our context--and how we will
envision, staff, and deliver a "professional" course of study.

         For our students, we need to think carefully about what our name com-
municates given the role it plays in marketing and recruiting. Who is our target
audience? Does the minor deliver what it is supposed to? What do students
think that is? One colleague notes reservations about the minor's suitability for
English majors, a constituency we hope to reach:

   It's just that I think they're [courses in the minor] less useful to English majors
   than I had anticipated they might have been when we started. And maybe
   it's because the problems you have to address for the guy who wants to be
   a rancher who's trying to learn how to write reports are not the level of the
   person who wants to be the editor of a professional journal, for example.

One student, a graduated English major, shares this concern: "I think that some-
times, being already an English major, I felt that I wasn't getting quite as much
from the required classes in the minor as other students might that are not al-
ready majoring in the field."

                                                                                                  35
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

         The same colleague suggests an important interpretation of our program
name, clearly related to his belief about the minor's relevance to English majors:
"The problem with it is that it's not professional writing. It's writing for people
with different majors. People who are not going to become professional writers."
In conducting our research, it seemed that at least some colleagues felt a similar
sense of conflict and read or constructed the minor as a site where "professional-
ization" is the ultimate outcome. To put it in Couture and Rymer's terms, some
faculty members expect the minor to graduate "career writers," rather than "pro-
fessionals who write" (4-5). The distinction is meaningful here because it gets to
the heart of the program's purpose and audience. If the minor is designed to de-
velop "career writers," genuine writing professionals, it would seemingly exclude
much of the external, interdisciplinary population of students who we believe 1)
give it vitality and 2) stand to benefit from it. On the other hand, if the minor is
designed and directed toward "professionals who write," some, at least, seem to
see our own English majors as excluded. "Professional," here, is clearly ambigu-
ous, and one can easily see the curricular complications that emerge. However,
the ethical dimension of this confusion cannot be ignored: we must be certain
that we are delivering the kind of instruction that benefits all of the students we
invite; otherwise, we need to send out fewer invitations.

             "Professional" Writing and the Challenge of Dissensus

         We would like to make a few final observations about our minor's
name, starting with the interesting paradox surrounding "professional": it evokes
concerns about "practical," which is often seen as uniquely odious in English set-
tings even as it evokes feelings of status--however authentic--among students,
some faculty, and, we would guess, administrators. The implicit link between
"practical" and a market economy can feel problematic to some, even as it ex-
cites others. One colleague, arguing for a more unified approach to literary and
rhetorical education, notes about the minor:

   I think you've tried to subdivide or isolate a certain set of literary skills that
   don't necessarily depend upon a rich wealth of allusion or nuance.... if the
   extent of their power of allusion is the Microsoft homepage, then you're really
   working with a ceiling you'll never rise above. I don't think you can be really
   "professional" if your range of knowledge isn't beyond that kind of ceiling ....
   If all the allusions we make are to consumer values, then we're not advancing;
   we're not professional. We're not advancing the knowledge of our community.

To this colleague, achieving "professional" status means more than being practi-

36
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

cally prepared to join the workforce; indeed, "professionalism" is in some ways
synonymous with liberal education and the intellectual discovery it implies. But
again, other students, colleagues, and administrators may well hold a positive
view of the practical dimension of "professional writing" (only one part of it, we
would argue) as a necessary step toward a successful career and the status that
follows. So, while "professional" is oft-hailed for its generality and the breadth
it accommodates as a naming word, we must constantly be attuned to the very
different ways in which students, faculty, and administrators will encounter it.
We need to seek ways to unite the different goals these constituencies locate in
the term "professional."

         Optimistically, this variety of interpretations may well open the door
to many possibilities for our program structure. However, this lack of consensus
can lead to manipulation as well. Unlike composition and rhetoric or technical
writing, for that matter, "professional" floats just above the surface of signifi-
cance--it remains general and resists deep treatment of any particular kind of
writing or communication. This absence of narrowly defined specialization can
make it difficult, for instance, to argue for tenure-track faculty and extended-
term APL lines, stalling deep investment in writing research.

         More frustrating still is the fact that the term "professional" lets the mi-
nor be administratively manipulated, which may be simply unavoidable. Initial
rumblings about a general "writing minor" turned at some point to a "profes-
sional" writing minor, which no doubt plays better at higher levels of adminis-
tration even as its signification is relatively ambiguous. Again, this is to be ex-
pected to an extent. As one colleague notes, "I wouldn't expect there to be a real
deep signification in this notion of professionalism, except that it's really kind
of `hitching on' to the cultural values of the early twenty-first century. Within
the university we tend to live with an awful lot of euphemisms and packaging."
But while this is true, it is frustrating that, for instance, connecting professional
writing to the mission of the department's new MFA might be, as one colleague
put it, "...largely rhetorical performance for the academic plan and academic af-
fairs," if we are unwilling to work tirelessly to understand and professionalize the
working conditions of those who teach in the minor that goes by the same name
or fully acknowledge the intellectual depth of this emerging part of our English
Studies "profession."

                           conclusion

         Names are important to program developers, but we believe they be-
come even more crucial as a constituency gets farther away from the program. If

                                                                                                  37
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

we assume, for instance, that writing faculty and program developers enjoy the
most intimate relationship with the program (perhaps a self-centered assump-
tion, but one that makes intuitive sense) and, indeed, oftentimes are charged
with the task of naming itself, other constituencies might be seen as existing--
and thus interpreting--the program at some degree of removal. Other depart-
ment members use their reading of the name, for instance, as an inroad into
departmental conversations that can shape program direction and expectations.
Similarly, students interested in enrolling in the program may rely dispropor-
tionately on the name to determine whether the program is relevant to their
interests and career goals. In each case, these constituencies rely more heavily on
the name for interpretation and decision-making than do those charged with
developing the program. As the first interface many have with the program, a
name matters.

         Are the stakes lower for us at UW because we are talking here about
a minor, not a major or graduate program? Perhaps. But we would argue that
the core issues surrounding naming vis-à-vis program development and execu-
tion remain roughly the same. Any writing program must carefully consider the
range of interpretations and expectations various constituencies will bring to
bear on its curriculum and, significantly, its institutional role. Are these expec-
tations at odds with one another? Which expectations can realistically be met
given resources like faculty, funding, and goodwill?

         Moreover, the ethics of recruiting students to a particular name must
be of chief concern to any program. Students deserve to know what particular
courses of study--minor, major, or graduate--can do for them in both their
intellectual development and their preparation for a career. Naming--and op-
erationalizing a chosen name--is central to this, as a program's label heavily
conditions marketing and recruiting, as well as advising. Advisers, particularly
those in other departments, frequently rely on either a limited understanding or
a markedly different discourse when helping students make curricular decisions.
These differences must be considered and accounted for. If signification must
lack precision, writing program faculty members owe it to students and advisers
to make as much information available as possible. We believe that examining
that signification's history can go a long way toward developing a more robust
shared understanding for all of these constituencies.

                                notes

1 Kelly Belanger took a position as an associate professor at Virginia Tech Uni-
versity in fall 2005.

38
                                                                     Starts, False Starts, and Getting Started

2 In fall 1993, a change in status to extended-term Academic Professional Lec-
turers (APL) was implemented for qualifying temporary lecturers in the depart-
ment. This position had a tenure track of sorts and lacked the previous term
limits in keeping with the vision of the Wyoming Conference Resolution. For
the English department, this change stabilized the ranks of instructors teaching
heavily enrolled required composition courses. The original plan was to hire
twelve APLs, four at a time over three years, but within two years of its incep-
tion, the dedicated funds for APL hires were rescinded and absorbed into the
university's general fund; APL hires now competed with professorial hires for
the same pot of money. Over the initial two-year hiring period, eight APLs
were hired; only three members of that original group remain. Since then, four
other APLs have been hired, with three still here, but these hires have been made
at large intervals of time and often on a need-to-hire basis to fill critical gaps
in other department offerings. One APL notes, "The English department has
NEVER fulfilled, or even approached, its goal of twelve APLs."

                           works cited

Couture, Barbara and Jone Rymer. "Situational Exigence: Composing Processes
   on the Job by Writer's Role and Task Value" Writing in the Workplace: New
   Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Uni-
   versity Press, 1993. 4-20.

Cunningham, Donald H. and Jeanette G. Harris. "Undergraduate Technical and
   Professional Writing Programs: A Question of Status." Journal of Technical Writ-
   ing and Communication 24.2 (1994): 127-37.

Dayton, David and Stephen A. Bernhardt. "Results of a Survey of ATTW Mem-
   bers, 2003." Technical Communication Quarterly 13.1 (2004): 13-44.

Faber, Brenton. "Professional Identities: What is Professional about Profession-
   al Communication?" Journal of Business and Technical Communication 16.3
   (2002): 306-37.

Hayhoe, George F. et al. "The Evolution of Academic Programs in Technical
   Communication." Technical Communication: Journal of the Society for Technical
   Communication 41.1 (1994): 14-19.

Johnson, Robert R. "Plenary Address." Presented at the Thirtieth Annual Meet-
   ing of the Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication.
   Potsdam, NY. October 2003.

Latterell, Catherine G. "Technical and Professional Communication Programs
   and the Small College Setting: Opportunities and Challenges." Journal of Tech-
   nical Writing and Communication 33.4 (2003): 319-35.

                                                                                                  39
Knievel, Belanger, Keeney, Couch, and Stebbins

MacNealy, Mary S. and Leon B. Heaton. "Can This Marriage Be Saved: Is an
   English Department a Good Home for Technical Communication?" Journal of
   Technical Writing and Communication 29.1 (1999): 41-64.

Mendelson, Michael. "Professional Communication and the Politics of English
   Studies." WPA: Writing Program Administration 17.3 (1994): 7-19.

Renz, Kathryn. "A Flare from the Margins: The Place of Professional Writing in
   English Departments." Pedagogy 1.1 (2001): 185-90.

Savage, Gerald J. "The Process and Prospects for Professionalizing Technical Com-
   munication." Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 29.4 (1999):
   355-81.

Sides, Charles H. "Quo Vadis, Technical Communication?" Journal of Technical
   Writing and Communication 24.1 (1994): 1-6.

Sullivan, Patricia A. and James E. Porter. "Remapping Curricular Geography: Pro-
   fessional Writing and/in English." Journal of Business and Technical Communica-
   tion 7.4 (1993): 389-422.

40
3 Composing a Proposal for a Professional / Technical
  Writing Program

   W. Gary Griswold

         The pages that follow describe the development of a grant proposal I
wrote to obtain funding from an external private funding source. In the grant
I proposed to research the programmatic options, student interest, and depart-
mental/administrative support available for implementing a master's degree in
professional and technical writing (PTW) at my university.

         The lessons learned and offered here are many, but can be distilled thus:
to put forward any type of proposal to develop (or as is the case here, to investi-
gate developing) an academic endeavor as potentially complex as a graduate-level
PTW program takes institutional savvy, administrative experience, and persever-
ance.

         And even these can sometimes not be enough.

                         the beginning

         It was just prior to my first semester as an assistant professor of Eng-
lish that, at a luncheon for new faculty, the Dean of the College of Liberal Arts
mentioned to me that she had heard about a call for proposals that might be of
interest. She knew of my experience teaching professional and technical writ-
ing, and this grant program provided start-up funds to work on establishing a
master's degree in non-traditional fields.

         If it sounds strange that a college dean would be chatting with a brand
new faculty member about initiating an MA, it is important to mention that I
was not really all that new. I had taught here at CSU (California State Univer-
sity, Long Beach), and run various English Department programs, including
the writing center, for more than a decade, during which my contractual status
had been short-term, temporary, or less-than-permanent; choose your favorite
terminology. The previous semester I had been successful in my application for a
tenure-track position, and I now found myself attending the same welcome and

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.03     41
Griswold

orientation meetings as new hires who had recently arrived from places like New
Mexico, Arizona, and New York.

         However, since I had been teaching at the campus for years and much
of that within the technical writing certificate program we already had, I was
no stranger to the idea of setting up a full PTW MA (or "PMA"). Over the
years, the concept had been examined and discussed in various contexts, in-
cluding meetings with the certificate program's advisory board, faculty teaching
the classes, and various administrators. Ultimately, while most agreed that such
a new program would be worthwhile, somehow no one had championed the
cause, and it sat on a backburner for someday.

         Certainly the grant award would give new life to this PMA concept,
pushing it to happen sooner rather than later. However, it is likely that eventu-
ally we would have gotten around to doing much of what ended up in the pro-
posal. I stress this point because it's relevant to a maxim a mentor of mine once
told me: try not ever write a proposal for something you are not already doing,
or at the very least, plan to do in the future.

         Why? Well for one, (and here I speak mainly from my perspective as a
faculty member in the CSU) you probably have a teaching and research load to
keep you busy; anything else taken on should dovetail in some way for activities
already underway. In addition, if you go about writing the proposal as I suggest
here and consult widely with colleagues and administrators about it, you will
likely get them excited about your idea. As a result, if it is not funded, you may
well be encouraged to go ahead with your plan. It makes sense, then, to propose
something that is doable within your regular workload, since your institution
may or may not provide the same level of fiscal support asked of the external
funding source. However, even if you propose something that seems like it will
fit into present plans and work, the necessary tasks can well spiral out of control.

         But I didn't ponder this very much prior to diving into this project; I
just asked the Dean to forward me the grant information.

               the request for proposals

         I tell my students that going after a grant is essentially detective work:
the proposal writer, like a sleuth, has to look for clues. Rather than forensic
evidence, though, the grant writer's job is to examine information concerning
the values, preferences, interests, and taboos as expressed by the granting agency.
Based on these clues, the grant writing gumshoe must consider whether or not
the potential project is enough of a match (or can be made into a match) to the

42
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

granting agency's agenda to warrant the necessary work needed to develop a
good proposal document.

         Therefore my first task was to read through the granting agency's Re-
quest for Proposals (the "RFP," as grant writers call it, the complete text of which
is provided in Appendix A). The Council of Graduate Schools (CGS), the or-
ganization that had issued the RFP, had carried out some research on master's
degrees for the Ford Foundation. CGS was now interested in receiving proposals
for "planning grants," in which institutions would be given funding to support
what were essentially feasibility studies, the purpose of which were to determine
if student interest, employment demand, and institutional support existed for a
"professional master's degree" in a given area of the humanities or social sciences.
CGS hoped to hear about possible master's degree programs that "serve specific
employment needs of business, industry, government, and non-profit sectors"
(See Appendix A). They were particularly interested to fund grants describing
activities that would include consultation with prospective students and area
employers, as well as provide evidence (via letters from campus administrators
at the department, college, and university levels) of institutional support for the
plan.

         All this had to be completed in a week and five pages.
         Before doing anything else, I followed what I stress in my upper-divi-
sion proposal writing seminar: I got on the phone. When most folks think of
going after funding of some kind, they usually jump the gun and, after reading
the RFP, devote a lot of time to writing. However, as is often taught in many
a first-year composition course, a significant investment in what a writer does
before beginning a draft will help ensure a better product. This guideline applies
even more so in "real world" proposal writing, where it is possible to devote a
week or more to writing and administrative scrambling only to find out that the
proposal does not quite fit the funding agency's agenda.
         So I called the director of this grant program at CGS to discuss my ideas
and asked if my reading of their priorities was accurate. He, in turn, confirmed
that I had a solid take concerning their RFP, but he also provided additional
insight as well as motivation: CSG was particularly interested in programs that
would result in master's degrees that were a professional end to themselves and
not stepping stones to PhD programs or work inside academia. Also, though it
was alluded to in the RFP, he confirmed that successful planning grant recipients
would be invited to submit proposals for implementation grants, which would
involve larger sums provided by the Ford Foundation, which was also providing
the funding for these initial planning grants. He said a proposal relevant to a
master's degree in technical and professional writing sounded very promising.

                                                                                                  43
Griswold

         So at this point I had two very important "pre-writing" activities to
engage in: garnering the necessary departmental "buy-in" for the idea (since I
could not accomplish it on my own) and getting letters of support from admin-
istration. Also, I had this nagging but hazy feeling that I had probably better get
going on the campus approval process as soon as possible.

                      shopping the idea

"It's a grant for a feasibility study. It's to see if we have student interest, faculty
support, and the resources to develop an MA specifically in professional and
technical writing."

         "Ah."
         "I've already seen a great deal of interest from many of our grad stu-
dents. I suspect there's a considerable amount who don't want to be teachers or
go onto PhD programs. They want to use their writing skills to get a job after
the MA."
         "Yes, well. That sounds great. I'm glad you're taking the lead on this.
Maybe it will help get us other grants. Hey, have you considered designing a
profit-making extension program? It could help us support our main MA."
         Such was the reaction I got from one of the folks whose approval would
probably be necessary to move beyond the feasibility study phase, should it ever
come to that. I thought it best to let these people know about this "seed money"
grant I was working on so that later on they would feel they had been consulted.
So I had various informal chats with my fellow composition specialists.
         What really surprised me is not that I was met with hostile stares, but
rather blank ones: a couple of key players had a hard time seeing a PTW program
as a legitimate--or even promising--segment of rhetoric and composition.
         In "The Rise of Technical Writing Instruction in the America," Robert
J. Connors concludes with a rather rosy view of the picture of the future of PTW
programs, stating that "prospects have never been brighter," and that "it now
seems likely that technical communication will be an acceptable field of study
for English graduate degrees in many schools by the end of the decade" (96).
         Well, twenty years later, at least in our department, that did not quite
seem to be the case, but no matter: as the director of a writing center for over
twelve years, I'd had a lot of experience explaining something outside the tradi-
tional academic scope to my colleagues. And so long as they did not seem eager
to put up barriers, it seemed safe to proceed. However, I still needed to give a
heads up to what I was doing to another member of our department.

44
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

         As already mentioned briefly, our department already had a modest
technical writing certificate program. For many years it had done well in serv-
ing students who wanted a small add-on to a traditional MA or BA in English.
But for just as many years, various faculty who taught in the program as well as
members of the program's advisory council had batted around the idea of hav-
ing a full master's degree devoted to technical/professional communication. We
suspected that student interest would be very high for such a program.

         The problem was that no one seemed eager to take on the administra-
tive nightmare that shepherding a new MA through the bureaucracy of the
California State University system was said to entail. The director of the cer-
tificate program, a senior member of the department who had kept the pro-
gram viable through the last decade's sundry fiscal crises, had often estimated
that it would take at least five years to get a new MA degree approved. He
certainly knew what he was talking about, but I also suspected that since he
was nearing retirement, he did not want to initiate a new program that more
junior faculty would have to deal with long after he was gone. This was also
why, when I discussed the grant to him, he pretty much supported what I was
doing, albeit with a knowing gleam in his eye. Since the grant was essentially
to fund a "feasibility study," why shouldn't I take a look at the possibilities?

                  letters, we get letters

         Assuming you are on good terms with your department chair and col-
lege dean (I was and thankfully still am), getting letters of support from them
is fairly easy. However, obtaining such missives from provosts and presidents is
another matter. Though they be wonderfully supportive, the problem remains
that they often do not have any idea about your proposed program and probably
do not have the time (especially when all you've got is a week) to sit down with
you and discuss it.

         Here's my method: First, I will usually find out who is the gatekeeper
(or as a Hollywood celebrity's aide is dubbed, the "handler") for that admin-
istrator. This person is usually an "administrative assistant," though that title
is not by any means universal. Next, after initially contacting the handler and
determining that the administrator is willing to write a letter, I ask which the
administrator would prefer: I can go ahead and draft the letter and send it to
him/her to finalize, or I can send along information concerning the grant and
then the administrator--or as is more likely, the administrative assistant--can
write it.

                                                                                                  45
Griswold

         All the while I am hoping that they choose the first option, since I do
not really want the timely submission of my proposal resting on the hope that
they will actually have the letter ready by the deadline. And I already have writ-
ten the letter so it's immediately ready to email if and when they assent to the
first option.

         Last, there is the matter of (politely) making sure that the assistant and
the administrator truly understand the time frame I'm working under. This is
also a good opportunity to ask the handler to check the administrator's calendar
to confirm that he or she will not be going out of town any time soon. I also
emphasize I would love to stop by the administrator's office to pick up the letter
as soon as it's done (and thereby not having to risk the vagaries of the campus
mail system).

         Thus, I am always ready to do a lot of walking the week the proposal is
due and to grin and bear it after arriving and being told the letter is not quite
ready.

            campus clearance: the product
        goes nowhere without this process

Once again, the lesson to be learned is that having a great idea, the ability (other
than funding) to carry it out, and the skill to write an effective proposal are not
enough, especially if the deadline looms. If I had not been willing to literally
walk the campus to hand-carry and personally pick up the various documenta-
tion necessary to the grant, the deadline would have been missed, even if I had
twice the time.

         A simple list of the non-writing tasks carried out relative to institutional
clearance of my proposal will help illustrate:

   1) Show the proposal to the College of Liberal Arts Development Officer and
       get her feedback.

   2) At the urging of my Dean, make contact with the Director of Sponsored
       Projects to let her know the rather compact time frame I was working on
       so that I might get a quick lesson on the clearance process.

   3) File a "Notice of Intent to Submit Proposal for External Funding." Make
       various phone calls to clarify how to do so.

   4) Go to the Sponsored Projects Office to set up an "internal budget plan."
   5) Make several phone calls to CGS and establish whether or not certain

       budget items would be allowed under the terms of the grant.

46
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

   6) Provide a copy of the proposal text to various representatives of the Spon-
       sored Project Office.

   7) Initiate an Internal Clearance Form and confirm that it was making the
       rounds for the required approvals.

   8) Meet in person with the Director of Research Compliance to make sure
       that my proposal did not have to be further examined by the Institutional
       Research Board.

   9) Hand deliver the final draft of the proposal to the Director of Sponsored
       Research so that her assistant could mail it out (with a cover letter from
       their office) by the deadline.

         Certainly all individuals involved did everything possible to make the
process flow smoothly. However, a valuable lesson remains: with all the clearance
steps required these days, a proposal writer must be willing to take a hands-on
approach (or be fortunate enough to have a team of GAs or TAs to do so), or he
or she may well endanger a great idea from being funded simply by missing a
deadline. And even more important is the fact that the next time you need such
clearance you do not want to be remembered as the person who made everybody
scramble at the last minute.

         Before moving on to examine the actual proposal, there are two tasks
that were briefly listed above that deserve a bit more attention. The first is the
somewhat cryptic (at least to first-time seekers of external funding) mention
of an "internal budget." Very likely the money a proposal writer seeks will not
in its entirety be applied to the proposed activities he/she seeks to fund; the
institution must also cover its own costs. At my institution, all external monies
awarded must be managed through an account at our Foundation Office. For
every monetary transaction made, the Foundation Office charges a percentage
to cover their costs for maintaining the account. Usually this "take" is only a
modest amount of the total funding, but the point here is that when writing
a proposal for external funding, it's usually wise to consider your budget page
to be tentative until you have meet with your institution's folks responsible for
overseeing external funding.

         Of even more significance to anyone writing a similar proposal to gar-
ner funds for developing a program is what I breezily mentioned in item number
eight above: getting your proposal cleared by your college or university's research
compliance body.

         A review of this kind is standard fare in the physical, applied, and social
sciences, where faculty routinely go after hefty private dollars to fund research
that in some way affects humans and/or animals in its investigation. However, for

                                                                                                  47
Griswold

anyone whose primary academic activity is in the liberal arts/humanities, espe-
cially English, where many PTW programs reside, this whole research clearance
concept may well be perplexing. Traditionally, "research" in our areas means, for
the most part, examining artifacts (primary and secondary texts, etc.). Though
we might assert these works "live and breathe," and some of the creators may still
be alive, we are not doing anything physically invasive by writing about another's
work.

         It is when the proposal writer indicates that he or she will be sallying
forth to talk, chat, interview, question, survey, or otherwise interact with actual
people (either face-to-face or by other means) that we stray into the realm of
using "human subjects," and at that point research clearance becomes an issue. I
indeed proposed to interact with great many students, employers, and technical
writing practitioners.

         What saved me from having to seek formal approval and potentially
months of delay (and thus missing the deadline) was the fact that what I was
going to do was programmatic in nature. Here is a point where "administration"
has positive connotations for the lone faculty member: since I was mainly go-
ing to consult with various interested people concerning the potential demand
and interest in a PTW master's degree and use the resulting information for
programmatic development (i.e., not publish it) I was in the clear. Such activity
is considered within the scope of regular administrative duties for department
chairs, program directors, and assistant professors looking to initiate new mas-
ter's degrees.

 writing the proposal: saying what you'll do

         I do not intend to take you though each moment of my writing the
week or so when I was actually drafting the proposal; going into what section I
wrote first, how many drafts it took, etc. would not really be helpful here. How-
ever, I do think it would be useful to go through the sections of the proposal and
discuss my rationale for exactly what I included. My main rationale for includ-
ing each section, of course, was primarily that the RFP stipulated them in one
form or another.

         I started off the text of the proposal with a rhetorical device I encourage
students to use in their professional documents: a concise purpose statement
that informs the reader exactly what the document is all about. Then, the first
paragraph of the "Rationale" section begins with a discussion of what I saw as
the connection between the master's degree and the area employers. Here the
proposal also stresses the importance of communication to the various enter-

48
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

prises mentioned in the RFP (business, industry, government, and non-profit
sectors) while also briefly providing a definition of technical and professional
writing and explaining its relevance to the Long Beach area in particular and the
global marketplace in general.

         Audience analysis, that concept we all come back to again and again
with our students, is what was behind placing this information in such a promi-
nent position; the RFP had stated that CGS was interested in funding pro-
grams that showed potential for meeting "local or regional workforce needs"
(See Appendix A). Therefore, I wanted to establish here the employment and
demographic diversity of the Long Beach area as I conveyed exactly what techni-
cal and professional writing was. In my experience, and the experience related
to me by the practicing writers from the local chapters of the National Society
for Technical Communication, most people, even those in academia (and even
English Departments), have a very narrow view of what "technical/professional"
writing entails.

         In the next two paragraphs, the proposal begins to fully outline the
"problem": few opportunities exist in California for the study of technical and
professional writing, especially at an advanced level. Here some modest evidence
is presented to suggest that such a demand exists generally, though specifically
assessing the demand/interest more locally will be a part of the grant activities.

         The last paragraph in the "Rationale" section overviews the problem
that this proposal is intended to begin a process in solving. The intent here is to
briefly demonstrate the kind of program that we would be looking to build.

         The next section, "Relevant Institutional Background," was one that
some campus colleagues and development experts I consulted with thought
I might want to greatly shorten or leave out altogether since the proposal
did not specifically call for it. Nonetheless, I still thought it was extremely
important to include, though it did take away some space for other sections.
Though some quick research on the CGS website indicated that their Board
of Directors consisted of folks (mostly deans and provosts) who had extensive
experience in higher education, I thought it best to provide some background
on the CSU for three reasons: 1) even those experienced in higher education
do not always know the particulars of other states' systems, 2) while the CGS
Board consisted of people familiar with various higher education systems, the
representatives of funding organizations they acknowledge in their literature,
who I supposed would likely examine at least some of the proposals, would not
be familiar with the CSU, 3) the RFP expressed interest in providing funding
to institutions with "a track record of admitting students to master's degree
programs . . . rather than offering master's degrees only to students admitted
to doctoral programs, but who do not complete the doctoral degree" (See Ap-

                                                                                                  49
Griswold

pendix A). I dang well wanted to be sure that they knew that this very much
characterized CSU Long Beach.

         The next section, "Proposed Plan of Action," as its name implies, out-
lined what I said we would do with the funding if awarded. Using the exact
wording in the proposal, these are listed below:

   1) Gather quantitative and qualitative data regarding student interest and
       perceptions for a master's degree in technical and professional writing.

   2) Consult with Employers and Current Professionals.
   3) Fully assess the feasibility and options of establishing the master's degree

       program.
   4) Draft an action plan for implementing the master's degree program in

       technical and professional writing.

         There is nothing particularly innovative about the action areas listed
here; they are appropriate steps for assessing the feasibility of any academic pro-
gram, and all are in line with what the RFP outlined as fundable activities.

                      how things stand

         And funded they were: the proposal was submitted on time, and a few
months later I learned that CGS had awarded us the grant. For a good part of
a semester and much of the summer break, I have been carrying out what was
promised in the proposal: wide consultation with students, faculty, technical
writing practitioners, and employers in order to establish the need for the MA
and begin considering the shape it might take. For me, as a "new" faculty mem-
ber, I have been able to make invaluable contacts both on our campus and in the
surrounding business community and have been amazed at how all sorts of folks
will pay attention when I mention that our project is "supported by funds from
the Ford Foundation." I also now have a thorough understanding of the campus
clearance process for faculty going after external funding.

         Which is a good thing, since the process is about to start all over again.
CGS has invited us to submit an implementation proposal: a report of the grant's
activities thus far as well as a detailed description of how we would like to set up
the program. In fact, as soon as I complete the manuscript of this very article and
email it to the editors of this volume, I plan to jump upon drafting that proposal
and initiating the clearance and support-letter gathering processes. I am glad to
say that I have allowed a bit more time to finish this one; the deadline is once

50
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

month hence, but, of course, the proposal is lengthier and the required letters of
support both more numerous and specific.

         The only glitch is that CGS has yet to receive final confirmation from
the Ford Foundation that it will provide the considerably larger funding for the
implementation grants. CGS has nonetheless encouraged us to submit these
proposals for follow-up grants.

                            an update

         It has been just about a year since I completed the terms of the planning
grant. As outlined in the proposal, I held meetings with local PTW practitioners
as well as those who employ them. I also conducted a survey of current English
majors at CSULB and orchestrated a focus group discussion of several students
enrolled in our upper-division PTW courses. In brief, these meetings established
that there did indeed exist a great deal of interest in this program.

         As another aspect of the grant, I consulted far and wide on our campus
concerning what it would take to set up a new PTW master's degree in our
department. What I discovered was quite close to what the director of our cer-
tificate program had told me: it would take around five or six years at the very
least to get approval from the required department, college, university, CSU
system, and California bureaucracies, and that did not include developing the
curriculum.

         Nonetheless, I did discover a much more expedient way to essentially
accomplish the same thing: we could develop an area of emphasis within our
current MA. We already had ten such emphases, ranging from medieval litera-
ture to rhetoric and composition. The only thing was that just as with all those
other emphases, the actual degree would say "Master of Arts in English" with
no mention of the particular concentration. However, I and other faculty from
the department didn't think that would be too great an impediment since it had
never dissuaded students from enrolling in the others.

         So, with input from a couple of interested colleagues, I wrote up a ra-
tionale describing the need and interest in and for the new MA emphasis and
a description of its curriculum. This included courses that we already offered
with a few more that would be developed (and that I and the others had wanted
to put together for quite some time). Ultimately, the document I developed
became the proposal for an "implementation grant" that CGS had invited us to
submit, whereupon I spiraled back into the previously described support-letter-
gathering and clearance-obtaining maelstrom.

                                                                                                  51
Griswold

         Unfortunately, we were not awarded an implementation grant. My fol-
low-up inquiries confirmed what I suspected were the reasons: our proposal was
not a bad one, but competition was extremely fierce for less funding than had
been expected. As a result, very few institutions received the second level of grant
funding.

         But that wasn't quite the end of the PTW master's degree concept. I
eventually had to report to my Dean that we didn't get implementation fund-
ing, but she was still enthusiastic and encouraged me (as did several other senior
faculty) to pursue the idea. It was also hinted that on-campus funding might be
available to provide some support. At any case I was congratulated for what I
had accomplished so far.

         Excited, I shared this information with the English Department Chair.
She also congratulated me on what I had done and urged me not to fret about
not getting the second proposal. However, she surprised me by expressing a
strong disinclination that I continue with the project. Below are the points she
raised.

         At our institution at least, it seemed that getting a grant proposal funded
and carrying out its terms is an activity that falls into an indeterminate grey area
for the purposes of retention, tenure, and promotion, the trinity of work that
no assistant professor can afford to ignore. Is writing a funded proposal equal
to a publication? To publication in a juried journal? Or is it just service? In the
case of someone like me, who teaches upper-division seminars devoted to things
like proposal writing, does it count as teaching development? Regardless of the
category writing a successful grant proposal falls into, and using the parlance of
my institution, another important question was did such work meet "essential"
or merely "enhancing."

         The written policies offered little clarity. While the Retention, Tenure,
and Promotion policy documents of the College of Liberal Arts hinted that
funded proposals could be considered "essential" items of scholarly research, our
department policies pretty clearly categorize them as "enhancing" (i.e., "lesser").
Though I had done well in my three-year retention review, it was clear that there
would be some doubt as to whether all this grant seeking was to count for much
in another couple of years when I was up for tenure and promotion.

         My Chair, rightly so, was concerned that continuing with the PTW
master's degree would get in the way of my publishing scholarly work. The for-
mer endeavor was something of a crapshoot concerning how it would contribute
to my six-year review; the latter was certain to be seen at "essential." As a result
then, of its nebulous scholarly status, I was strongly advised to shelve the PTW
master's idea for the time being. To return to the detective metaphor raised at the
outset of this article, I was taken off the case.

52
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

         The proposal outlining the option in professional and technical writing
for our current master's program remains on my office computer and archived
on my back-up flash-drive. I've shown a printed copy to a few of my newly ten-
ured colleagues and halfheartedly suggested they begin shepherding it through
our department and college curriculum process--lest the momentum gained for
the idea is lost during the next three years.

         So far, no one has taken up the offer.

              appendix a: the original rfp

                                 Council of Graduate Schools
             Professional Master's Program in the Social Sciences and Humanities

                                      Request for Proposal
                                          July 28, 2003

The Council of Graduate Schools [CSG] invites proposals for planning grants to sup-
port the needs assessment and development of professional master's degree programs in
the social science and humanities fields (PSSHM). Professional master's degree programs
prepare graduates for non-academic employment that serves local or regional workforce
needs rather than for doctoral study.

For the past two years, CGS has supported the development of professional master's pro-
grams in science and mathematics fields (see www.sciencemasters.com). With support
from the Ford Foundation, CGS recently conducted a survey of master's education in
the social sciences that generated interest among social science and humanities disciplin-
ary societies for a collaborative research and demonstration project that assesses the need
for and promising models of professional master's programs. The CGS/Ford program
will provide grants to CGS members to participate in this initiative.

Eligibility
All CGS member institutions that meet the following criteria are eligible to participate
in this program:

   · The institution must have a track record of admitting students to master's degree
       programs in the general disciplines specified for the project, rather than offering
       master's degrees only to students admitted to doctoral programs, but who do not
       complete the doctoral degree.

   · The institution and participating departments must have adopted strategic goals
       that are consistent with developing PSSHM programs that respond to non-aca-
       demic employment needs. Letters of endorsement from department chairs and
       administrative officials (including the graduate dean and chief academic officer)

                                                                                                  53
Griswold

       can be appended as evidence of commitment of faculty effort and institutional
       resources to the proposed PSSHM planning grant process.

Summary and Scope
The CGS/Ford project will provide grants to a significant number of member universi-
ties to participate in the collaborative research and demonstration project on profes-
sional master's education. The core of the project is the development of models of pro-
fessional master's programs that serve specific employment needs of business, industry,
government, and non-profit sectors. The models will provide additional insight into the
trajectories of master's education in relation to societal needs. We are hopeful that the
results of this PSSHM planning/development project will provide a compelling basis for
a second series of grants to implement some of the proposed PSSHM programs.

CGS will make a maximum of 60 PSSHM planning grants of up to $6,000 across a
broad range of social science and humanities disciplines in universities reflecting the
variety of CGS member institutions: private and public; minority and majority serving;
research/doctoral and master's focused. This coverage will demonstrate most effectively
the broad applicability of the concept of professional master's education and provide suf-
ficient numbers of models to attract the attention of colleagues and peers and to serve as
templates for replication of the programs in other departments and institutions.

Activities to be undertaken in the assessment and program planning process
The grants will provide support for activities such as:

   · Contacting prospective non-academic employers and engaging them in a discus-
       sion with departmental faculty and institutional officers concerning the skills and
       backgrounds they expect of new employees and realistic projections of workforce
       needs for PSSHM graduates.

   · Establishing an external board to advise on curricular issues, offer information,
       serve as external mentors to PSSHM students, and sponsor internships for stu-
       dents in PSSHM programs.

   · Conducting information sessions/focus groups/surveys among likely pools of
       prospective PSSHM students in order to determine interest and to project enroll-
       ments.

   · Assessing institutional and departmental commitments to and capabilities of de-
       veloping PSSHM programs, either by establishing new degree programs or by
       revising existing master's degree programs and incorporating professional com-
       ponents.

   · Developing a proposal for implementing one or more model PSSHM programs,
       provided employer, student, faculty, and institutional support are sufficiently
       strong. The proposal will include a PSSHM curriculum with appropriate dis-

54
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

       ciplinary core strength, components that develop high-level communications
       and professional skills, and employer commitments for internship experiences.
       A business plan will be required that includes projection of tuition appropri-
       ate for the applicant pools, contributions for program funding from employers
       and the institution, internship stipends/salaries, and other revenue sources that
       allow the program to be developed and sustained at a cost acceptable to the
       institution.

Application materials for an assessment and planning grant
Institutions are encouraged to submit proposals for as many as three PSSHM assessment
and planning grants per institution. The body of the proposals for each program area
should not exceed five pages2.

The proposals must:
   · Demonstrate an interest in and commitment to master's education by faculty and
       the institution, including appropriate credit for faculty through the university
       review and reward system
   · Propose strategies to seek the participation of minorities and other underrepre-
       sented groups
   · Commit appropriate matching funds and effort to accomplish the goals of the
       planning grant: in most cases we anticipate these goals would include a proposal
       to create a PSSHM program
   · Indicate an interest in establishing PSSHM programs in two or more depart-
       ments
   · List activities to be used to determine needs, interest, and institutional capacity
       for developing PSSHM programs

Appended material as required to:
   · Document that faculty from departments that would be most likely to develop
       PSSHM proposals are committed to the project (department letters that express
       interest in and commit faculty efforts to the project are particularly relevant.)
   · Assure that the activities and intent of the grant are consistent with and comple-
       mentary to the institutional mission and strategic plans (a letter of endorsement
       by the chief academic officer or president would be particularly useful.)
   · Provide evidence of endorsement by the graduate school (a letter from the gradu-
       ate dean or other person responsible for graduate education at the institution.)

Project time-line
July 2003: CGS sends RFP to member institutions and posts on CGS website
October 15, 2003: Deadline for response to RFP for CGS/Ford PSSHM planning grant

                                                                                                  55
Griswold

Oct.-Nov. 2003: Evaluation of proposals in response to RFP
November 2003: CGS/Ford PSSHM grants awarded to graduate deans
December 2003: CGS Annual meeting: plenary session on professional master's educa-
tion and meeting/progress reports for deans, directors of CGS/Ford PSSHM projects
May 2004: Interim reports due from PSSHM planning project directors/graduate deans
July 2004: Meeting of PSSHM deans and directors at CGS Summer Workshop
September 2004: Final reports due for CGS/Ford PSSHM planning grants. Proposals
for implementing proposed PSSHM programs due

Responses to this RFP in the form of proposals for a CGS/Ford PSSHM Planning Grant
may be sent via e-mail (preferred) or by U.S. mail (with an e-mail notice that proposal
is being sent).

Send completed applications to For more information or questions, contact
Council of Graduate Schools Les Sims or Peter Syverson
Professional Master's Degrees lsims@cgs.nche.edu or psyverson@cgs.nche.edu
One Dupont Circle, NW, Suite 430 Phone: (202) 223-3791
Washington DC 20036 FAX: (202) 331-7157
www.cgsnet.org

1 Professional Master's Programs in the Social Sciences: Current Status and Future Possi-
bilities, Report to the Ford Foundation. The Council of Graduate Schools, Washington,
DC 2003. Available upon request.
2 The Professional Science Master's startup checklist (http://www.sciencemasters.com/
startup_checklist.html) provides a set of topics that could be useful in developing a
PSSHM proposal.

                 appendix b: the proposal

         A Professional Master's Degree Program in Technical/Professional Writing:
                                  A Planning Grant Proposal

                                           Prepared for:
                               The Council of Graduate Schools
          Professional Master's Program in the Social Sciences and Humanities

                                            Prepared by:
                                    W. Gary Griswold, PhD
                                     Department of English
                           California State University, Long Beach

                                      1250 Bellflower Blvd.
                                 Long Beach, CA 90840-2403

56
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

Purpose Statement
This proposal outlines a four-part process to enable faculty at California State University,
Long Beach (CSULB) to develop an implementation plan for a Professional/Technical
Writing program leading to a Master of Arts degree.

Rationale
The city of Long Beach, California, its surrounding communities, and the greater
Southern California area abound with corporations, government agencies, and non-
profit organizations requiring the advanced skills of specialized communicators. Sim-
ply stated, prose communication is a staple of success; no organization in this region
can thrive and grow without professional writers. In all forms of print and electronic
media, the technical and professional writer in Southern California is the conduit to
a wide variety of internal and external audiences with diverse linguistic, cultural, and
demographic profiles. The scope of this diversity becomes evident with the realization
that over 40 different languages and dialects are spoken in the city of Long Beach
(LBUSD, 2003).

However, few opportunities exist in California for graduate-level study in the area of
technical and professional writing. The Society for Technical Communication's national
Academic Programs Database lists only 15 universities in California offering any course-
work in technical and professional communication. Only five of those are within a 50
mile radius of the Long Beach area, and all of these are certificate and/or extension pro-
grams. In fact, there exists no master's degree program whatsoever in California focusing
specifically on technical and professional writing (STC, 2003).

Nonetheless, the websites of the Los Angeles and Orange County chapters of the Soci-
ety of Technical Communication list more than 50 current job announcements in the
area (LASTC, 2003; OCSTC, 2003), and the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational
Outlook Handbook indicates that the employment rate of such positions "is expected to
increase faster than average" (U.S. Department of Labor, 2003). Money magazine has
suggested that work as a communicator in scientific, technical, medical, and other spe-
cialized areas is one of the top twenty best careers in the nation (Gilbert, 1994).

A professional master's degree program in technical and professional writing will provide
students the opportunity for in-depth study of the advanced rhetorical and composi-
tional theories and practices necessary for them to be leaders in designing, composing,
and editing the prose and visual media so critical to success in nearly every industrial,
scientific, governmental, technical, corporate, institutional, and philanthropic endeavor.
This same master's degree would offer academic study and training concerning com-
municating with multicultural and multilingual audiences. In addition, completion of

                                                                                                  57
Griswold

such a program would confer upon students the appropriate advanced credential often
required by employers for career advancement.

Relevant Institutional Background
The California State University (CSU) system consists of 23 campuses offering bach-
elor's and master's degrees in more than 1,600 programs in approximately 240 subjects.
(CSU, 2002). CSULB is the largest campus in the California State University system
and the second largest institution of higher education in the state.

Currently, the CSULB Department of English offers a Technical and Professional Writ-
ing (TPW) Certificate Program. Earned in conjunction with a baccalaureate or master's
degree (usually, but not always in English or related areas), the program requires 24 units
of coursework. A capstone portfolio project and internship experience are also required.
A small Advisory Council, consisting of various area practitioners (in both freelance and
in full-time positions), assists faculty in the overall direction of the program. As valuable
and established as the TPW Certificate Program is, in its current form it cannot offer
the scope and contemporary focus that a full master's degree program would provide.

The vision set for here, then, is to allow our faculty to build upon the foundation of the
current TPW Program at CSULB, so that it may develop into the leading technical and
professional writing graduate program it has the potential to be.

Proposed Plan of Action
The following four action areas are proposed as most critical in developing a sound
academic and financial plan for a master's degree in technical and professional writing at
CSULB. Under each are listed the proposed activities to be carried out with the support
of this planning grant.

1) Gather quantitative and qualitative data regarding student interest and perceptions for a
master's degree in technical and professional writing: Methods to be used include written
surveys as well as focus groups. Current graduate students as well as graduating bacca-
laureate students will be included in these efforts. Expertise from those faculty and staff
involved in the Department of Communication's Hauth Center for Communication
Skills can be drawn upon for establishing and conducting the focus group interviews.

2) Consult with Employers and Current Professionals: Area employers as well as practicing
technical communicators will be consulted in a needs assessment process concerning the
advanced skills and knowledge they see as important to include in such a master's degree.
Special emphasis will be placed on involving, whenever possible, those practitioners and
employers from minorities and other underrepresented groups. The TPW Certificate

58
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

Advisory Committee will be a valuable resource in this activity, which will likely result
in a wider range of interested employers and practitioners participating in the advisory
board established for the proposed master's degree program.

3) Fully assess the feasibility and options of establishing the master's degree program: An in-
terdisciplinary and interdepartmental range of faculty, staff, and administrators will be
consulted concerning the options available for establishing the master's degree.

Faculty, staff, and administrator expertise can be drawn upon from a number of depart-
ments and programs both within and external to the College of Liberal Arts: the Depart-
ment of English's Composition Program, the Department of Communication Studies,
the Department of Computer Science, the Department of Political Science, the Center
for Language Minority Education and Research, the Hauth Center for Communica-
tion Skills, the Writer's Resource Lab, the College of Engineering, the Department of
Journalism, the College of Business Administration, and the College of Natural Sciences
and Mathematics.

4) Draft an action plan for implementing the master's degree program in technical and
professional writing. Led by the principal investigator, faculty and staff involved in the
planning process will draft an action plan for the technical and professional writing
master's program. Drawing upon the input gathered in the consultation process de-
tailed above, this document will outline the most feasible program structure as well as
estimates of costs and available funding.

Throughout the planning, faculty and staff involved with remain cognizant of the
fiscal climate likely to continue for some time in California. Plans for having the
program generate, whenever possible, its own revenue streams and strategic develop-
ment plans will be examined along with traditional programmatic funding sources. In
addition, throughout the planning process the integration of outreach to minority/
underrepresented student populations will be a priority.

Course release time will be provided to the Project Director by the Department of Eng-
lish and the College of Liberal Arts to facilitate this planning grant. (A normal workload
at this campus is four 3-unit courses per semester.) During the preparation of the action
plan as well as any ensuing proposal development for funding and implementation,
other faculty will participate as time and resources are available.

It is important to note that the Department of English has the expertise necessary to
develop and carry forward the planning process here, as well as the implement the re-
sultant master's degree program. In the last three years alone, three tenure-track faculty

                                                                                                  59
Griswold

have been hired with experience in general technical writing and rhetoric, visual literacy,
new media, applied writing technologies, and scientific/technical editing. In addition, a
core of five full-time lecturers regularly teach classes within the current TPW Certificate
program. Among these eight faculty, six bring extensive marketplace experience in tech-
nical and professional writing.

Conclusion
CSULB is uniquely positioned to develop a viable professional master's program in tech-
nical and professional writing, one that can draw upon its broad array of institutional
expertise and resources to provide students with a learning experience that is grounded
in current theoretical and practical applications. It is hoped that once such a program is
established, the planning process and the actual program may serve as models for other
institutions to develop their own professional master's degree programs.

References
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook,

   2002-03 Edition, Writers and Editors. Accessed online at <http://www.bls.gov/oco/
   ocos089.htm>. (Date of access: October 4, 2003).
California State University, "About the CSU." Accessed online at <www.calstate.edu>.
   (Date of access: February 13, 2002)
Gilbert, J. "The Best Jobs in America." Money. 23.3 (1994): 70-73.
Long Beach Unified School District, "About the District." Accessed online at <http://www.
   lbusd.k12.ca.us/research/update2001/index.html>. (Date of access: October 7, 2003).
Los Angeles Society for Technical Communication. Accessed online at
   <http://www.lastc.org> (Date of access: October 1, 2003).
Orange County Society for Technical Communication. Accessed online at
   <http://www.stc.org/academic.asp> (Date of access: October 1, 2003).
San Gabriel Valley Society for Technical Communication. Accessed online at <http://
   www.stcsgv.org> (Date of access: October 1, 2003).
Society for Technical Communication, "Academic Programs." Accessed online at <http://
   www.stc.org/academic.asp> (Date of access: October 1, 2003)

Tentative Schedule

December 2003/January 2004:
Plan, organize; and design survey instruments and focus group sessions; attend CGS
Annual meeting (Dec. 3-6), assemble core faculty team; hire GA assistance.
February/March 2004:
Administer surveys; conduct focus groups; consult with faculty, staff, and administration
in other departments; develop employer and practitioner contacts.

60
                                                                                        Composing a Proposal

April/May 2004:
Analyze survey response, focus group, and interview data; begin drafting of action plan;
circulate action plan draft for institutional input.
June/July2004:
Prepare final draft of action plan; attend Summer Workshop (July 10-14).

                           works cited

Conners, Robert J. "The Rise of Technical Writing Instruction in America." Tech-
   nical Writing and Communication. 12.4 (1982): 329-51. Rpt. in Teaching Tech-
   nical Communication: Critical Issues for the Classroom. Ed. James M. Dubinsky.
   Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2004. 77-98.

Council of Graduate Schools. The Council of Graduate Schools: Advocacy, Research
   Innovation. Washington, D.C.: Council of Graduate Schools, 2004. 10 Sep-
   tember, 2004. http://www.cgsnet.org/aboutcgs/brochure.htm

Gage, John T. "On `Rhetoric' and `Composition'." An Introduction to Compositions
   Studies. Ed. Erika Lindemann and Gary Tate. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.
   15-32.

                                                                                                  61
4 Disciplinary Identities: Professional Writing,
  Rhetorical Studies, and Rethinking "English"

   Brent Henze
   Wendy Sharer
   Janice Tovey

         More than a program's course content, a curriculum is a contested
         representation of the public identity of an institution and a discipline.

                       - David B. Downing, Claude Mark Hurlbert, and Paula Mathieu (1)

         Few of us in professional and technical writing or rhetoric and composi-
tion have avoided the turf wars that often accompany the development or revi-
sion of curricula within English departments. At institutions across the country,
faculty in these areas have attempted to carve a niche for themselves, often in
the midst of heated resistance. When we, along with several of our tenured and
untenured colleagues in the areas of rhetoric, linguistics, and professional writ-
ing, proposed a curriculum for an undergraduate concentration in "Rhetorical
Studies and Professional Writing" (RSPW) as one option for English majors at
East Carolina University (a regional state university with approximately four
thousand graduate and sixteen thousand undergraduate students), we certainly
felt some heat.

         At the time we developed our proposal, the department offered two
degree options: 1) a BA in English, and 2) a BA in English with a Concentra-
tion in Writing. The former option provided students with detailed knowledge
of literary periods and genres, while the latter combined course options in
creative writing, technical and professional writing, and rhetoric and compo-
sition. As we describe below, faculty specialists in technical and professional
writing and rhetoric and composition, frustrated by curricular limitations
within the Concentration in Writing, developed a new curriculum that would
provide students with an opportunity for focused study of writing in a variety
of professional and civic contexts. While the Concentration in Writing had
made sense when it was developed--a time in which creative writing courses
constituted the majority of writing courses in the department--the growth

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.04  63
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

of course offerings and faculty presence in rhetoric and professional writing
seemed to call for curricular revision. We envisioned that our proposal would
lead to two separate, but ultimately more purposeful, concentrations in writ-
ing--one a rhetorically based study of writing in the workplace and the com-
munity, and the other a creative writing track with course parameters and
requirements to be developed by creative writing faculty. We intended for the
RSPW concentration to provide both theory and practice for undergraduates
interested in a variety of writing-related careers. In order to provide this fo-
cused study, our revised concentration omitted a few of the previously required
literary history courses required of all students in the existing BA curriculum.
While we suspected that these changes might meet with some resistance, we
hoped that, by retaining some of the literature requirements and by making
the argument that this new concentration would increase the total number of
English majors, we could persuade our colleagues that the revisions were in the
department's best interest.

         At a rather contentious faculty meeting, the motion we put forward to
incorporate the new RSPW concentration was critiqued and ultimately tabled
pending further discussion among department faculty. The attempt to reconfig-
ure our offerings to English majors met with significant resistance and exposed
tenuous relationships among the disparate scholarly and pedagogical interests
in our department. We had thrown open the floodgates of disagreement about
what a degree in "English" means. The proposed changes prompted faculty in
the department to engage in heated, sometimes painful, but ultimately necessary
conversations about what the "core" courses in the department should be and
what a "core" in an English Department should accomplish.

         We discuss three aspects of our proposed program here: 1) The structure
and rationale of the revised curriculum; 2) The departmental identity issues our
proposal raised, including the instability of disciplinary boundaries that demar-
cated the department's programs in the past; and 3) The tactical changes we
would make if we could start this process anew. This article is not intended to be
a gripe session--such an indulgence would assist neither us nor our readers. In-
stead, we discuss our conflicts, frustrations, and missteps in the spirit of working
through them. How might the process of proposing a new curriculum have been
better executed? What problematic assumptions and communicative practices
impeded our attempts to revise the curriculum, and what might we have done
to better respond to these problems? We conclude our discussion on a positive
note, with a brief overview of some of the positive results that this struggle has
produced. We believe that our story, through the cautionary tales and advice it
provides, will interest other faculty and administrators who are just embarking
on the process of constructing an undergraduate program in technical and pro-

64
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

fessional writing, and who are, in the process, redefining the boundaries among
traditional and emerging specializations within English departments.

                     proposed revisions

At the time of our proposal, the department awarded two Bachelor degrees--a
BA in English, which focused primarily on literature; and a BA in English with
a Concentration in Writing. In the past, the department has offered a BA in
English Education, but that program was recently relocated to the College of
Education. The BA in English with a Concentration in Writing was first listed in
the 1978-79 undergraduate catalog, and, although two distinct BA concentra-
tions were elaborated beginning with that catalogue, all English majors began
their undergraduate major programs with a "common core" of courses. The na-
ture of the courses included in this common core has changed over the years,
with recent configurations of the core requiring students to take a fairly specific
sequence of literary studies courses. The chart below shows the 2004-05 core:

 2004-05 Undergraduate Catalogue
 Core Courses (required of students in both Concentrations)

     · ENGL 2000. Interpreting Literature
     · ENGL 3000. Lit in English to 1700
     · ENGL 3010. Lit in English, 1700-1880
     · ENGL 3020. Lit in English, 1880-Present
     · One Shakespeare course (Tragedies, Comedies, or Histories)

 For English (Literature) Concentration
     · One course in language or composition
         (includes courses in linguistics,
         composition and rhetoric, and creative writing, but not professional writing)

 For Writing Concentration
     · One non-writing elective; choices include linguistics, film studies, as well as
         other literature courses

figure 1: core requirements, 2004-05 catalogue

                                                                                                  65
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

Prior to our proposal for an RSPW curriculum, the consensus among a sig-
nificant segment of the faculty for several semesters had been that we needed
to reevaluate and reconfigure our undergraduate major and consider possible
changes, particularly to the overburdened and perhaps overly specific core. The
reasons for such a reconfiguration were several:

   1. Use of faculty strengths: The course options in the existing curriculum did
   not take advantage of the department's growing number of faculty (fifteen at
   the time of this writing) with strengths in technical and professional writing,
   discourse analysis, linguistics, and rhetoric and composition, particularly at
   the upper-division undergraduate level. For example, faculty specialists in
   rhetoric and composition had only one upper-division course at the under-
   graduate level: English 3810: Advanced Composition.

   2. Recognition of disciplinary diversity: The limited selection of core and
   elective courses in these areas reflected a lack of recognition and value for
   these areas in the undergraduate curriculum.

   3. Response to student course needs: The selection of writing courses was
   heavily weighted toward creative writing and did not address the needs
   of students in the writing concentration who were not interested in cre-
   ative writing. Creative writing workshops--two each in poetry, fiction,
   playwriting, and creative nonfiction--offered a variety of writing experi-
   ences for those interested, but there was a noticeable absence of courses in
   rhetorical theory and composition studies. Other "non-creative" writing
   courses included two services courses, business writing and scientific writ-
   ing (both grandfathered in when the WAC program established writing re-
   quirements in all disciplines), and only three courses created especially for
   professional writing: editing, publications development, and internships.

   4. Coordination of departmental programs: The undergraduate curriculum
   was not clearly coordinated with the graduate curriculum. We believed that
   our strong MA program in professional and technical communication would
   be enhanced by a strong BA in writing, as would the department's PhD pro-
   gram in Technical and Professional Discourse. This PhD program includes
   three focus areas: technical and professional communication, writing studies
   and pedagogy, and discourses and cultures. While the third area--discours-
   es and cultures--was represented in several of the department's literature

66
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

   courses, the first two areas and the study of linguistics (an important compo-
   nent of the third area) lacked a strong emphasis in the undergraduate major.
In response to these situations, we proposed a curriculum that decreased the
number of required (core) courses, created new courses in both rhetorical studies
and professional writing, and provided more flexibility for students:

2004-2005 ba in english (36 s.h.)

Concentration in English                Concentration in Writing

2000. Interpreting Literature           2000. Interpreting Literature

3000. Lit in English to 1700            3000. Lit in English to 1700

3010. Lit in English, 1700-1880         3010. Lit in English, 1700-1880

3020. Lit in English, 1880-Present      3020. Lit in English, 1880-Present

One SHAKESPEARE                         One SHAKESPEARE
(Comedies, Histories, or Tragedies)     (Comedies, Histories, or Tragedies)

One course in LANGUAGE or               Six courses in WRITING
COMPOSITION                             (includes courses in composition, prof
(includes courses in linguistics,       comm, and creative writing)
composition, and creative writing, but
not prof comm)

Six ENGLISH ELECTIVES                   One ENGLISH ELECTIVE
(excludes writing courses)              (excludes writing courses)

figure 2a: comparison of 2004-2005 and proposed bachelor of
arts curricula in english

                                                                                67
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

                          proposed ba in english (36 s.h.)

Concentration in English    Concentration in Rhe- Concentration in
Literature                  torical Studies and Profes- Creative Writing
                            sional Writing (RSPW)

2000. Interpreting          2000. Interpreting Litera- To be defined by faculty in
        Literature
                            ture                          creative writing
3000. Lit in English to
        1700                One upper-level lit course

3010. Lit in English,       One course from
        1700-1880           linguistics, film,
                            folklore or creative writing
3020. Lit in English,
        1880-Present        3030. Intro to Rhet Stud-
                                    ies*
One SHAKESPEARE
(Comedies, Histories, or    3040. Intro to Prof Wtg*
Tragedies)                  4885. Capstone Semr in

                                    RSPW*

One course in               Four courses in RSPW,
LANGUAGE or                 with at least one from
COMPOSITION                 each area:
(includes courses in
linguistics,                A. Professional Writing
composition, and creative   B. Rhetorical Studies
writing, but not prof
comm)

Six ENGLISH                 Two ENGLISH
ELECTIVES                   ELECTIVES
(excludes writing courses)

* indicates proposed new course
figure 2b: comparison of 2004-2005 and proposed bachelor of
arts curricula in english

         Once our first draft was submitted informally to the faculty for review,
the department held two open meetings for faculty to respond to the proposal.
These meetings highlighted conflicts that, although present for many years, had

68
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

been generally overcome by a collegial environment. In a department in which
rhetoric and professional writing courses are strong programs at the MA level
(the MA degree in Technical and Professional Writing, for example, has a matur-
ing online degree with about seventy-five active students, a majority of the de-
partment's MA students) and are a significant factor in a PhD program, some of
the faculty not specifically involved with these areas became concerned and dis-
turbed by our proposed reduction in the number of required literature courses
for students pursuing the RSPW concentration. Some even suggested that since
RSPW faculty "had [the] PhD," we should let literature faculty "have the BA."
Our attempt to extend our presence to the undergraduate major became a ter-
ritorial struggle. The extent to which reactions to our proposal reflected struggles
over institutional power can be seen in the responses of faculty in other areas of
study that were also not firmly rooted in the departmental core. While we were
perceived by some faculty as upstarts trying to deny the "soul" of English--the
study and composition of literature--our proposal garnered support from fac-
ulty teaching in other areas with limited visibility in the major: linguistics and
multicultural literature.

            the meaning(s) and boundaries
                  of the "english" major

         Our conclusion that the resistance that we encountered was tied up
in larger territorial battles is hardly earth-shattering. It will be more revealing,
and, we hope, helpful to our readers for us to analyze the specific scholarly
and institutional conditions that demarcated disciplinary boundaries and sub-
sequently fueled that resistance. On the one hand, these sorts of conflict may
be the inevitable consequence of gathering together any group of twenty or fifty
or (in our case) eighty strong-willed people who are devoted to what they do.
On the other hand, while there is no doubt that ego and personality conflicts
have had some part in this resistance, we do not want to reduce the divergence
of opinions to "interpersonal conflict" or to present that divergence as simplistic
"us vs. them" factioning. Rather, we would like to outline some of the differing
assumptions that inform the department's guiding terms and that maintain (or
challenge) the boundaries among the many scholarly pursuits currently housed
within the English department. Departments of all shapes and sizes have had to
deal with just the kinds of conflict that we have wrestled with: conflicts over the
real "meaning" of the English major, the role of the so-called "practical" courses
in an English curriculum, and the merits and problems of institutionally sepa-
rating writing from literature.

                                                                                                  69
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

         In his concept of "disciplinary boundary-work," sociologist Thomas
Gieryn offers a useful lens through which to examine the controversies that
arose within our department (see also David Russell's discussion of bound-
ary work in the composition/literature split). According to Gieryn, a disci-
pline's representatives strategically shape its boundaries by means of discourse:
they articulate the discipline's mission in a certain way, they define a set of
characteristic problems to coincide with the discipline's methodologies, they
articulate collective values, and they engage in other practices to widen the
discipline's scope and strengthen its resources. In Gieryn's approach, the epis-
temological, ontological, and practical relationship between a discipline and
the surrounding culture is interpreted according to a cartographic metaphor.
Gieryn employs this familiar metaphor to explain that a discipline relates
to other disciplines, and to larger systems of knowledge and activity, in the
same manner as a geographic territory relates to neighboring territories and
to the larger land mass that encloses it. Furthermore, the relationships be-
tween neighboring territories strongly influence the overall health, power, and
legitimacy of the involved territories. As such, it is helpful to know how the
boundaries between territories are formulated and how they share resources.

         What's up for grabs in boundary conflicts is not just traditional "re-
sources" (such as faculty lines, research funds, courses, and students), but also
control over representations of the discipline's central problems, concepts,
and methods--that is, the "rhetorical resources" that disciplines create and
maintain in order to solidify their boundaries. Contests over the department's
undergraduate curriculum have the potential to shape not only very practical
matters like hiring priorities and new course creation, but also the distribu-
tion of rhetorical resources--namely, formulations of "English" as a discipline.
One of the primary rhetorical resources in this case is control over the names
assigned to different programmatic elements--concentrations, degrees, and so
on--of the department.

         As rhetorical attempts to construct a sense of collective identification,
the names that an academic department chooses to apply to its programmatic
structures stand in for larger arguments about the mission and the justification
of the department. What Charles J. Stewart, Craig Allen Smith, and Robert
E. Denton say about terms involved in social movement debates also applies
to conflicts within academic departments: The terms we choose "play a role in
determining sides of a conflict, specific views of reality, notions of right and
wrong, and needed corrective action" (161). As points where social struggles
occur as views of reality and notions of right and wrong are negotiated, the
names we give to our pedagogical and scholarly endeavors provide important

70
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

sites for examining how language intervenes between division and cooperation
within academic units.

         No doubt the most contested term we battled with in our proposed cur-
ricular revisions was the name "English." The disciplinary boundaries established
through this term are tremendously volatile. While many scholars in different areas
of English talk about "English Studies" in their scholarship--and by this phrase
signify various textual specialties--the term "English," rather than the two-word
name "English Studies," often remains the official name of academic departments.
This official name, which omits the plural "studies" designation, reflects the pug-
nacity with which particular areas of study remain the expected focus of English
departments. As many scholars have documented, the name "English" has, over
the past century, come to equal "Literature," and an "English major" means a
"Literature major," no matter how many times we refer to "English Studies" in our
scholarship. While literary studies are by no means monolithic--the name "liter-
ary studies" in fact encompasses a wide array of texts and scholarly approaches to
them--this area has been defined by some scholars within the specialty in a way
that limits the scope of "legitimate" textual studies within English departments.

         Such legitimating processes of definition are illustrated in some of the
discussion that circulated within our department after we introduced our pro-
posal. In response to the controversy, an ad hoc committee was formed to ex-
plore ways to revise the department's curriculum. As part of this exploration,
the committee circulated a survey to faculty, asking for opinions about the mis-
sions and purposes of the English department. While several people envision
a department devoted to language study broadly conceived to include literary
studies, linguistics, composition and rhetoric, creative writing, and technical
and professional writing, others expressed a belief that literary study is the busi-
ness of English departments. In one survey response, a faculty member urged
the adoption of a curriculum that would include the most possible literature
courses. In another response, a faculty member recommended that the required
"core" courses for the department should include only literary surveys.

         Equations of "English" with "literary studies" result in part from the
ways in which the term "English" is defined and structured by professional or-
ganizations that claim to represent practitioners in the field. Karen Fitts and Bill
Lalicker point out that the MLA has the power to define and delimit "English"
in a way that determines "what is central, what marginal; what's remarkable,
[and] what's barely noticed" (428). Recent articles included in the MLA's Profes-
sions journal, Fitts and Lalicker argue, portray teaching writing as drudgery--as
the work that must be endured before the teaching of serious and valuable "Eng-
lish" courses can take place. These understandings--or misunderstandings--of

                                                                                                  71
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

writing instruction make it very hard to create a larger, more inclusive under-
standing of the term "English."

         A 2003 ADE Bulletin dedicated to discussing the English major simi-
larly reinforces the centrality of a particular kind of non-utilitarian, aesthetic
literary study in English departments. Addressing the doubts of many parents
about the practical value of an English degree for their children, editor David
Laurence suggests that "a specific and valuable sort of uselessness characterizes
true engagement in the learning that serious consideration of literature uniquely
affords"; yet, he continues, "part of the value of that specific uselessness lies in
how useful it eventually shows itself to be in various walks of life. We are bound
to be incurably ambivalent and conflicted on the subject of the `practical value'
of studying English" (5). Laurence makes an excellent point about the significant
long-term practical value of studying literature: the descriptor "useful" too often
is used to denote only immediately measurable and applicable skills, ignoring
the practical benefits of long-range attitudes and habits of thought. Indeed, the
practical value of what Peter Elbow calls "imaginative" language is often over-
looked. As Elbow explains, "Imaginative language touches people most deeply;
sometimes it's the only language use that gets through" (537). In other words,
to achieve the effect we wish to have upon an audience--to accomplish a very
practical goal--we need to be able to use imaginative language, and the study of
literary texts is often a tremendously effective way to develop facility with such
language. Yet Laurence's assertion about the "incurable ambivalence and con-
flict" surrounding the study of "English" rests on the assumption that an English
degree does not include courses in rhetoric and composition or technical and
professional writing, courses with more immediately identifiable practical value.

         The name "English" is made to signify and exclude certain kinds of
teaching and research in local contexts as well. For instance, the BA in English in
our department had two concentration options at the time we proposed a new
curriculum. One concentration was called a concentration in "English." This
literary-intensive option was the "regular" concentration--the one that had no
modifier and was identical in name with the department itself. The second con-
centration option was a Concentration in Writing. It is no coincidence that the
concentration focusing on literature was called the concentration in "English"
(and thus named the same as the department as a whole) while the Concentra-
tion in Writing was designated by a different term.

         Underlying these attempts to identify what does and does not count as
"English" are well-established assumptions about disciplinary unity--unity in
purpose and mission. One of the clearest forms of what Gieryn calls "boundary-
work" is the strategic act of defining a discipline's purpose or mission according
to a principle of coherence that legitimizes one type of activity while delegitimiz-

72
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

ing others. In the case of "English," claims about the "core" of the discipline--
and even claims that English is a unified discipline--create a cultural map of
"English" that normalizes certain types of work while pushing other work to the
margins. The components, and indeed the very concept, of a unified core for the
English department, not surprisingly, became a site of heated discussion during
our departmental wrangling.

         As mentioned above, both concentration options started with a com-
mon "core" consisting of "Interpreting Literature," "Shakespeare," and three
courses in literary history. Beyond this core, the two curricula diverged almost
completely. Students in the "English" concentration took eighteen additional
hours in literature plus one writing course, while the students in the Concen-
tration in Writing took eighteen additional hours in writing (picking at their
discretion from courses in creative writing, technical and professional writing, or
rhetoric and composition) plus one non-writing course. In this Concentration
in Writing, students did not receive systematic introduction to the concepts,
questions, and methods of rhetoric or professional writing. One of our main
goals in designing and proposing the RSPW curriculum, thus, was to ensure
that students would have a "coherent experience" of these areas on some level.
We proposed introductory courses in rhetoric and professional communica-
tion, plus a "capstone" seminar in which students would be asked to reflect on
the whole of their major experience. In the disciplinary map defined by our
proposal, we intended to provide a meaningful "core" experience for students
interested in rhetoric and professional writing, a core that would replace the
disjointed experience provided by the Concentration in Writing and a "core" of
literature courses that made almost no reference to what those students would
later encounter in their advanced writing courses.

         Ironically, it was precisely our desire to create a "coherent" program
that got us into trouble--not because other faculty rejected the idea of coher-
ence, but because they disputed the principle of coherence that our curriculum
proposed. In fact, nothing was more consistent than the argument by our critics
that students should have a "shared experience" of some kind--but when these
critics argued that students need a "coherent experience" of the English major,
what they meant was the "coherent experience" that the curriculum, as config-
ured before our proposal, provided: the fifteen hours of literature that existed
in both concentrations. It was this core experience of literary study that our
proposal threatened.

         The idea that the department, rather than the concentration options
available within the department, should be the level at which students share
a common academic experience has been championed mostly, though not ex-
clusively, by literature faculty, who have also been those most likely to refer to

                                                                                                  73
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

"English" as a discipline with various sub-disciplines (including creative writing,
rhetoric, professional writing, linguistics, and so on). By contrast, many of the
faculty in areas other than literary study have tended to refer to their own areas
as "disciplines" existing within the English department, which itself serves as an
institutional framework of related disciplines, each with its own core. Several
responses to the faculty survey circulated by the ad-hoc committee suggest that
English is not a discipline in the way other so-called disciplines, such as his-
tory and mathematics, are. Rather, English is an administrative structure that
coordinates related but different disciplines. In this cultural map, "English" has
an institutional reality, while rhetoric, professional writing, and so on have the
more fundamental disciplinary realities. Working from this view of English as an
institutional, rather than disciplinary, reality, some faculty have suggested that
we investigate the possibility of establishing a College of English with different
departments within that college.

         The "disciplinary boundary-work" perspective illuminates how a group
of generally fair-spirited, sincere, and intelligent people can hold and vigorously
defend positions that appear irreparably at odds with one another. Departments
of English are eclectic spaces, and it is not surprising that the residents of those
spaces would depend upon different maps to help them make their way. It might
be too much to expect to formulate a single boundary map that everyone can
use. Absent that possibility, if we want to be able to refigure and expand maps
that others have had a hand in drawing, it is handy at least to be able to read
those maps effectively.

                      "english" lessons

         By enabling better understanding--better readings--of the different
disciplinary maps operating within English departments, the boundary-work
perspective can also enable more productive discussions within those de-
partments. In this section, we highlight some communicative strategies that
might lead to a process of change that is less fraught with territorial tensions.
More specifically, we present some steps we might have taken--and that we
think other faculty at other institutions may wish to take--to better prepare
the way for proposed curricular changes. This is not to suggest that we could
somehow have avoided all resistance or to imply that it's always in the best
interest of professional writing and rhetoric faculty to remain housed within
"English" departments (indeed, there are many successful, independent pro-
grams); rather, if we wish to maintain close departmental ties with our col-
leagues in literature--and, at this point, this is our goal at ECU--we have a

74
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

responsibility to find out how best to communicate and justify our proposals
to them.

  Strategy #1: Discovering and Addressing Mistrust and Misunderstandings

         One thing our story suggests for others who might be in a position to
propose changes such as we did is the necessity to conduct--preferably before
proposing curricular changes--the kind of meta-analysis of faculty alliances, fac-
ulty understandings of key terms, and faculty perceptions of disciplinary bound-
aries that we have conducted in this article. Discovering fault lines in faculty un-
derstanding of a department's identity and purpose is a critical first step toward
productive change.

         To be sure, we needed to better address our colleagues' mistrust of
things "professional" and "technical." The attitudes of many assessment-focused
bureaucrats toward the liberal arts has resulted in gut-level hostility on the part
of some of our colleagues toward any program that proposes to teach commu-
nication that is in any way technical or business-related. Many of our colleagues
resent the discourses of business and technical communication because these
discourses are often used by those who want to "streamline" university budgets
and to measure learning as quantifiable outcomes, despite the fact that, from a
humanistic standpoint, much learning is not quantifiable. David Laurence's la-
ment that the usefulness of literary study is often not readily apparent, at least
not in the way that other kinds of workforce skills are, reflects this dissatisfaction
with attempts to gather and report outcomes data about graduates of literary
studies programs. Understandably, many of our colleagues in literature wonder,
along with Richard Ohmann, "How can the complex things we most highly
value be reduced to numbers?" (63). These colleagues--with justification--look
skeptically on attempts to gather, analyze, and report data because such commu-
nication strategies have been used by assessment professionals to discredit and
downsize academic programs in the liberal arts.

         Some of the specific vocabularies of business, and thus of professional
communication, have similarly fallen into disrepute among many of our lit-
erature colleagues. As Ohmann explains, "All in the arts and science . . . are
likely to be put off by the ideas and language of business that have trailed along
with accountability in its migration into the university" (63). Ohmann relates
the details of a 1999 conference on "Market-Driven Higher Education," in
which leaders discussed business management concepts such as " `customiza-
tion,' `knowledge management,' `just-in-time learning,' `strategic partners,'
[and] `faculty management'" (63). Attempts to bring business management,
and the predominant language of that management, into the administrative

                                                                                                  75
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

structure of the academy are threatening to faculty members who are not used
to being "managed": "In short, when politicians or business people or trustees
call for accountability in higher education, they are asking administrators to
plan, oversee, and assess our labor," a process that academics, accustomed to
or at least enamored of the idea of academic freedom, tend to resist. It is little
wonder, then, that some of our colleagues looked with serious reservations
on proposed curricular changes that gave a visible presence to the teaching of
the discourses of business, even if our actual curricular aim was to teach the
responsible, ethical use of such discourses.

         While the "technical and professional" aspects of our proposal raised
hackles, so too did its focus on rhetoric. As we discussed our proposed changes
with our colleagues in literature and with some colleagues in other departments,
we discovered that people often either do not know what rhetoric means, or they
assume that they know what it means and that it is not good. On the one hand,
some equate rhetoric with composition, and, since many faculty have been so-
cialized within academic programs that see first-year writing as a stepping stone
to bigger and better academic pursuits, the idea of giving rhetoric a prominent
place in the undergraduate BA program seemed paradoxical. On the other hand
are faculty who associate rhetoric with verbal trickery, with "empty" political
talk, and with downright deception. Rhetoric, in these perceptions, does not
merit serious scholarly attention. When the term "rhetoric," understood as ver-
bal trickery, was combined with the term "professional" in the curricular struc-
ture that we proposed, some of our colleagues read the program as a training
program in corporate deception.

                       Strategy #2: Publicizing What We Do

         These perceptions of the fields involved in our proposed curricular revi-
sion reflect a reluctance to accept new areas of scholarship and teaching into the
realm traditionally reserved for literary study. But, as we have come to realize,
they also reflect the need for the architects of programs in professional writ-
ing and rhetoric within existing English departments to undertake a concerted
campaign of educational publicity. The perceptions of some of our colleagues in
literary studies about rhetoric and professional writing are inaccurate, but not
necessarily because of territorial ill-will. Rather, these colleagues are reacting to
their experiences of actual institutional conditions. So how do we change their
views of what we do?

         First, we need to try to bridge the conceptual gaps between the study
of literature and the study of rhetoric and professional writing. To address these
perceived gaps, we might employ some of the critical arguments put forth by

76
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

well-known scholars of both literature and rhetoric. As Peter Elbow points out,
scholars of both literature and rhetoric have argued for the commonalities of
texts, regardless of where they might fall on a spectrum from "imaginative" to
"technical" or "professional":

   Wayne Booth has made it clear that even literature has designs on readers--
   argues, does business. . . . [T]he tradition from Nietszche and I.A. Richards
   provides the opposite lens to help us nevertheless see that all language use
   is also an instance of poetics. . . . What's sad is that a discipline devoted to
   understanding language use should tend to restrict itself to one lens. (539)

Stressing such commonalities among texts might help alleviate the perception
that rhetoric and professional writing are fundamentally different endeavors
from the work of poets and novelists.

         Secondly, we have come to realize that we need to illustrate the ex-
panding theoretical frameworks within which professional and technical com-
munication have developed--a development that many of our colleagues in
literature are not aware of. Too often, our colleagues see courses in professional
writing as handmaidens to other areas--business, engineering, science--courses
that are components of curricula designed to make students more successful in
other specialized fields. Yet, as we know, our courses have evolved to provide a
much deeper education for our students. Once strictly service courses offered
to majors from various parts of the university, writing courses in the technical
professions, business, and the sciences have evolved into more or less coherent
programs of study, exploring how certain kinds of specialized information can
be communicated to those who need the information both within and outside
of the technical or professional fields. At the same time, faculty in professional
communication have worked toward carving out a niche for their research as
well as their teaching. Although traditionally perceived as simply formulaic and
practical, the research of educators and practitioners in professional writing has
helped to define an endeavor rich in theory as well as practice.

         Additionally, our colleagues need to realize the purposes and benefits--
beyond marketable skills--of knowledge in rhetoric and professional writing.
While some in the department will be persuaded of the importance of preparing
students with "practical" writing skills, others simply will not be, not because
they don't want our students to be employable graduates, but because they don't
want them to just be employable graduates. This second group of colleagues
mistakenly sees programs that focus on "professional" writing as primarily vo-
cational rather than critical. Thus, we need to build into our publicity attempts
examples of how instruction in professional writing, particularly when coupled

                                                                                                  77
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

with a rhetorical approach, goes beyond the mere transmission of technical or
corporate skill. We need to reveal that our scholarship and pedagogy are not part
of a callous endeavor to produce students with quantifiable workplace skills--
rather, this instruction sensitizes students to the power of language, to the pres-
ence of propaganda, and to the ethical/humanistic concerns of communication
in a variety of contexts, including the workplace.

         At the same time, we need to explain how programs in professional
writing and rhetoric can promote less-quantifiable cognitive goals--e.g. critical
thinking skills--and, perhaps most importantly, can encourage the integration
of these critical thinking skills into communication used in technical and pro-
fessional settings. Isn't it better, we might argue, for our departments to teach
students about the rhetorical impacts and the ethical consequences of writing in
professional situations than to let them enter these endeavors without exposure
to such considerations? Writing for business need not be part of an attempt
to further the heartless desires of capitalism--in fact, education in professional
writing might undermine these desires as students discuss the ethical, cultural,
and social aspects of communication in business and industry. For English de-
partments to cast off professional communication is for them to ignore the part
they might play in encouraging students not to perpetuate oppressive corporate
ideologies.

         A good source to consult when considering how to explain the benefits
and merit of a program in RSPW is Carolyn Miller's 1979 College English article,
"A Humanistic Rationale for Technical Writing." Although this article is over
thirty years old, Miller's arguments are still germane today. Teaching professional
writing from a "flagrantly rhetorical approach," Miller argues, would, in fact,
"present mechanical rules and skills against a broader understanding of why and
how to adjust or violate these rules, of the social implications of the roles a writer
casts for himself or herself and for the reader, and of the ethical repercussions of
one's words" (617). "[A] course in scientific or technical writing" she continues,
"can profitably be based upon this kind of self-examination and self-conscious-
ness," thus furthering what Miller calls the "central impulse" of the humanities
(617). Perhaps if we make these kinds of connections explicit for our colleagues,
we can alleviate their fears.

                        Strategy #3: Reviving the "Practical"

         While it is essential to alter misunderstandings of professional writ-
ing that see it merely as a vocational endeavor, we might also benefit from at-
tempts to resuscitate the practical within English departments. Ellen Cushman
has suggested that "English studies must avoid simple vocational training: the

78
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

uncritical, unexamined acquisition of skills that apply mechanically to work-
place production and distribution of information, products, and services." But,
she continues, this does not mean that instruction in modes of writing that
relate to these activities should be abandoned or held in lower esteem than the
study of literary textuality. The key, she explains, is to separate the teaching of
writing for the purposes of vocationalism (writing for career advancement) and
the teaching of writing for the purposes of utilitarianism (writing to get things
done). "[V]ocationalism," she clarifies, "should be differentiated from utilitari-
anism. . . . Utilitarian knowledge can be made and put to use by well-rounded,
knowledgeable, socially conscientious students, citizens, and professors who to-
gether try to better the public and private institutions they are both critical of
and reliant on" (213).

         Scholars in English studies need to be made aware that there is impor-
tant middle ground between selling out to corporate America and providing
critical instruction in efficacious knowledge. Our students will find it extreme-
ly difficult to survive economically if we fail to prepare them to communicate
in contemporary workplaces and other public settings. As Cushman puts it,
"Any reform of English studies must consider how ultimately the knowledge
made in English can be of economic and social value, can accrue cultural
capital, and can help its bearers accrue symbolic capital" (213). For graduates
with degrees in English to implement--in other words, to gain the symbolic
and economic capital to put into practice--the kinds of social changes we
might wish to see, those graduates will need instruction in utilitarian kinds
of knowledge. They will need the rhetorical skills to communicate effectively
in professional contexts. Teaching in this kind of utilitarian framework might
provide "skills" for communicating in professional contexts, but it would do
so with an undercurrent of critique--the kind of critique that literary writers
have long promoted through poems, novels, and other forms of literature.

         Of course, we will not be able to change everyone's view of the proper
sphere of the English department. Those who hold that certain kinds of writing
are inherently superior to others or who come to the table with other depart-
mental agendas will not necessarily care what we have to say. But, in any at-
tempt to elevate the presence of rhetoric and professional writing within English
departments, those colleagues should not be our primary intended audience.
Instead, we need to focus our persuasive efforts on colleagues who are legitimate-
ly skeptical of our proposals, rather than immovably against them. Even with
such focused approaches, we might find that the negative views of rhetoric and
technical and professional communication are too strong. Indeed, where space,
finances, demand, and political climate permit, several scholars and teachers of
professional writing and rhetoric have found the best solution to departmental

                                                                                                  79
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

conflicts to be the establishment of separate academic departments. If we wish
to remain--for whatever reasons--within a broad-scope department like ours
at ECU, however, we need to promote what we do in our theory and in our
practice.

                         Strategy #4: Rethinking the "Core"

         In addition to promoting what we do, curricular proposals such as ours
call for advanced discussion about the purposes and the location of "core" cours-
es. Such discussion had taken place in the past in our department, but those dis-
cussions were several years removed. It may have made the process of changing
the undergraduate curriculum less antagonistic if we had engaged in these con-
versations shortly before putting forward our proposal. How one understands the
purposes of a "core" will of course impact one's response to curricular proposals
that configure a core in a particular way. In their survey responses to the afore-
mentioned ad hoc committee, faculty proffered three major understandings of
what a "core" in the English department should provide for students: 1) a com-
mon set of skills needed for academic, professional, and/or civic achievement;
2) a common body of knowledge, understanding of which should characterize
English majors; and 3) a combination of skills and knowledge that together will
prepare students for academic, professional, and/or civic achievement. Obvi-
ously, each of these understandings would lead to a significantly different "core"
of required courses. Exploring the purposes of a "core" and imagining different
options available for locations of "core" knowledge within a degree program
might have made it easier for us to present our plan to colleagues without seem-
ing to threaten what they value.

         At the time the "core" is discussed, it would also make sense to provide
alternative visions of "core" knowledge in English departments. Such alterna-
tives can be garnered from other departments and from a variety of scholarly
publications. Jonathan Culler, for instance, provides some ideas for how to rei-
magine the concept of the "core" in an English department in such a way that
students do have some common experience across the different areas of English
Studies but that does not privilege one subject area over others. Although Culler
begins his piece "Imagining the Coherence of the English Major" with a three-
and-a-half-page discussion of how to create a unified English Major as a literary
degree, he goes on to acknowledge that this kind of literary-based coherence
comes at a significant cost:

   The major drawback may be, however, that this approach defines the Eng-
   lish major as a literature major, neglecting all the other things that English

80
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

   departments have come to do--including the study of other sorts of writing;
   the practice of writing itself, whether expository or "creative," as we oddly call
   it; and the study of other cultural practices, such as film and television. (9)

The concluding page and a half of the article articulate a vision of an English
department that would include literature and all these other things. Culler's
proposal focuses on developing the "unity" of the English major through differ-
ent abilities and habits of mind that various courses might cultivate in students.
More specifically, he proposes that

   English departments attempt to define the sorts of learning that we think
   ought to take place and that might be achieved in the English major. For
   instance, an English major might include literary and rhetorical analysis, his-
   torical analysis, social analysis, cultural analysis, cognitive and moral analysis,
   and the practice of writing. Here, I think, we have distinct sorts of analytic
   practices that students can acquire, all in the broad structure of the English
   major; the coherence of the major would lie in its attempt to provide instruc-
   tion in this full range of practices. (10)

This arrangement would ensure that students in the sprawling English depart-
ment have common abilities, even if they do not all graduate with the same
content knowledge.

                 Strategy #5: Highlighting Institutional Realities

         We might also explore the strategic, yet admittedly materialistic, "power
in numbers" argument at the same time that we suggest ways in which our stud-
ies and goals overlap with those of our literature colleagues. Pat Sullivan and Jim
Porter have mapped out the spaces occupied by professional writing in English
departments and explored the struggles faced by this relatively new terrain of
professional writing, arguing that the "development of professional writing as
an academic entity signals a key conceptual shift: from the traditional notion of
writing as ancillary to some other subject matter . . . to a recognition of writing
as a discipline in its own right . . . " (405-06). They conclude that professional
writing may be at home in "English," but question whether English departments
can afford the resources to support these programs. Perhaps more significantly,
they also ask if English departments can afford not to support these programs.
More recently, David Downing has argued that administrators, under pressure
to reduce expenses, "are the only ones to gain from internecine warfare among
competing subdivisions. In the end, isolation makes any small unit or program

                                                                                                  81
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

more vulnerable to administrative surveillance" (31). Such an argument, how-
ever, needs to be made strategically. Because of associations between professional
writing and business interests, some colleagues may resist this argument, seeing
it not as a practical reality but as yet another way that they are being pressured
to submit to the interests of those driven by assessment and efficiency.

                           Strategy #6: Discussing Names

         The resistance we met with also suggests that a prior or concurrent
discussion should have addressed the official name currently assigned to our
department. Our proposal might have fared better if we had considered a new
departmental name--a more appropriate combination of terms that reflects the
scope of the work that actually goes on within "English" departments. Perhaps
the term "English" is too laden with previous meanings and assumptions to be
useful as a signifier with which the commonalities of the current-day English
department can be represented. As one respondent to the departmental survey
put it, "I don't think a student should get a degree in English without having a
substantial background in literature. Call the degree something else if necessary,
but don't call it a degree in English." How about the Department of English
Language and Literature? Or, to give writing an even more visible presence, the
Department of English Literature, Language, and Writing Studies? These names
identify and thus privilege multiple strands of research and pedagogy, better
reflecting faculty expertise and, perhaps more importantly in terms of attracting
students, explaining more clearly for undergraduates what they can study and
learn within the department.

         While reconsidering a bifurcated departmental name, it would also per-
haps be worthwhile to ask why there needs to be one, unified mission and only
one word (to reflect this supposed unity) in our name. Disciplines, Michel Fou-
cault suggests, are not unified bodies of knowledge but disparate ones. This view
of disciplinarity, Craig Dionne and David Shumway suggest, "conflicts radically
with our expectations, and it should lead us to wonder where the criterion of
unity comes from and why it should be applied" (6). The ability of the depart-
ment to function together and make the best use of the various talents of its
teachers, researchers, and students is perhaps best served by acknowledging that
we don't all do the exact same thing and that we don't all hold the same goals
to be equally important. As Elbow suggests, perhaps "a discipline can be even
richer and healthier if it lacks a single-vision center. A discipline based on this
multiplex model can better avoid either-or thinking and better foster a spirit of
productive catholic pluralism" (544). Accepting a multivalent construction of
"English" would also be an acknowledgement of the reality that the discipline

82
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

has never, in fact, been fully congealed around one methodology or body of
knowledge. No English department--since there have been such departments--
has ever been smoothly, wholly unified. If there was such unification, it would
most likely indicate stagnation.

         The process of negotiating what "English" means and the lack of under-
standing exhibited by some of our colleagues--and here we stress the word "some"
because there has been significant support for change in the curriculum--have
not always been pleasant. But we are happy that the conversation is underway. It's
a necessary process that many other departments have undergone and that still
others have yet to begin. Too, there have been moments of productive coopera-
tion. Comments from many faculty show a desire to structure the department as
one that welcomes an expansive array of approaches to texts and a multi-faceted
understanding of the kinds of writing that might fit within a diverse department.
One survey respondent, a literature specialist by training, reminded readers of
what our departmental mission statement says. This mission statement, despite its
moments of elitism, presents the department as an open space that, as a matter of
course, values language, writing, and literature, all of which are "integral" to the
department:

   Members in the department share these assumptions:
   1. Language is fundamental to human nature and is at the heart of intel-

        lectual life.
   2. Literature permits us to engage our consciousness with singular keen-

        ness, profundity, and pleasure.
   3. Writing engenders social, cultural, economic, and political vitality.
   4. Language, literature, and writing are integral.

This statement reflects Robert Scholes's revised model of English studies, putting
"textuality" in all its forms, rather than only literary works, at the center of our
endeavors. Perhaps, as our colleague suggests, we might revisit our mission state-
ment and rededicate ourselves, as a department, to textuality.

      epilogue: the stage for future change

         Downing, Hurlbert, and Mathieu suggest that "when taking collective
action, moments that feel like failure may have future effects we cannot know or
imagine. For example, if a group plans an ambitious new curriculum and it fails
to be implemented, that process might have succeeded in other ways: bringing
people together to highlight tacit departmental divisions . . . or setting the stage

                                                                                                  83
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

for future change" (13). Since we began working on this account of the turmoil
that ensued when we attempted to alter the curricular structure of the depart-
ment, we have witnessed the kind of "future change" that can eventually result
from a moment--in this case the demise of our proposed RSPW concentra-
tion--that feels like failure. As we mentioned earlier, in response to the issues
raised by our proposal, an ad hoc committee was formed to conduct a survey
of faculty views on the nature of an English degree. The committee was further
charged with developing a revised undergraduate core curriculum based upon
these views. The work of the ad hoc committee has resulted in several significant
changes to the department's undergraduate degree, changes that were unani-
mously approved by departmental faculty. The two most significant changes,
which went into effect in spring 2005, are as follows:

   1. The core group of courses required of all majors in the department was
       revised to give some presence to classes dealing with rhetoric, professional
       writing, and English language study. At the same time, the number and
       specificity of core requirements was reduced, thus allowing students more
       opportunity to explore the variety of specialties within our diverse depart-
       ment. The new core is elaborated in the table below.

Old Core                                Revised Core
(required of all majors in the          (required of all majors in the
department before Spring 2005)          department beginning Spring 2005)

    · ENGL 2000. Interpreting Litera-   · One Historical Survey (selected
       ture                                from a variety of offerings in Litera-
                                           ture pre-1700)
    · ENGL 3000. Lit in English to
       1700                             · One Historical Survey (selected
                                           from a variety of offerings in Litera-
    · ENGL 3010. Lit in English, 1700-     ture post-1700)
       1880
                                        · One Shakespeare course
    · ENGL 3020. Lit in English,            (Tragedies, Comedies, or
       1880-Present                         Histories)

    · One Shakespeare course            · One Language Study Course
        (Tragedies, Comedies, or            (chosen from a variety of
        Histories)                          courses in Creative Writing,
                                            Linguistics, Rhetoric &
                                            Composition, and Technical &
                                            Professional Communication)

84
                                                                                        Disciplinary Identities

   2. Separate, named concentrations within the BA in English were eliminated.
       Instead of a BA in English with options for Concentrations in Writing
       or Literature, the department now simply offers a BA in English for all
       students. As they pursue this degree, students are expected to work with
       their faculty advisors to create a curriculum of upper-division courses that
       will best meet their interests and advance their future plans. While the
       removal of concentrations did not give RSPW an official, named presence
       in the department (something we'd initially hoped our proposal would
       accomplish), the change provides opportunities for students to expand
       their studies in RSPW in ways that were not possible under the previous
       structure of concentrations.

         At the same time that the core was being revised, several new courses in
rhetoric and professional writing were added to the department's regular offer-
ings, including two courses--Introduction to Rhetorical Studies and Introduc-
tion to Professional Writing-- intended to introduce students to RSPW as an
integral part of the English department. While we did not find success with our
initial proposal, we are encouraged by the more visible presence we now have in
the curriculum and by the attendant possibilities for collaboration among the
various specialties within our large and diverse faculty.

                           works cited

Culler, Jonathan. "Imagining the Coherence of the English Major." ADE Bulletin
   133 (Winter 2003): 6-10.

Cushman, Ellen. "Service Learning as the New English Studies." Beyond English
   Inc: Curricular Reform in a Global Economy. Ed. David B. Downing, Claude
   Mark Hurlbert, and Paula Mathieu. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 2002.
   204-18.

Downing, David B. "Beyond Disciplinary English: Integrating Reading and Writ-
   ing by Reforming Academic Labor." Beyond English Inc: Curricular Reform in
   a Global Economy. Ed. David B. Downing, Claude Mark Hurlbert, and Paula
   Mathieu. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 2002. 23-38.

Downing, David B., Claude Mark Hurlbert, and Paula Mathieu. "English Incor-
   porated: An Introduction." Beyond English Inc: Curricular Reform in a Global
   Economy. Ed. David B. Downing, Claude Mark Hurlbert, and Paula Mathieu.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 2002. 1-21.

Elbow, Peter. "OPINION: The Cultures of Literature and Composition: What
   Could Each Learn from the Other." College English 64.3 (May 2002): 533-46.

                                                                                                  85
Henze, Sharer, and Tovey

Fitts, Karen, and William B. Lalicker. "Invisible Hands: A Manifesto to Resolve
   Institutional and Curricular Hierarchy in English Studies." College English 66.4
   (March 2004): 427-51.

Gieryn, Thomas F. Cultural Boundaries of Science: Credibility on the Line. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, 2000.

Laurence, David. "Notes on the English Major." ADE Bulletin 133 (Winter 2003):
   3-5.

Miller, Carolyn R. "A Humanistic Rationale for Technical Writing." College Eng-
   lish 40.6 (February 1979): 610-17.

Ohmann, Richard. "Accountability and the Conditions for Curricular Change."
   Beyond English Inc: Curricular Reform in a Global Economy. Ed. David B. Down-
   ing, Claude Mark Hurlbert, and Paula Mathieu. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
   Cook, 2002. 62-73.

Russell, David R. "Institutionalizing English: Rhetoric on the Boundaries." Disci-
   plining English: Alternative Histories, Critical Perspectives. Ed. David R. Shum-
   way and Craig Dionne. Albany, NY: SUNY P, 2002. 39-58.

Scholes, Robert. The Rise and Fall of English Studies: Reconstructing English as a
   Discipline. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.

Shumway, David R., and Craig Dionne. Introduction. Disciplining English: Alter-
   native Histories, Critical Perspectives. Ed. David R. Shumway and Craig Dionne.
   Albany, NY: SUNY P, 2002. 1-18.

Sullivan, Patricia, and James E. Porter. "Remapping Curricular Geography: Pro-
   fessional Writing in/and English." Journal of Business and Technical Communica-
   tion 7.4 (1993): 389-422.

86
revising
5 Smart Growth of Professional Writing Programs:
  Controlling Sprawl in Departmental Landscapes

   Diana Ashe
   Colleen A. Reilly

                         introduction

         At our first departmental planning retreat in January 2004, we gave a
twenty-minute presentation in front of our assembled colleagues. Our goal was
the creation of an administrative position for a professional writing coordinator,
a course release for that position, and some other additional resources. To that
end, we detailed the constraints under which our Professional Writing program
had been operating: we had 108 students--fully one-third of the department's
majors--enrolled in our program, yet we were the only two tenure-track fac-
ulty in an English department of twenty-five fully dedicated to our PTW major
and certificate program at UNC Wilmington1. In addition, we detailed some
of the administrative duties involved in meeting the needs of the program in its
first four years, including establishing and obtaining university approval for the
program; communicating with prospective, current, and former students; audit-
ing graduation requirements and distributing certificates; scheduling all PTW
courses every semester; recruiting, screening, interviewing, and mentoring part-
time faculty; applying for and carrying out grants for curriculum development
within the program; chairing the professional writing committee; and advising
prospective and current students in the program. We felt that we could no lon-
ger carry out these ever-increasing duties without harming our research agendas
(and, thus, our tenure hopes), so this presentation was of critical importance.

         Once we finished stating our case, we opened the floor for questions,
and the hand of a colleague with primary interests in literature was raised.
She asked quite earnestly, "What exactly is professional writing, anyway?" We
responded by giving a few working definitions and moved on to more specific
concerns about the changes we were proposing, but the question had tremen-
dous impact on us. Part of the impact derived from the difficulty in answer-
ing this question briefly. More significantly, though, being confronted by this

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.05  89
Ashe and Reilly

question impressed upon us both the lack of understanding among some of
our colleagues for what we do and the position of our program as something
of a foreign entity within the English department, where, to our knowledge,
all other subdisciplines were accepted on their face as comprehensible and
appropriate. The question speaks to scholarship in professional and technical
writing that raises the issue of how and even whether to define professional
and technical writing. Pithy definitions have been developed, such as David
Dobrin's assertion that "Technical writing is writing that accommodates tech-
nology to the user" (242), which is still referenced positively in introductions
to the field and discipline (see Lutz & Storms). However, other scholars, such
as Jo Allen, object to restrictive definitions like Dobrin's, especially as they are
not based upon systematic study, and are often used to exclude certain types of
work or other writers from the field. Allen cautions against creating definitions
and argues that it is better for us to "keep our field intact--with our impres-
sionistic, experience-based ideas of what technical writing encompasses--than
to succumb to simplistic or exclusionary definitions that separate us from one
another" (77). Recently, many seem to agree with scholars such as Spilka, who
argues that the diversity of definitions of professional and technical writing
indicates that the field is healthy, characterized by "diversity, fluidity, a contex-
tual nature, interdisciplinarity, and multiplicity in terms of career paths and
specializations" (102-3).

         In our local departmental environment, we have experienced both a
continual request for definitions of our field as well as the objections that follow
when our descriptive definitions of our major and the field contain something
objectionable, such as references to technologies or workplace contexts, or ex-
clude something that colleagues outside the field perceive as belonging to it,
such as journalism. In January 2006, we were again asked to define professional
and technical writing at a series of meetings that led up to another departmental
retreat in February 2006. Our discussions with colleagues at these meetings and
informally in the halls reemphasized that operating a professional and technical
writing program within an English department entails more than all of the du-
ties we list above; it also entails operating within a collegial and organizational
context, one that reaches out to and is reached by stakeholders and community
members at every possible turn. Unless our colleagues share our understand-
ing of our curriculum, mission, and goals--something we continue to struggle
with--we will never achieve our hopes for the program and our students will al-
ways be underserved. Conversely, our goal of offering a consistent and carefully
balanced set of courses with the strongest faculty and most current resources we
could muster will not be truly successful until we acknowledge and understand
our program's unique departmental and university environments.

90
                                                                                                Smart Growth

         In the pages that follow, we borrow concepts from systems thinking and
from the smart growth movement to conceptualize the necessity and potential
for situating professional and technical writing programs interdependently with-
in their larger organizational contexts. Systems thinking offers clear guidelines
for designing and maintaining programmatic operations, guidelines that delin-
eate specific goals and actions on the way to creating sustainable and resilient
programs. Smart growth planning demonstrates the specific actions within each
of the systems thinking guidelines that strengthen and clarify the relationships
between programs, stakeholders, and communities. Through our discussion, we
show how we have tried to plan the future of our program with the help of these
two matrices, how these principles have influenced our attempts to define, flex-
ibly and from a systems perspective, professional and technical writing as a field
and as a program within our English department at our university, and how
we have tried to use these principles to articulate and demonstrate more clearly
the connections between our work and that of our colleagues as well as better
encourage them to participate in and understand the work that we do. Our suc-
cesses as well as our failures provide insights into the usefulness of systems think-
ing and smart growth as bases for directing programmatic growth and expansion
in professional writing.

       approaches to programmatic growth
                 in professional writing

         Writing programs in general and professional writing programs in par-
ticular often fit uneasily within humanities departments, such as English, de-
spite often originating in those departments and sharing many characteristics
and goals with other humanities disciplines (Di Renzo, Rutter). Professional
writing's epistemological and methodological connections to English can be
seen as tenuous (Hocks, Lopez, and Grabill), and professional writing programs
may have more success obtaining resources and finding support for collabora-
tive scholarship, for example, in departments of business or technology (Davis).
Institutional circumstances, however, may make it impractical for programs to
relocate in other areas of the university and, therefore, growth and development
strategies must be developed that work within institutional limitations and reali-
ties.

         Numerous scholars and writing program administrators in professional
writing advocate interdisciplinary approaches to program growth and devel-
opment in order to prepare students broadly to work with information and
communication technologies and gain expertise in subject areas outside of the

                                                                                                  91
Ashe and Reilly

humanities. In addition to competency in writing and rhetoric, scholars note
that professional writing students benefit from training in computer sciences,
graphic design, and organizational communication, which they can best and
perhaps only get from other departments, depending on the expertise and size
of program faculty (Blythe). In certain institutional contexts, creating profes-
sional writing programs as extra-departmental, interdisciplinary structures pro-
vides the best means for providing educational options for professional writing
students; supplementing the skills of the professional writing faculty, who often
number only a few; and gaining access for students to more technological re-
sources than small programs in English departments may be able to provide
(Blakeslee; Blythe; Andrews & Worley). Forging partnerships with and gaining
participation from faculty in other departments can integrate professional writ-
ing into the broader university community, which can in turn provide expo-
sure and stability to the program. Such integration can be accomplished using
the model of WAC/WID programs already in existence and, in fact, a number
of scholars advocate allying professional writing with WAC programs (Bosley;
Hocks, Lopez, and Grabill). Other approaches to program development empha-
size the work that needs to be done at administrative levels, including compact
planning, which focuses on setting specific, incremental goals for the program
and gaining administrative support for those goals (Allen).

         A number of the approaches to program growth and development that
we surveyed highlight the importance of and problems with creating a space
within traditional academic structures, like English departments, for technical
and professional writing programs (Hocks, Lopez, and Grabill), whose inter-
disciplinarity and focus on workplaces and technologies are not always easily
accommodated by traditional notions of discrete departments and the concerns
of humanities disciplines. The focus on space is by no means accidental, for
academic units, including departments, schools, and universities as a whole, are
organic entities sharing attributes of biological and environmental systems. Ad-
dressing the space and environmental issues raised by many developers of profes-
sional and technical writing (PTW) programs requires systems thinking, as we
explain in the next section.

    systems thinking and academic ecosystems

         Imagining our universities, departments, programs, students, and fac-
ulty as part of an academic ecosystem has both utility and precedent. Systems
thinking dominates in contemporary scientific endeavors, putting emphasis
on the interdependence of relationships between organisms and their environ-

92
                                                                                                Smart Growth

ments. Our work as PTW program administrators is no different; resource allo-
cation and day-to-day challenges may dominate our thinking, but relationships
constrain or support our success.

         Sydney I. Dobrin and Christian R. Weisser define ecosystems as "groups
of organisms which function together in a particular environment (physical and
chemical) and exchange energy within the system in order to metabolize, grow,
and reproduce" (73). Dobrin and Weisser have put together volumes on the link
between ecosystems and writing systems, and the connection has been touted
for more than twenty years. Marilyn M. Cooper, who made the most widely-
cited early suggestion of the potential of an ecological approach to composition,
still emphasizes the idea that "the systems that constitute writing and writers
are not just like ecological systems but are precisely ecological systems, and that
there are no boundaries between writing and the other interlocked, cycling sys-
tems of our world" (xiv).

         Extending the link between ecosystems and writing systems, we suggest
that academic departments are ecosystems of their own, and that by thinking
of them in this way we can highlight the spatial, geographic, and relationship
aspects of academic units and the importance of considering these elements
for the growth of programs within these units. Michael Weiler and W. Barnett
Pearce use the term "rhetorical ecology" to describe viewing public discourse as
"a kind of ecosystem in which various individual discursive subsystems interact
in relations of conflict and mutual dependence" (14). Likewise, in the academic
department, special interests must interact over curriculum, instruction and de-
partmental resources.

         Our role in this ecosystem is constantly changing and tends to provoke
reactive changes in the roles of other members. As Weiler and Pearce suggest,

   Rhetors are forced to act within the confines of the ecosystem, and their
   discourses must reflect the web of relationships among its species and its sur-
   roundings. But as the rhetorical ecosystem evolves, as any living thing must,
   so too do its discursive possibilities, and within the system there is ample
   room for authorial creativity and cleverness (15).

The space within the department or university ecosystem for authorial creativity
and cleverness offers program administrators opportunities for building pro-
grams that have internalized certain survival skills. Survival skills in our case
would include careful planning for the inevitable changes that occur in our rhe-
torical ecosystems. Because "[c]ontext both fits rhetorical action and is recon-
structed by it" (15), our decisions as administrators change the system and all of
the relationships it affects and is affected by.

                                                                                                  93
Ashe and Reilly

    developing academic ecosystems through
                         smart growth

         A number of fields in the humanities, including ecocomposition, rhe-
torical ecology, ecocriticism, and ecofeminism, look to ecosystems as founda-
tional constructs. Outside the humanities, urban planners, political scientists,
and sociologists use environmental science in other ways that can inform our
thinking and bring a systems approach to program planning, development,
and adaptation. A recent and particularly useful systems-based approach, smart
growth, involves the application of broad-based systems thinking to land-use
decisions and community development. Smart growth offers concrete strategies
for handling growth and change that can be used productively to address the
concerns of new Professional and Technical Writing programs. These strategies
combine strategic planning, environmental awareness, and political negotiation
as opportunities for identity construction and chances to demonstrate the ap-
propriate place of the PTW program within the department and the university.
In the face of fears that PTW is the academic equivalent of urban sprawl, the
language and strategies of smart growth can help us to develop and strengthen
our programs in ways that are in the best interests of the department, the uni-
versity, and the community.

         On the surface, smart growth principles may seem distant from the
needs of PTW programs because they refer specifically to physical spaces and
environmental concerns. According to both major smart growth coalitions in
the United States, the Sustainable Growth Network and Smart Growth America,
the main principles of smart growth are as follows:2

   1. Create a range of housing opportunities and choices
   2. Create walkable neighborhoods
   3. Encourage community and stakeholder collaboration
   4. Foster distinctive, attractive communities with a strong sense of place
   5. Make development decisions predictable, fair, and cost-effective
   6. Mix land uses
   7. Preserve open space, farmland, natural beauty and critical environmental

       areas
   8. Provide a variety of transportation choices
   9. Strengthen and direct development towards existing communities
   10. Take advantage of compact building design

                        (Sustainable Communities Network, "About Smart Growth")

When considered through the lens of the academic program, however, the basic

94
                                                                                                Smart Growth

goals of this kind of systems thinking can serve as a framework for program
administrators when setting goals for program design, program development,
outcomes assessment, and strategies for anticipating and managing change.

         According to Joseph Fiksel, resilient systems feature diversity, effi-
ciency, adaptability, and cohesion. In order to design a resilient system, Fiksel
recommends "identifying system function and boundaries, establishing re-
quirements, selecting appropriate technologies, developing a system design,
evaluating anticipated performance, and devising a practical means for system
development" (5330). As Fiksel indicates, resilience leads to and fosters sus-
tainability, which "is not an end state that we can reach; rather, it is a charac-
teristic of a dynamic, evolving system." In order to foster their own resilience
and that of the academic ecosystems of which they are a part, administrators
of PTW programs can enact Fiksel's recommendations for sustainable devel-
opment, which, as Fiksel argues, can be employed at any point in a system's
development to alter its course (5334). In the remainder of this chapter, we
will demonstrate how Fiksel's critical actions for designing a resilient system
and sustainable growth, combined with the ten principles of smart growth
from the Sustainable Communities Network offers strategies for building suc-
cessful PTW programs that flourish within the departmental and university
ecosystems where they have taken root.

 identifying system function and boundaries

         As a PTW program begins to grow, it is inevitable and essential to hold
discussions about the direction and amount of sustainable growth possible in
light of current resources and other institutional constraints. In order to lead and
initiate such discussions, we felt that it would be essential to have one designated
program coordinator who could be the official spokesperson of the program
in discussions and negotiations with other faculty and administrators. One of
our early successes was to get departmental approval and chair support for the
position of coordinator of professional writing, which came with a list of duties,
including permanent membership on the departmental steering committee, as
well as a course release. Until we earned tenure, we shared the position, alternat-
ing years, in order to allow both of us to gain formal administrative experience
central to developing sustainable programmatic growth.

         In some cases, successful undergraduate programs, in particular, face
departmental and administrative pressure to grow beyond capacity in order to
attract more majors, serve growing numbers of interested students, and even
create bridges between the community and private industry, something that

                                                                                                  95
Ashe and Reilly

administrators may uncritically see as the role of PTW programs. In order to
handle growth, negotiate external pressures, and design a program that serves
the entire university, reflection about the function of the program, including its
goals and strengths, is essential and can help program administrators argue suc-
cessfully for holding expansion and development to manageable levels.

         In setting boundaries for a program to avoid taking on too much too
soon, program administrators may draw upon smart growth principles six and
ten, which advise: "Take advantage of compact building design" and "Mix land
uses." The former recommends that development be compact, make efficient use
of space and resources, build upon a strong foundation, and keep growth under
control in order to avoid overtaxing resources. Likewise, the latter principle of
"Mix land uses" highlights the importance of integrating the use of resources by
commingling different populations in the same environment and maximizing
the populations who benefit from the available services and resources that they
need.

         In practical terms, by thinking of PTW programs as part of the depart-
mental and university landscape, program administrators can "Take advantage
of compact building design" by directing growth in service of the stated goals of
the program and of the department as a whole. For programs with few faculty
that, like ours, are housed within an English department, the programmatic
and departmental goals should be integrated and reconciled so that the PTW
program can take advantage of the department's course offerings. Courses in
rhetorical theory, essay writing, or journalism, for example, might be outside the
strictest province of professional and technical writing, but can help students to
build strong writing and rhetorical skills and supplement the more specialized
knowledge in PTW that only a few faculty can provide. By taking fullest advan-
tage of existing departmental course offerings, a sufficient number of courses can
be offered within human resource constraints. Overall we have been quite suc-
cessful in actively recruiting faculty outside of professional writing to teach such
courses and to develop special topics courses related to writing and rhetoric,
some of which, like Writing about Film, have become regular courses that appeal
to our students as well as students in our university's burgeoning film studies
program. However, we must acknowledge that a very small number of faculty
who are skeptical about how our program fits within the humanities mission of
the English Department refuse to teach courses that are within their areas of ex-
pertise because they are listed as professional writing courses. Nonetheless, over
the past two to three years, we believe that we have effectively enlisted existing
departmental personnel to offer a wide range of courses for our students and,
simultaneously, to gain more support and understanding from other depart-
mental faculty for our programmatic mission.

96
                                                                                                Smart Growth

         Programs can also efficiently use resources and shore up their founda-
tions by avoiding taking on too much and focusing their programs around the
specialties and backgrounds of existing personnel rather than trying to accom-
plish theoretical goals based on ideals gleaned from scholarship or past experi-
ence. For example, our program incorporates some journalism-oriented courses
into the base requirements for our major. We have a number of talented part-
time faculty to teach those courses who are trained and experienced journal-
ists and no other department on campus teaches print journalism, so there is a
significant student demand. Furthermore, the university has recently created an
interdisciplinary minor in journalism that we can support and participate in. We
include journalism in the professional writing curriculum despite the fact that
none of the tenure-track faculty in PTW were trained in programs with such a
focus, and it violates our instincts and strict understandings of our field to some
extent. However, to attempt to build a program around only specialized courses,
like Writing for the Computer Industry, would be currently spreading ourselves
too thin, weakening our foundation and increasing our horizontal rather than
vertical growth, making us less able to offer our students the ability to pursue
some subjects in depth through a range of upper-level courses. Additionally we
would be resisting the interests of our students, many of whom are interested in
studying journalism and working as writers for local and national publications.

         Keeping growth compact and focused further helps in the efficient use
of resources, both human and technological. Concentrating on specific goals
can make best use of both tenure track and part-time faculty by allowing them
to concentrate on teaching classes in their specialties, which prevents them from
becoming fragmented and overworked by continually having to learn new sub-
ject matter. Additionally, limited resources for acquiring technologies such as
software can be spent in targeted ways rather than be used to acquire the latest
tools in areas far afield of the central goals of the program. Finally, the goal of
compactness may extend to considerations over the types of degrees and other
credentials the program can award. Successful undergraduate programs such as
ours, which attract many majors, may be pressured to expand to the M.A. level
or offer courses to private industry before they are ready for this sort of expan-
sion. Until additional qualified faculty and other resources make meeting the
needs of undergraduate majors less of a struggle, referring to the benefits of
compactness and a solid foundation highlighted by this smart growth principle
can help program administrators to articulate resistance to premature growth.

         Within a focused and targeted PTW program, administrators can be
guided by the smart growth principle which advises "Mix land uses" by mak-
ing the program appealing to a diverse population of students. This can be
accomplished by providing ways for students with different majors to incor-

                                                                                                  97
Ashe and Reilly

porate aspects of PTW into their programs of study. For example, English
majors can obtain their degree in the forty-two-semester-hour major in the
Professional Writing track, while students majoring in science or business can
pursue a twenty-one-semester-hour Certificate in Professional Writing. Both
the track in the major and the certificate require only a limited number of
specific courses (two named courses and two from small groupings of courses
for the major and three named courses and one from a small group for the cer-
tificate), allowing students with specific interests to select courses that relate to
their own academic and career goals. This flexibility appeals to many students
in and outside of English studies who are interested in writing and wish to
add a formalized writing credential to their academic profiles and this appeal
is supported in part by our growth in majors, up from 50-60 at the start of the
program to 112 as of December 2005. Because we attract students from a va-
riety of backgrounds in our courses, including our Introduction to Technical
Writing, Writing about Science, and Writing and Technology, we provide an
interdisciplinary learning experience including a diversity of perspectives and
talents in the classroom.

         In order to make the program accessible and palatable to a range of
students, including non-traditional students, choices about the scope and di-
rection of the program and courses have to be made with a number of often
conflicting audiences in mind. For example, we require an internship for our
certificate program but not for the major, as the internship may pose an obsta-
cle for some students who want to pursue the PTW major. In addition to the
minimum grade average required for an internship (which helps to ensure that
only our strongest students are representing the university in this way), some
non-traditional students, students with children, and students who already
work full-time jobs may have logistical difficulties completing this require-
ment, so we incorporated it into only the optional certificate. Many of our
PTW majors obtain the certificate as well, but occasionally we have students
who are unable to do so due to work or family pressures. Additionally, many
students in Communication Studies also pursue our Professional Writing Cer-
tificate or even double major in Professional Writing to hone their writing
skills and help them further their career goals, particularly in print journalism.

               establishing requirements

         In order to prepare the PTW program for growth, it is important to
understand the program's current status and what would be required for growth,
where opportunities exist for development, and what sorts of additions would

98
                                                                                                Smart Growth

most benefit students. Prior to planning for growth, including adding new
courses and hiring new permanent faculty, program administrators need to un-
derstand and analyze the present level of resources and direct growth in sustain-
able directions.

         The smart growth principle seven, "Preserve open space, farmland,
natural beauty, and critical environmental areas," is relevant in determining
what is present and what will be required in order to grow the program in pro-
ductive and useful ways that capitalize on the strengths and address the gaps in
the current curriculum and structure. Based on this principle, growth should
preserve open space or flexibility, be redirected to existing communities, and
help in removing development pressure. In planning new hires, should lines
become available, candidates should be sought who both complement what is
currently working and provide additional expertise related to targeted growth
areas. For example, we recently hired a fourth specialist in professional writ-
ing who specializes in science and medical writing, which can help us to serve
and speak to the large number of biology and marine biology students and
growing numbers of nursing students, by state mandate, at our institution.
Furthermore, although the fit is outside of strict definitions of PTW, we have
agreed to assist the department in pursuing a future hire in journalism to serve
the large numbers of students interested in that area in our program as well as
our institution's new interdisciplinary minor. Preserving what is unique about
our institution's offerings is, in this instance, more critical than delineating a
textbook PTW program.

         Preservation also extends from the program to the departmental level.
The PTW program should be flexible enough to help to bolster what is good and
useful in the department outside of the program and in related departments so
as to integrate PTW and other areas. For example, our PTW program requires
a significant number of courses from literature (nine to twelve semester hours)
and allows students to take related courses in the creative writing department
and count them toward the program. Such crossover preserves what is useful in
the established programs in English--while simultaneously making it possible
for our literature colleagues to continue to teach upper-level classes in their fields
despite growing enrollment in PTW--and creative writing by drawing students
to those courses while decreasing our development pressure, providing our stu-
dents with more options and depth without overtaxing our permanent and part-
time faculty in PTW. While some may question the relationship between other
fields, such as creative writing, and PTW, at our specific institution the creative
writing program is extremely popular and nationally renowned and, thus, work-
ing with them benefits us both. Another way to preserve open space is to build
in enough elective credits that allow the program to easily adapt if curricular

                                                                                                  99
Ashe and Reilly

requirements in the department or university change in the future and allow for
developments in the field to become new courses.

         To "Create a range of housing opportunities and choices," as smart
growth advocates advise, parallels the guideline of "Mix land uses." The require-
ments for the PTW program should provide a variety of ways for students to
live in or inhabit the program. A range of different types of students can be
accommodated, including students who transfer into the university or come to
the program late in their careers, students for whom PTW is a secondary inter-
est, students who have already obtained a degree but return to the university
to take advantage of the program, and students with interests in a number of
subfields of PTW that the program can offer while guarding against attempting
to cover too much (a constant struggle, we readily admit). While a program can-
not satisfy the needs of every potential student, identifying alternate means of
approaching PTW and alternate goals for students seeking this instruction will
help a program to grow in a manner that maintains flexibility in requirements
and maximizes the program's potential.

        selecting appropriate technologies

         In selecting appropriate technologies for a system, Fiksel emphasizes
that the most recently developed technologies are not always the best and
most effective ones and may actually affect the environment in more negative
ways than do older technologies. For Fiksel, the best technologies increase the
efficiency of the system but also make it more flexible and adaptable. With
that in mind, the selection of technologies can also be productively informed
by smart growth principles two and six: "Create walkable neighborhoods"
and "Mix land uses." Walkable neighborhoods are those that provide safe and
easy access to needed goods and services while promoting a sense of com-
munity. These sorts of neighborhoods are developed through mixing land
uses, incorporating residential, commercial, retail and open spaces into one
area. Applying these principles to program growth and development entails
selecting a range of technologies to incorporate into PTW courses that both
prepare students for work in organizational contexts and foster community,
accomplishing multiple goals at once. For example, our program recently
purchased on-screen video development software3 so that students can create
software training videos, a skill which is in some demand by private industry
in our area. This software can also be used to create a sense of community by

100
                                                                                                Smart Growth

enabling students to develop a bank of training videos about how to use other
software, such as web page editors and publication design software4, that can
be used for instructional purposes by students in other classes. Participating
in producing programmatic resources helps students to feel a sense of accom-
plishment and belonging, particularly if their contributions are recognized in
other venues or courses. Our program is also using technology in the form of
an email discussion list to maintain connections with and community among
our alumni.

         The smart growth principles emphasize that mixing land uses is key
to fostering the walkable neighborhoods, spaces that are safe and reasonable to
negotiate. To accomplish this, the technologies employed and used within the
program should be targeted and overlapping across campus, so that students
can feel a sense of building a knowledge base and avoid fragmentation. To this
end, faculty within and across programs can hold discussions about the various
technologies that they employ and make an effort to learn about and use some
common technologies so that students do not have to relearn how to negotiate
each course as a foreign land. This sort of faculty sharing may have the happy
byproduct of creating a greater sense of community among the often diverse
group of part-time and permanent faculty who teach in the program. Because
resources for purchasing technologies for computer classrooms are often sparse,
it may be necessary to agree as a faculty which applications are key to the pro-
gram and would benefit the largest number of courses and students and focus
efforts in obtaining those. Such programmatic consensus can reduce waste and
help make all participants more flexible as teachers and willing to learn new ways
to accomplish tasks that focus on helping students learn particular skill sets and
critical analysis strategies. We have been more successful at achieving such con-
sensus and sharing such information within our department and program than
across departments, partially due to differing goals and resource allocation. For
example, we want to begin an electronic portfolio initiative within our program.
Upon discovering that the School of Education already had an electronic port-
folio requirement for all students, our coordinator met with the chair of that de-
partment to investigate sharing expertise and technological resources. While we
gained valuable advice as a result of this meeting, we did not choose to employ
the technology that the education faculty used largely because it required that
each student pay $25 per semester for its use. We did not wish to place such a
burden on our students when perfectly viable open source alternatives are avail-
able5. Ideally, students could rely on the same technology campus-wide to meet
portfolio requirements.

                                                                                                 101
Ashe and Reilly

               developing a system design

         The design of a resilient system entails the integration of aspects of the
system discussed above, including the goals, requirements, technologies, resourc-
es, and constraints, to create a viable and navigable system. As Fiksel emphasizes,
"Sometimes the greatest resilience is achieved through design simplicity, which
reduces the chances of unexpected failure or disruption" (5336). A simple pro-
gram design would be straightforward, transparent to participants, consistent
with previous decisions, and reflective of the faculty and student populations
involved. In prompting the system to thrive and then to grow, administrators
will do well to follow smart growth principles three, eight, and four: "Encourage
community and stakeholder collaboration," "Provide a variety of transportation
choices," and "Foster distinctive, attractive communities with a strong sense of
place."

         "Encourag[ing] community and stakeholder collaboration" is one of
the most important smart growth principles and possibly the most difficult prin-
ciple to apply to program development and growth. As the Sustainable Growth
Network indicates, "Citizen participation can be time-consuming, frustrating
and expensive, but encouraging community and stakeholder collaboration can
lead to creative, speedy resolution of development issues and greater community
understanding of the importance of good planning and investment" ("Encour-
age"). Regarding PTW programs, stakeholders include the program administra-
tors, faculty, and even some university administrators, while other faculty and
students make up the community. Collaborating with students may be in some
ways easier than collaborating with faculty members in the departmental com-
munity for a variety of reasons. The majority of students involved with the PTW
writing program beyond the introductory course elected that involvement, have
an interest in the program's goals and subject matter, and can provide input and
feedback through their courses and through brief, online surveys; in contrast,
faculty in the department outside of the program may know very little about
PTW, may have no interest in it, or may even believe that it should not be part
of their department. This smart growth principle reminds us of the importance
of attempting to reach out to the community as a whole and to make a special
effort to inform, educate, and enlist the support of even the most resistant col-
leagues.

         Such outreach to colleagues can be accomplished through special
means, such as making presentations to the faculty and holding information ses-
sions for faculty and students, and routine means, including talking about the
contributions and issues of the program at department and committee meetings
and educating colleagues during peer observations of teaching or meetings of de-

102
                                                                                                Smart Growth

partmental reading groups, if those exist. Additionally, qualified colleagues with
talents in adjacent subject matter, such as activist writing, travel writing, policy
or grant writing, memoirs, and literature of the environment, can be recruited
to teach courses that count towards the PTW major requirements. Involving
these colleagues as teachers accomplishes two things, both of which could lead
to greater long-term investment in the PTW program: 1) these faculty become,
for that semester, part of the program, 2) these faculty become familiar with our
students and more aware of their accomplishments and the concepts they are
learning in other courses in the major.

         Another way to keep a broad range of the community informed and ac-
tive in the PTW program is to seek as diverse an advisory committee as possible
by recruiting one or two members from clearly non-PTW fields, so that other
voices can speak for the program during department discussions, particularly
those concerning resources and hiring. Furthermore, students can also be asked
to serve on the PTW advisory committee as can a few providers of internship
experiences or local alumni. These individuals may be ex-officio members, and
they may not need to attend every meeting or have a voice in every decision, but
their presence can improve the diversity and cohesion of the program.

         Community participation can also be extended past the confines of the
university through internship requirements and with service learning or com-
munity-based learning initiatives to strengthen and polish students' educational
experience while developing the university/community relationship. In our pro-
gram, for example, our introductory courses require a service learning project in
order to provide students with an opportunity to experience an organic, com-
plex writing situation and to develop a sense of civic responsibility. Through this
project, students also discover that they have much to offer the community, and
successful projects provide good public relations for the university and the PTW
program in the community and on campus. Service learning initiatives also al-
low us to reach out to stakeholders at the level of university administrators.
One of our university's strategic goals includes service learning and community
involvement, and making our initiatives known to upper administration helps
to demonstrate the contributions of our program to university-wide goals. Fur-
thermore, our university and our college more specifically have a goal of reduc-
ing reliance on part-time faculty. Our chair was able to secure our most recent
PTW faculty hire by demonstrating how adding this position to our depart-
ment would allow us lower our reliance on part-time faculty by covering certain
courses that part-time faculty commonly teach. We will likely secure our next
hire using similar arguments.

         The smart growth principle "Provide a variety of transportation choic-
es" serves as a reminder to provide options for system navigation and design

                                                                                                 103
Ashe and Reilly

to reduce congestion. The flexibility built into the program's design through
mixing land use can provide a basis for making it easy to navigate. If the pro-
gram is configured to facilitate and support double majors, it will be easier
to develop routine ways to handle the rules and requirements so that those
double majors can progress smoothly. For example, administrators should try
to anticipate some of the exceptions to the rules necessitated by the diverse stu-
dent populations that the program is designed to attract, such as students who
complete an internship in another program/department and ask for dual credit,
students with below-minimum grades who want to be allowed to continue
in the program, students who want a certificate as soon as they complete re-
quirements but before they actually graduate for use in obtaining employment,
and students who are less prepared or adept technologically. While it may be
impossible to invent specific policies in advance that will cover every potential
situation, the program can institute processes to handle situations as they arise,
such as course substitution criteria and procedures, and empower a number of
faculty in the program to handle these situations so that there is usually some-
one present to fill out paperwork and give information to students. One way
to institute such processes is to draw up charts to represent the delegation of
responsibilities among those who will share the tasks of running the program
and advising students and discuss these at regular meetings of program faculty.
Program administrators can also chart the flow of information that will get
students through the program and provide that information in a variety of
places, such as on departmental websites and bulletin boards, and to a variety of
people, including faculty from outside of the program who are teaching related
courses or advising PTW students.

         Congestion in the system in the form of inadequate courses to meet
students' needs and demands in a particular semester can result from inade-
quate planning and program oversight. Developing "a variety of transportation
choices" in the form of an adequate and diverse number of sections of a required
course in each semester, such as a senior capstone seminar, can help to reduce
this congestion and avoid trapping students in school for one more semester in
order to obtain the courses required for graduation. While our program has been
aware of these congestion issues resulting from the rapid growth of our fledging
track in the major, we found that without a designated program director, we
were less able to coordinate the courses and adequately document the problems
faced by students in scheduling classes and graduating on schedule. The need
to make long-term plans for the program and designate a faculty member who
would be responsible for planning, troubleshooting, and problem-solving gave
us part of the justification we required to request a formal coordinator posi-
tion for our program. While planning does not have to be hierarchical, it does

104
                                                                                                Smart Growth

require some degree of coordination and a central person around whom change
revolves.

        evaluating anticipated performance

         Fiksel emphasizes that the evaluation of resilient systems should go be-
yond outcomes or performance assessment and use predictive measures that help
to anticipate the degree to which change and growth in particular directions can
be sustained. Some elements involved in such an analysis, which is commonly
done through modeling, include economic factors such as operating costs and
customer retention, environmental factors such as power use and product reli-
ability, and societal factors such as knowledge enhancement and community
trust (Fiksel 5337). As mentioned in the previous section, a clearly identified
coordinator and a high level of cooperation between stakeholders and the com-
munity are required in order to conduct effective predictive planning as well as
outcomes assessment.

         Smart growth principles including "Mak[ing] development decisions
predictable, fair, and cost effective" and "Foster[ing] distinctive, attractive com-
munities with a strong sense of place" can offer useful guidance in determining
criteria for assessing program growth and planning further development. Fair
and cost-effective development decisions are those that benefit all participants
and community members and expend resources in a just and equitable manner,
avoiding short-changing any facets of the community. Likewise, developing a
distinctive and attractive community with a strong sense of place involves un-
derstanding the goals and values of the community and viewing development as
a long-term, iterative process.

         Addressing these smart growth principles in program development in-
volves reflecting on and revising the long-term development plans in light of
both predictive and performance-based assessments. Program administrators
can accomplish predictive growth assessments in a number of ways, such as
studying enrollment numbers to judge areas of demand within the program
and directing resources there, talking to representatives from other departments
about their plans to require PTW courses or even certification for their students,
and watching the growth of industries in the region that may employ PTW stu-
dents upon graduation and determining what skills and experiences might best
prepare students for employment therein. Furthermore, administrators should
not ignore the desire of some students to go on to graduate school, and the pro-
gram should be designed to satisfy their needs as well. While specializing may
benefit faculty in terms of research, becoming too specialized may not serve the

                                                                                                 105
Ashe and Reilly

diverse student populations within the PTW program as well as a broad founda-
tion might.

         While predictive evaluations can assist in identifying the best areas for
sustainable growth, performance assessments can provide useful information
regarding the success of current initiatives and provide data to support continu-
ing or intervening in a course sequence, faculty instruction, or technology use.
Many universities, including our own, are pushing for outcomes assessment
and starting such an initiative can raise the profile of the PTW program on
campus. Using a process-oriented assessment tool, such as electronic portfolios
of materials collected over time and accompanied by reflective statements, can
help administrators to spread the responsibility for teaching students to de-
velop materials over the whole of the program; help students demonstrate the
development of their skills, knowledge, and analytical acumen over time; and
allow students to see and experience revision on a long-term basis. More im-
portantly, the development of a portfolio requirement prompts a program to
codify its goals and values in order to design criteria to use to assess the portfo-
lios and guide their composition, thus perhaps facilitating the emergence of a
programmatic identity. As Fiksel and smart growth proponents note, however,
this identity is most sustainable when it helps the program to fit well in its
environment; therefore, programmatic goals and identity construction should
be done with the goals and identity of the department and university commu-
nities in mind. For example, if the university values outreach and community
involvement, incorporating those into the goals for the program might be
useful. Likewise, if the program is housed in a department that values activist
or environmental concerns, programmatic goals can also touch on these areas
and involvement in or understanding of them might be sought in graduat-
ing students' portfolio materials. Smart growth principles emphasize that even
outcomes assessment cannot work in a programmatic vacuum; successful and
resilient programs reflect university community as well as local programmatic
values.

               devising a practical means
                 for system development

         In this phase of development planning, system designers focus on im-
plementing their new developments. As Fiksel explains, stakeholder and com-
munity involvement is especially important in this part of the process. As smart
growth principle nine admonishes, "Strengthen and direct developments to-
wards existing communities." New initiatives cannot just envision an ideal com-

106
                                                                                                Smart Growth

munity population but must measure their effects on existing populations and
serve their needs as well. For example, at the start of our PTW program, which is
a track in the English major, we accommodated many students who were in the
middle of pursuing a degree in English literature. These students often did not
take the prerequisite courses, such as the introductory technical writing course,
with someone trained in PTW and therefore often required instruction in the
basics of writing as a social act or in the use of computer applications that were
new to them. Our position as part of the English department requires us to meet
the needs of such crossover students in order to make the transition to our new
program possible and foster its growth.

         Focusing on existing communities also emphasizes building on what is
strong in the preexisting environment. For example, as noted above, we as the
first two tenure-track PTW specialists arrived in our program to find a strong in-
terest in journalism among students and talented faculty available to teach those
courses. Although this focus conflicted with our previous conceptions of what
PTW is or should be due to our graduate school preparation, we recognized the
importance of developing this aspect of our program because it provides a good
foundation and student base for our program, and we both developed courses
related to it. Additionally, building on such preexisting strengths helps us to
avoid sprawl by trying to take the program in other directions too soon, thereby
diluting already sparse human and technological resources.

         Perhaps even more importantly than merely following smart growth
principle two, "Making development decisions predictable, fair, and cost-effec-
tive," in the deployment of programmatic change and growth strategies, is in-
forming stakeholders and community members that you are doing so through
documentation of those efforts. Once a program coordinator position has been
approved and one has been appointed, it is important for that person to record
all administrative duties in order to provide a record and develop data for use
in making arguments in favor of creating new positions or acquiring other re-
sources. Some of the activities that might be logged include student contacts;
formal and informal meetings with committee members, administrators, and
prospective students; time spent in hiring and other staff decisions; comple-
tion of requirement checks for certificate students; creation of new courses; and
attendance at conferences and workshops to keep skills current. The program
administrators should also record the minutes of all committee meetings and
post them on the department website or through another semi-public venue
in order to create transparency and keep all parties informed of programmatic
concerns, developments, and decisions. In addition to record-keeping, it may be
useful to hold open meetings of the advisory committee, advertise those meet-
ings, and encourage input from any interested parties. A transparent system, to

                                                                                                 107
Ashe and Reilly

most onlookers, is a trustworthy one and the more the program wins the trust
and cultivates the interest of the community, the more sustainable and resilient
it will become.

                           conclusion

         The creation and maintenance of a resilient and sustainable professional
and technical writing program asks for a particular emphasis on cooperation
and interaction among stakeholders and community members. In addition to
this priority, PTW program administrators often face the additional challenge of
fostering an inclusive atmosphere in an indifferent or even hostile departmental
environment. While professional and technical writing programs seek to find
their places within their universities' various departments and structures, we as
program administrators can find within systems thinking strategies for linking
our work to our larger communities and linking our larger communities to our
work. Systems thinkers, stressing the crucial attributes of diversity, efficiency,
adaptability, and cohesion, offer us a methodology for building and maintain-
ing stronger programs that serve our constituencies in more and better ways. By
"identifying system function and boundaries, establishing requirements, select-
ing appropriate technologies, developing a system design, evaluating anticipated
performance, and devising a practical means for system development" (Fiksel
5330), professional and technical writing program administrators can system-
atically develop better programs and find new ways to conceptualize problems
inherent in existing program structures. In addition, systems thinking privileges
the relationships inherent in organizations and environments, the very relation-
ships that can determine whether goals are reached, resources allocated, and
initiatives approved.

         Using a methodology from systems thinking, we have applied the
principles of smart growth urban planning to PTW program administration.
Considering programs and their environments as landscapes affords us a way
to create and sustain diverse, efficient, adaptable, and cohesive programs. These
principles are broad-based and inclusive, fostering collective understanding and
cooperation from stakeholders and communities. In addition, smart growth
principles, translated for program administration, can help us answer or even
avoid altogether the accusation that professional and technical writing programs
are the academic equivalent of urban sprawl. Tighter, stronger programs with
transparent administration might even mean never again having to hear a long-
time colleague ask, "What exactly is professional writing, anyway?" And if, by
chance, the question were to arise again, smart growth principles and systems

108
                                                                                                Smart Growth

thinking strategies would allow us to respond by inviting that colleague to par-
ticipate in specific ways in our open, inclusive, and mutually beneficial academic
community.

                                notes

1 As of December 2005, the breakdown of English majors was as follows: 112 in
professional writing, 91 in literature, 50 in teacher licensure, and 54 undeclared
(email from the department chair, December 13, 2005).
2 Smart Growth America lists the same principles, although in a different order,
on their website ("How is Smart Growth Achieved?," 2004).
3 We first purchased Techsmith's Camtasia, which allows students to make vid-
eos of what appears on the computer screen that incorporate sound and other
graphic elements. More recently we purchased Macromedia Director for our
computer classroom. This software allows students to develop interactive mul-
timedia movies that include other film clips, graphics and audio. We were only
able to afford ten copies for classes of twenty, but such sharing can be viewed as
a positive way to foster collaboration among students.
4 We currently use Macromedia Dreamweaver for web design and Adobe InDe-
sign for producing publications.
5 Drawing upon advice from professional writing faculty at other universities,
we are currently investigating the use of the Open Source Portfolio Initiative
application, which we will have to house on off-campus server space, as our
university's IT department refuses to support installing open source applications
on university servers.

                           works cited

Allen, Jo. "Compact Planning and Program Development: A New Planning
   Model for Growing Technical Communication Programs." Models for Stra-
   tegic Program Development. Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific
   Communication Annual Conference Proceedings. 19-20 Oct. 2000: 56-58. 12
   May 2004. Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication
   Website: http://cptsc.org/conferences/conference2000/program2000/proceed-
   ings2000.html

Allen, Jo. "The Case Against Defining Technical Writing." Journal of Business and
   Technical Communication 4.2 (1990): 68-77.

                                                                                                 109
Ashe and Reilly

Andrews, Deborah C., & Worley, Rebecca B. "A Networked Approach to Pro-
   gram Growth." Managing Change and Growth in Technical and Scientific Com-
   munication. Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication An-
   nual Conference Proceedings 11-13 Oct. 2001: 71. 12 May 2004. Council for
   Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication Website: http://cptsc.
   org/conferences/proceedings2001/proceedings2001.html

Ben-Zadok, Efraim. "Growing Smart is Hard to Do." Planning 69.9 (Oct. 2003):
   32-35.

Blakeslee, Ann M. "The Case for an Integrated Approach to Program Develop-
   ment." Models for Strategic Program Development. Council for Programs in Tech-
   nical and Scientific Communication Annual Conference Proceedings19-20 Oct.
   2000: 24-25. 12 May 2004. Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific
   Communication Website: http://cptsc.org/conferences/conference2000/pro-
   gram2000/proceedings2000.html

Blythe, Stuart. "The Value of Seeking Interdisciplinary Models for Smaller Profes-
   sional Writing Programs." Models for Strategic Program Development. Council for
   Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication Annual Conference Proceed-
   ings 19-20 Oct. 2000: 26. 12 May 2004. Council for Programs in Technical
   and Scientific Communication Website: http://cptsc.org/conferences/confer-
   ence2000/program2000/proceedings2000.html

Bosley, Deborah S. "A Proposal for the Marriage of Technical Communication and
   WAC/WID." Models for Strategic Program Development. Council for Programs in
   Technical and Scientific Communication Annual Conference Proceedings 19-20
   Oct. 2000: 72. 12 May 2004. Council for Programs in Technical and Scien-
   tific Communication Web site: http://cptsc.org/conferences/conference2000/
   program2000/proceedings2000.html

Cooper, Marilyn M. "An Ecology of Writing." College English 48 (1986): 364-75.
Cooper, Marilyn M. "Foreword." Ecocomposition: Theoretical and Pedagogical Ap-

   proaches. Ed. Christian R. Weisser and Sydney I. Dobrin. New York: SUNY
   Press, 2001. xi-xviii.
Davis, Marjorie T. "How the Institutional Home Affects a Program." Models for
   Strategic Program Development. Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific
   Communication Annual Conference Proceedings 19-20 Oct. 2000: 19-20. 12
   May 2004. Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication
   Website: http://cptsc.org/conferences/conference2000/program2000/proceed-
   ings2000.html
Di Renzo, Anthony. "The Great Instauration: Restoring Professional and Techni-
   cal Writing to the Humanities." Journal of Technical Writing and Communica-
   tion 32.1 (2002): 45-57.

110
                                                                                                Smart Growth

Dobrin, David N. "What's Technical about Technical Writing?" New Essays in
   Technical and Scientific Communication: Research, Theory, Practice. Ed. Paul
   V. Anderson, R. John Brockmann, and Carolyn R. Miller. Farmingdale: Bay-
   wood,1983. 227-250.

Dobrin, Sydney I., & Weisser, Christian. Natural Discourse: Toward Ecocomposi-
   tion. New York: SUNY Press, 2002.

Fiksel, Joseph. "Designing Resilient, Sustainable Systems." Environmental Science
   and Technology 37.23 (Dec. 2003): 5330-5340.

Geller, Alyson. "Smart Growth: A Prescription for Livable Cities." American Jour-
   nal of Public Health 93.9 (Sept. 2003): 1410-14.

Hocks, Mary E., Lopez, Elizabeth Sanders, and Grabill, Jeffrey T. "Praxis and
   institutional architecture: Designing an interdisciplinary professional writing
   program." 12 May 2004. academic.writing1: http://wac.colostate.edu/aw/ar-
   ticles/hocks2000.htm

Lutz, Jean A. & Storms, C. Gilbert. "Introduction." The Practice of Technical and
   Scientific Communication: Writing in Professional Contexts. Ed. Jean A. Lutz
   and C. Gilbert Storms. Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing, 1998. vii-xvi.

Rutter, Russell. "History, rhetoric, and humanism: Toward a more comprehensive
   definition of technical communication." Journal of Technical Writing and Com-
   munication 21.2 (1991): 133-53.

Smart Growth America. "How is Smart Growth Achieved?" 2004. 12 May 2004.
   Smart Growth America website: http://smartgrowthamerica.org/sghowto.html

Staley, Samuel R. "Markets, Smart Growth, and the Limits of Policy." Smarter
   Growth: Market-Based Strategies for Land-Use Planning in the 21st Century. Ed.
   Randall G. Holcombe and Samuel R. Staley. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
   2001. 201-217.

Sustainable Communities Network. "About Smart Growth." 2004. 24 Febru-
   ary 2004. Smart Growth Online: http://www.smartgrowth.org/about/default.
   asp?res=80.

Sustainable Communities Network. "Encourage Community and Stakeholder
   Collaboration." 2004. 24 February 2004. Smart Growth Online: http://www.
   smartgrowth.org/about/principles/principles.asp?prin=10&res=1024

Weiler, Michael, & Pearce, W. Barnett. "Ceremonial Discourse: The Rhetorical
   Ecology of the Reagan Administration." Reagan and Public Discourse in Amer-
   ica. Ed. Michael Weiler and W. Barnett Pearce. Tuscaloosa: University of Ala-
   bama Press, 1992. 11-42.

                                                                                                 111
6 Curriculum, Genre and Resistance: Revising Identity
  in a Professional Writing Community

   David Franke

         When I was invited to direct our Professional Writing major, the first
steps were clear: my PTW colleagues and I were to find students, promote the
program, and develop a curriculum.1 Much of this work was informal and oc-
casional--conversations in the elevator with the dean, talk in the mailroom. My
colleagues and I were surprised, however, at how much of our time and energy
was devoted to writing, and writing that was not exactly scholarly. Our sub-
ject-matter expertise played a much smaller role than our rhetorical ability: we
learned quickly how to make a complex point simple, what points not to raise,
and how to anticipate the niggling unasked questions of our readers. Functional
writing, in prescribed genres, was how work got done: getting the program pro-
posal to the bureaucratic center of our system in Albany, NY was a labyrinth
in its own right, but then came the course proposal revisions, emails, funding
requests, webpages, syllabi, memos, minutes, class-size projections, assignments,
and the like, each of which serving as an "important lever" that allowed us to
"advance our own interests and shape our meanings in relation to complex social
systems" (Charles Bazerman 79).2 As Bazerman says elsewhere, these genres are
not cold and mechanical, but "forms of life, ways of being" ("Life," 19). In other
words, in a complex literate system such as a professional writing program, our
ways of being--our behavior, our identity, our style--are strongly shaped by
the way we engage with key administrative genres. In the pages that follow, I
want to tell the story of our program's evolution as embodied and enacted in our
administrative writings, and I focus on the curriculum because it is the center of
this web of genres. Although the curricular text we wrote is neither profound nor
even very long, being nothing but a completely humorless and efficient page full
of prerequisites and other technical paraphernalia, it defines the nature of our
program and the way subsequent and linked genres are written. Once the cur-
riculum is approved and published in the college catalog, we become animate.

         As the center of this "web" of genres, the curriculum is often printed (or
downloaded) to a page or two of the college catalog, and it serves as a semi-legal
document that gives sequence, shape, unity, themes, and minimums to students,
providing them with a loose road map for how they can complete a degree in un-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.06  113
Franke

der four years. Most curricular systems are complex gerrymandered intellectual
districts when it comes to course requirements--a minimum of two from category
A and three from category B, but at least six all told, for instance--and this system
serves as the program's DNA, what potentially gives it life and order. Just as we
ask people to spell out words when we want to really understand what is said, so
too we look at a program's curriculum in order to truly make sense of it. Many
conventions are widely accepted: the sequence of courses in the curriculum is
indicated by prerequisites and level indications (such as 300-level courses for
juniors, etc). The courses, for all their richness, are usually written in deaden-
ing bureaucratese, never read until necessary, and perhaps for those reasons the
descriptions retain a sense of finality and authority, what Bazerman might refer
to as a "reducible" genre (90), one that "exists only in its consequences." And
despite the reductive quality, this authority is something that faculty are likely to
appreciate, especially after struggling two or three years to get courses through
the system and into the catalog. Because curricula are written, they tend, over
time, to appear factual, not contingent; purely practical, not theoretical; a firm
answer to a set of fixed problems rather than a tacit question about how a pro-
gram can best adapt and grow.

         Yet these conventional assumptions are incomplete. The curriculum,
while "reducible," is a form of activity that engages dynamically with the other
powerful genres common to a writing program. This case study examines the cur-
riculum not in terms of the logic and technicalities of our graduation sequences
and requirements, or even the frustrations of finally getting the thing into print
(though doing so did severely test our patience), but rather as a source of both
continuity and change. In our experience, the curriculum is in fact less like a pro-
nouncement from Zeus than a dialogue with Hermes, both the messenger and
trickster, stabilizing and destabilizing our program. By learning to respond to this
dynamic, we came to value our functional, administrative writing; in turn, we
came to understand better how programs mature and how writing functions for
members of a small community such as ours. The effect of our developing un-
derstanding and rhetorical savvy is not just that we became better at manipulat-
ing the administrative genres of our program--though I think we did--but also
that we came to understand better how to sustain a small academic community
of "writers-in-training"--a category that includes ourselves. I am advocating that
program designers do more than simply "expect the unexpected" or "remain flex-
ible," but rather that they intently look for places to take reasonable risks, and the
curriculum is often the most important place in a writing program for that to hap-
pen. It is hoped that this narrative will help other program designers decide what
a "reasonable" risk might be given their particular situations.

114
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

                                 site

         SUNY Cortland is a semi-rural, mainly tax-funded, solidly established
branch of the State University of New York system. The division between the
liberal and applied arts is especially sharp. A former "normal" (teacher-prep)
school, we still carry the pre-professional major of Education as our largest con-
tingent, followed closely by Recreation and Sports Management; "traditional"
Arts and Science majors, those not in a professional track, take up only a third
of most incoming freshman classes. Furthermore, many of our students are first-
generation academics, perhaps not encouraged by family to entertain seemingly
frivolous majors. We are not an endowment-rich school and must therefore
work within a very tight and unpredictable state budget. There is little largess
for experimentation; it is expected that any venture show a clear and positive
relation between expenditures and results - an approach most students are likely
to understand well.

         For all these reasons, the college, like the culture at large, is pushed
to understand success as a lack of error. The number of solecisms in gram-
mar, usage and mechanics can be what determines "good writing." Casual
conversation can turn into a lament when the topic of student writing comes
up, and too often "students nowadays can't write" emerges as a commonplace
marking the travails of teaching. Teaching writing is too often understood as
remediation, an unfortunate prerequisite to the real content any course might
offer, a way of displaying remembered knowledge, rather than as a process of
making or discovering knowledge. Despite a dynamic and persuasive Compo-
sition Program and WAC director, writing can function more as an inocula-
tion against diseased prose than a way to join a community and tradition of
inquiry.

         We developed a writing practice in our PWR program that is often at
odds with these conventions, and did so structurally. Our goal, most textually
embodied by the curriculum, but echoed in syllabi, assignments, and a thousand
other pieces of writing, is to graduate writers who are creative professionals, able
to imagine the textual needs of their community and immediate audience. Our
mantra is that students need "to be taken seriously" as writers, and getting that
to happen in our program means they must absorb a rhetorical awareness and
familiarity with the conventions of grammar and style, as well as the ability to
invent and complete new writing projects. To reach this goal we made our pro-
gram commodious enough to attend to creativity, analysis, technology, history,
theory and practical skills--in other words, we chose to build a program that
approached professional writing as a liberal art and committed to developing

                                                                                                 115
Franke

students who will, in order to be successful, have to understand and join writing
communities as creative professionals--not merely avoid error.

         Our English department's focus on reading and historical periods--no
writing courses--allowed us to create, without competing, the several writing
strands indicated below. Undergrads must take eighteen credit hours of required
courses (with asterisks), and fifteen credit hours of elective professional writing
courses, six hours of which must be at the 400 level.

         Creative     Workplace       Rhetorical    Digital          Bookends

200- Writing                                        *Writing in the  *Introduction
level Fiction                                       Digital Age      to Professional
                                                                     Writing
         Writing
         Poetry       Grant           *Rhetoric     Writing in
                      Writing                       Cyberspace
300- Writing
level Creative        Technical
                      Writing
         Nonfiction
                      *Revising and
         Writing      Editing
         Children's
         Literature   Writing for
                      Online
         Writing      Publication
         Sports
         Literature

                      Business Writ-
                      ing

400- Advanced         The             The           Contemporary     *Senior Seminar
                                      Evolution of  Poetics          in Professional
level Creative Writ- Publishing       Writing                        Writing

        ing           Industry

         Experiments  *Internship in
         in Creative  Professional
         Writing      Writing

grad

As with many PWR programs in English departments that "have begun rec-
ognizing the power of a more eclectic writing program," our challenge is to
make coherent course offerings that are united mostly by what they are not:
literature. The net is cast very wide, from creative writing to "technical and

116
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

business writing, feature writing, autobiography and biography, research and
other modes of advanced composition," (Adams 152). Yet at the same time,
our "property" is also spoken for by our extended family in the humanities:
journalism, literacy, communications, English, business or management, com-
position and rhetoric. While most PTW program leaders would be quick to
make alliances with some of these before others, the fact remains that we are
operating both in the margins and at the intersections of disciplinary terri-
tory. It's an odd place and ultimately, I'm not sure it is possible to resolve. As
I discuss below, we experimented with several structures to lasso the disparate
courses together, but never felt fully satisfied and comfortable. On reflection,
I suspect this is simply something we have to accept and I would argue with
Adams, above, that this is in fact our strength. We are forced to constantly
reflect on our practices and offerings, and there is little room for complacency;
likewise, however, it takes a long time in an institution to develop the momen-
tum and recognition that other departments are born to, despite the fact that
the courses we teach are informed by a rhetorical lineage that extends back
over three millennia.

                     designing identity

         Our first curriculum was a loose collection of courses, a list composed
by the diligent efforts of faculty who wrote proposals before any of us were
hired to the proposed PTW program. Yet we started getting students in our
courses even before all of our faculty were hired. And once the three of us were
in place, we immediately began writing course proposals, researching other
programs, talking to students, contacting potential employers, imagining se-
quences, picturing our program in disciplinary terms as a place to develop
knowledges and practices that would be unique in the context of our pragmat-
ic college. The goal was to create an identity for ourselves, a "space" in which
certain kinds of conversations could take place about style, process, rhetoric,
and technology. We hoped to actually hear these topics being bantered about
in and between classes, to have readings in the afternoons, to connect our
program to the ongoing WAC work and faculty development writing in our
college.3 We were trying to design a community, not just a set of classes, and
assumed that once we "published" our PWR curriculum in the college cata-
log, we would be done: our program would be in place, the black and white
document would function as a machine to automatically sustain this small
academic colony.

                                                                                                 117
Franke

                       student writers

         Students generally joined PWR with an open-mindedness that al-
lowed them to experiment with a broad spectrum of genres and concepts.
Even before we finished our first revision of the curriculum, we accumulated
our small village of creative, irreverent kids who seemed capable of anything
and surprised by very little. Our first line-up of courses was bare: a few creative
writing courses, a technology course, a tech writing course. From the start we
hoped to elicit reflection, judgment, and a life-long practice of writing and felt
we were at odds with the conventions of our college, in that we taught writ-
ing as a strategy rather than a skill, linked more to reasoning and imagination
than polish--though now in retrospect it's clear that being at odds with the
conventions of the someone is part of being a new program. Where rhetoric was
assumed to be facile posturing, we developed rhetoric into a course on "be-
ing taken seriously," and though technology was often assumed to be a set of
recondite technical skills, we developed courses that assumed new media to be
culture-altering and mind-altering. With the focus on the rhetorical situation,
audience, authority, and motive, we were able to move into and among various
genres with facility.

         Our first true draft of the curriculum was quite broad and, as Kathleen
Adams recommends, we tended to teach and talk about writing in a way that
blurred the lines between PWR's disparate sources and traditions (152). We sin-
cerely hoped that the disparate motives for writing implied by the curriculum--
writing used for play (creative), for solving problems (technical and business),
and for critical reflection (rhetorical theory and history)--and through it all our
emphasis on technology--would intertwine and fertilize each other. As we add-
ed more courses we also assumed that the differences in subject matter between,
say, a grantwriting course and a poetry course would become secondary to the
strong unity provided by reflection, peer-review, collaboration, audience analy-
sis and revision. We would emphasize close reading of any text, be it technical,
creative, or digital; promote an ongoing analysis of motive, content, purpose,
and situation; approach grammar as a strategy, not a shibboleth. It would be a
struggle, of course, but we aimed to create a set of practices and perspectives that
would allow students to speak each other's language regardless of what course
they enrolled in. We expected a peaceable kingdom, and waited for our solid and
published curriculum to guarantee us just that. While we encouraged students
to do some "free range" thinking while in the program, it's also true that their
curriculum was pretty strictly managed. As I discuss below, it is perhaps a little
ironic that our students were expected to embrace their freedom in the terms we
dictated.

118
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

                       a tie-dyed major?

         Our well-wrought curriculum was not playing out as we had intended
in reality. Our students, instead of connecting to "writing" or "rhetoric," broad-
ly conceived, instead attached themselves with a passion to certain genres and
formed small sub-groups that codified and confirmed an increasingly restricted
writing identity. They played it safe. The larger group, a fairly tie-dyed group of
"creative writers," soon took all their classes together, generally eschewing the
more theoretical classes, a group that included a trial creative nonfiction class,
the digital writing (technology) classes and, most intently, the technical writing
class. Though a small minority of techies emerged as the mirror image of these
creative writers, most of our students became deeply invested in developing a
"voice" and a body of work that could be read aloud at one of the many public
performances and poetry slams, both on campus and at nearby Ithaca, New
York. Certain poems and stories soon became touchstones for this dominant
community: Martin's long poem about coming out, read aloud to his surprised
peers at a public gathering, or Tanika's fictional account of an attempted suicide
that chilled many readers.

         But the development of a shared history was only one manifestation
of this group's identity; just as we had defined our program by its contrast with
the college at large, these student-writers were defined by what they were not
writing. I first came to recognize the students' identity-by-contrast when I was
teaching technical writing in our second year. We were reading some of the
scenarios provided in our technical writing textbook and going nowhere fast.
Most of my students couldn't get beyond the immediate personal details of the
characters in the scenario who were, if I remember correctly, simply trying to
buy forklifts for their company. The emotional / personal interrelationships of
these fictional characters seemed to be extremely important to them--my stu-
dents were obsessed by whether the co-worker might be a slacker or the boss a
tyrant--and the writing problem, the challenge to them as technical writers, was
either misinterpreted or overlooked.

         The students' confusion has to be put in context. This is a group of
young adults who have successfully negotiated the political and administrative
problems of juggling friends, relationships, one or two jobs, a full load of classes
and, for some, the demands from home placed on them by their children and
families. Identifying and solving problems was not beyond their ken. But it was
not until I brought in my own personal issue to class, the need to write an ef-
fective response to a major company that sold me a poorly designed hard drive
for my computer, along with all the attendant emails and correspondence I had
accumulated, were my students able to see the writing as a means of problem

                                                                                                 119
Franke

solving. When I asked these same technical writing students to write a letter of
complaint for me, I received many adequate responses, some equal to my own
draft, and several wonderful, excellent examples. Many were expert ventrilo-
quists and did an excellent job of speaking for me in their letters, picking up
on my "voice." I am not ashamed to say I cribbed some of their strategies, the
ways they positioned themselves as the consumer, delineated the problem, and
persuasively argued for a particular solution. I suspected then and still do that
these early PWR students wrote from a sense of community--"us" against the
forces of coldness and technology--a community that developed its most fluent
voice and vivid identity when challenged by "foreign" discourse.

         It was clear that we had come to a kind of stasis--a quiet crisis of ho-
mogeneity, at least within this large group of creative writers. The majority
had become surprisingly self-satisfied with their small constellation of genres.
As writers, they didn't seem to be working in the ways that we expected. They
didn't seem curious or invested in what was "outside" their immediate domain.
What encouraged this parochialism? There are the usual suspects: a distaste for
"mainstream" academic argument, fear of working hard and failing, the thrill of
being able to take the self as a subject--but there were bureaucratic reasons as
well. Taking a close look at the way we described the courses, I found that after
students got beyond a small set of "core" PWR courses, we only really described
two tracks or "clusters": one led into creative writing (Writing Poetry, Writing
Fiction, Writing Children's Literature, Experiments in Creative Writing) and
one led in the opposite direction to technical and business areas (Computer
Technology, Business Writing, etc). There were many shades of gray, but our
students seemed to insist on the black and white.

         Their resistance was surprising and troubling. Dr. Victoria Boynton,
also in Professional Writing, found that her poetry class had several disaffected
technical writers in it who were seemingly unable to picture themselves as "read-
ers" of each other's creative work and were having small emergencies of confi-
dence. Dr. Alexander Reid, also in PWR, reported that his new media theory
classes seemed to produce anything but a body of enthusiasts for the theoretical
and practical issues brought up in his discussions. It was too "cold" to some, too
"abstract" and too "impractical" for others. Instead of producing a pervasive pro-
gram ethos for our thirty or so majors and minors, we had unwittingly produced
writers who were constantly undergoing minor crises. Small groups were defin-
ing their collective selves as being allergic (or immune) to genres outside their
purview; for these students, "foreign" genres were threatening and uninteresting.
We were not producing writers who were commodious and inclusive. We were
producing niche writers who shunned the difficult and unfamiliar. We had writ-
ten the wrong curriculum.

120
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

                       in our own image

         A small program, we three faculty had few options. We could force a
broad range of genres on students by increasing the number of required intro-
ductory courses, dredge up the truism of how the "real world" expects great
flexibility in writers, or just come out and tell students we wanted them to as-
sume a commodious writing identity more in line with our expectations. I am
reminded of Richard Bullock's admission of the deep urge to create students in
our own image, to have them "become like me" (21). And though we wanted
students to take up our pluralism, not to wall themselves off to courses that
were pragmatic, realistic, and unfamiliar, the irony is that our students were
acting just as we were, defining themselves by resisting. But they didn't do it in
a way we found comfortable. As teachers, we tended to dismiss our students'
"creativity" as shortsighted; yet as program designers we had gone out of our
way to de-emphasize the discourse of "writing as correctness." The curriculum
we had developed gave both groups--PWR faculty and students--an identity-
by-contrast. In fact, we had created students who were, in deep ways, very much
like ourselves. This pointed to some difficult questions. In what ways might our
program's identity be as narrow-minded as our students? If so, how does com-
munity grow past its first identity?

                  constructive conflict

         Near the end of one of our first semesters, I stumbled across Chris An-
son and L. Lee Forsberg's useful discussion of how writers--in this case, interns
in a new environment--created identity. As they put it, "Conflict and initiative
seemed to be relatively concurrent in the cycle of transition" (218-219). In other
words, Anson and Forsberg found it possible to picture moments of conflict as
inevitable, even as a necessary part of development.

         We started to look more closely at these small moments of crisis. It
seemed that students were doing a very good job of forming a writing iden-
tity, which we saw, perhaps more vividly than they, as not only an individual
"writing self " but a self-among-others, a Vygotskian social self where mean-
ing was made by the hard-to-see collaborative work produced by students
reading and writing texts written for particular social purposes within partic-
ular social contexts (Thought and Language, 1962). Seen from this framework,
their reluctance to change--their deep commitment to one particular image
of themselves--could be understood as not so much a personal writing block
or distaste for particular genres, but a necessary moment in which identity

                                                                                                 121
Franke

and meaning are made. It was literally a "pre-liminary," a hesitation at the
threshold. Our best goal might be to support, not lament, the way students
reactively formed sub-communities of writers, to explicitly identify and seek
those places where they could confirm their identity in one area and from
there explore the big world of alternative writing identities. Instead of seeing
a writing identity as a destination--for a program or a student--I came to
see it as a necessary but contingent role, an identity-by-contrast, a set of attri-
butes, behaviors and attitudes such as a character from a play or novel might
possess.

         If I gave up my attempt to define a "professional writer" as someone
who seamlessly moves through various rhetorical situations, I gained the ability
to see what these writers were actually doing in our program--and what we as
faculty were doing. The successful professional writer was perhaps better under-
stood as someone able to join with the struggles for authority and identity in one
community, and only after immersion in that community, imagine the conflicts
and purposes of other, less familiar situations, again not unlike our attempts to
build our program's identity into a small island, separated from the larger aca-
demic community. My students, connected to creative writing, had refused to
be "managed" by rhetorical theory or fundamental skills of writing; they were
ineluctably drawn to celebrate identity as a writer's key accomplishment. We
could accept this as their first principle, and only then begin to imagine other
writers' identities.

         I started to imagine ways to base my classroom questions on identity.
What clichés describe a writer of digital media or technical documents? What
do such writers really think about their role? What do they really do? What
does a short story writer know about organizing in his genre, and what expertise
in creating patterns might he bring to the challenges of organizing a business
proposal? What does "the writing process" mean to a writer in a different situ-
ation? When I personalized my problem with the buggy hard drive problem, I
had been on track. By emphasizing the lines between writers, the tension be-
tween "them" and "us" was highlighted and made more useful, not erased or
transcended. Only by attending to these conflicts did my students get what they
needed to proceed, a "home base," a perspective from which to eye, with mixed
curiosity and suspicion, the new. Creating an identity, however provisional and
mutable, needed my attention more than the possibility of teaching my students
skills that were immediately "portable."

122
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

                   contingent identities

         It was a short step to apply this not only to the individual student writ-
ers, experiencing their own crises when confronted with unappealing genres,
but to the program as a whole. We as faculty, those who had painstakingly de-
signed the program, were ourselves engaged in a conflict that pitted our aspi-
rations for a "peaceable kingdom" against our students' unexpected resistance.
The main document we used to establish our expectations was the curriculum
we had written. The curriculum did not only organize our program, giving it
shape and character, but as we could now see, also built in complications. Just
at the curriculum "shaped" our students (in ways we didn't expect), so they in
turn created the exigency--a conflict--that propelled us to take the initiative
and reflect on our status. We had rediscovered that even "reducible" documents
are endemic. Or to take it home to our situation, we had to learn there is no
"identity" cut loose from the complex swirl of texts and communities one writes
within, contexts that produce both frustration and the initiative to change. Re-
ally (re)committing to our students' development as rhetors meant giving them
a room with a view before we asked them to roam the neighborhood. Likewise,
the development of our program required that we had to accept the reality of
what we were handed: a difficult college context to develop a writing program, a
depressed rust-belt employment situation not favorable to writers of any stripe,
a small faculty and limited resources.

         We soon began three changes. The first and hardest was to recognize
that we were ultimately competing with other liberal arts degrees to provide
students with an identity. Like it or not, we had to recognize that the diploma
was, for many students, an elaborate nametag. Not a job, not a way of life, not a
ticket into the Western Tradition. As our students had tacitly asserted, the royal
road to their identity was most often, in PWR at least, through creative writing.
In PWR we were selling the opportunity for students to recognize themselves as
"writers," and we could only set the stage for their future development. In other
words, it was time for us to lighten up.

         This implied opening up the curriculum again. This time, however,
I think we began to see that treating curricula as they really are, as contin-
gent documents, which allow us as administrators and teachers to develop
new ideas and make interesting mistakes. We started to see that change was
inevitable and necessary. Not only are the curricular requirements always sub-
ject to reinterpretation--as second-semester seniors have sometimes taught
us--but what the curriculum "spells out" is also always changing as courses
develop over time, teachers gathering more experience and learning how their
courses are connected or incommensurate. We came to see the curriculum as

                                                                                                 123
Franke

a key, as in music, in which the program carries on. Further modifications
seemed less heretical and more inevitable as we came to see that anything we
wrote as a curriculum would set in motion a series of responses--the activi-
ties of writing, reading, teaching that occupy and define us a community--
and these responses eventually created the need for further adjustments in the
curriculum.

         It should be noted that these changes, however, are not simple revisions:
they required of us that we engage in constructive arguments, read and research
other programs, discuss our students' writing and summary evaluations to start.
Then a long and excruciating process of creating new course descriptions and
courses began, meeting with faculty from other departments, arguing our case
in front of various committees--some of which disagreed with each other, mak-
ing progress seem impossible. Patience, not insight, is what kept us growing and
changing, and this process, however uncomfortable, was absolutely necessary to
our success.

              lots of rooms, lots of views

         Developing for our students a room with a view meant deepening their
opportunity to establish themselves as a particular "kind" of writer, and in re-
sponse we began, now five years into the program, the process of creating and
herding through committee the new courses that would allow students to align
themselves with an identity. Students needed deeper experience in more and
narrower areas for all the reasons I've mentioned above, but we also felt the effect
of having our first students hit the job market and we were learning from their
experience how to revise our program according to regional and local employ-
ment pressures. No one was knocking on our doors looking for graduates. We
could barely find internships for many kids.

         Furthermore, I think it slowly became clear to us also that we could
never completely prepare our students for any particular writing career: there
simply were not enough faculty nor enough hours or even semesters. We decided
the small group of core courses would have to suffice; we quit trying to provide
all the theory and context for our writers and turned to our strengths. As teach-
ers, we saw that our curriculum and our expertise tacitly cohered into four areas:
play and the personal; form-driven writing that engaged in problem-solving;
the study and practice of new media; finally, history and rhetorical theory. To
return to Forsberg and Anson, the "cycle" of frustration and initiative is a useful
metaphor, but it was the faculty, as (curriculum) writers, not students, who took
initiative first.

124
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

         We modified the program's appearance on the page, making room for
the various identities students would create, their various provincialisms. To do
this, we simply realigned these four territories on paper, calling them "tracks,"
more explicitly defining various options for our program: a creative writing
track, a workplace track, a new media track, and a rhetorical theory track. We
retained an introductory and capstone course, along with the internship. We
added more hands-on lab time to the two sequential digital media courses, and
added a senior-level digital writing course to extend and deepen the track. Cre-
ative writing gained Writing Children's Literature, Writing Creative Nonfiction,
and Writing Sports Literature. This new shuffle of the deck helped us more easily
visualize and advertise our program's options, and we could quickly show our
degree offered many niches (of which Creative Writing was the deepest), thus
emphasizing distinct spaces one could inhabit-or visit-while an undergraduate.
Whether it was this change or whether we just "jelled" at this point, our identity
as a program became clearer. It was a thrill to hear in the hallways "after-hours"
conversations about writing and reading, and our enrollment jumped to twenty-
five majors and about fifteen minors--with a great many students sitting in just
to fill an elective.

                  beyond the curriculum

         Until this point, we enjoyed strong support from our president, dean
and chair. Soon, however, the inevitable changeover took place. In a short time
we found ourselves with a new Chair, Dean, Provost, and President, not all of
whom saw Professional Writing as an integral part of the college's development.
We were disappointed in house when English literature faculty (now referred to
as "the liberal arts" faculty by our chair) decided to stop counting PWR courses
as a legitimate part of the English major's requirements. It was uncomfortable,
perhaps inevitable, and unfortunate--many of the promises that had been made
when we were hired were now lost in the seas of institutional memory. But we
were working seriously. All of us had taught four new courses a semester, kept
learning new software, met weekly to plan, and kept up our own writing. The
paper load was enormous both from teaching (all our courses were Writing In-
tensive, of course) and from pushing proposals through the various committees.
In purely practical terms, we realized we could not sustain our work at this pace
forever. The belief that we could continually create new course options and new
combinations of classes was becoming untenable. We had other projects, too:
our own creative and scholarly writing, the dream of an MA program in Rheto-
ric that would let us (for the first time) to teach graduate courses in our own

                                                                                                 125
Franke

area, the possibility of joining the National Writing Project. There is a human
element that needed attention, too, for we were juggling the demands of new
families, children, and elderly parents.

         At seven years, as the first sabbaticals came into view and we were grant-
ed tenure, it was time to review and reassess our first years. Our students had
changed from our first tie-dyed contingent. A new community had formed,
one that didn't seem to need us to direct them as much; students arrived at our
program with clearer ideas about what they wanted to do for themselves. We saw
them use writing to pursue their passion, not just to "hone their skills"--a term
we never liked. The change was slow but definite. Becki had been fascinated with
the environmental and social role that zoos played--and she loved the animals.
Because she had no aptitude for zoology or medicine, she used writing as a way
to get her foot in the door and soon started writing publicity for the local zoo.
Likewise, Raymond, a skilled auto mechanic, decided to join our program so
he could pursue his passion for cars by writing better repair manuals than now
exist. Others majors joined to work in comics, or to prepare themselves for
working in politics; still others went on to become teachers or to attend graduate
school in creative writing. We were not a "professional" track in the traditional
sense, as was the case for our neighbors in the departments of recreation or edu-
cation, but we were finding our own rhythm and playing to our strengths, much
as our students were doing as writers.

         We saw that few of our students were trying to apply the PWR degree
to get an immediate job as a freelancer, editor, or technical writer. Our best
were going on to graduate school in creative writing or applying to Masters of
Arts in Teaching programs. Unlike Recreation or Education majors, for us there
was no large institution looking to hire writers; the local rust-belt economy was
tightened to the last notch. To develop the maturity and facility needed to move
from rural New York to where the jobs are, on the coasts and big cities, would
take more than a long time--it might take generations. It was a little unrealistic
to say the least to assume that by tweaking our curriculum and pushing students
to travel afar for their internships we could meliorate the challenges presented to
us by our uncertain students, our local economy, and our new administration.

         Yet we could not ignore that our students were enthusiastic about our
program, and that it was still growing, presenting us with new problems as other
departments asked us to offer service courses for their students, many of whom
were anything but expert writers. Technical, business and creative writing were
in high demand, but soon all of the courses were filled, from Creative Non-
fiction to Writing Children's Literature. Clearly, we had lined up an attractive
roster of offerings, but we no longer had the teachers we needed to take the
classes. The fourth faculty line we had been promised was clearly never going to

126
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

materialize, though our classes were more in demand than ever. Our exit inter-
views indicated that students wanted to be challenged intellectually, to go deeply
into a subject, and to have more freedom to pursue their interests. The result is
that we were pulled in two directions: on one hand we saw ourselves becoming
a service department for other disciplines; on the other hand, we felt we needed
to open up to accommodate our students. After all, the best ones weren't leaving
us for jobs--they left for more advanced academic work.

         We had to recognize that much of what students were learning was
happening outside the classroom. Every semester we took students on a writing
weekend to a verdant (or gelid) island in the nearby Adirondacks for workshops
and readings; the literary magazines had been revived in both print and web
forms; our learning communities were taking off; our online international news
journal NeoVox, through the tireless work of Alex Reid and Lorraine Berry, was
serving as our own in-house site for internships. Reid also put our program at
the front of the technological initiative from Apple called iTunes University.
Students were learning to write by writing, and their audience was not simply
the teacher.

         Furthermore, as faculty we came to understand better how to see our
own workplace writing, seeing that writing (and revising) curriculum was a
form of composition, no less challenging or influential than writing scholar-
ship, and in some cases more so. Though we never explicated the "administra-
tion as scholarship" argument as developed by Christine Hult nor leaned on
Ernest Boyer's redefinition of scholarship--we didn't expect our various com-
mittees would be receptive--we had accomplished some good things through
the construction and reconstruction of the curriculum over this period. We
saw how the functional, administrative drafts challenged us to revise our un-
derstanding of how writing governs a community. We started to see the cur-
riculum as a constantly negotiated response to what various communities of
students were doing--rather than a set of rules that codified their identity.
We came to appreciate and respond to the way the curriculum set in motion
certain ways of acting, having direct and indirect effects on how we acted as a
community of students and teachers. Our community and its texts developed
a sort of feedback dynamic I want to call a "voice" or stance, a certain tone
or characteristic way of acting, of asking questions and making decisions. The
character of our program, its evolving identity, had been created in large part
as a function of how this curriculum resonated with other documents--syl-
labi, assignments and even student papers. The bureaucratic process of writing
our program's curriculum helped us become better writers and better teachers
of writing, which in turn shaped our next rendition of the curriculum. I think
we became more realistic and even a little more humble. We had to learn to

                                                                                                 127
Franke

read our curriculum for what it always was: a powerful proposition, a set of
propositions about learning that enabled and constrained--not an identity in
itself. It was time to use the curriculum as a space in which the program and
the students could determine their identities.

                            the future

         Our identity as faculty started to change, too. We were able to let cur-
riculum become less of a mirror of our thinking and hopes. We saw ourselves in
other projects to pursue: our own creative writing and scholarship, a dream of
an MA program in rhetoric, a certificate program in writing, a National Writ-
ing Project. We began to look for ways to revise the curriculum to support our
strengths. An honest assessment recognized that to some degree we were a ser-
vice program. The courses Revising and Editing, Technical Writing and Business
Writing continued to be in high demand by other departments, and courses
such as Writing Sports Literature and Writing Children's Literature were a per-
fect match for the needs of our populous neighbors Recreation and Education.
Creative Writing was always full, and we were spread thin teaching these classes.
We had the good fortune of having excellent adjunct faculty who volunteered to
take many of these courses. We were in a secure place. We had a coherent and
popular program, excellent faculty and a strong community of students. It was
time for one more change to the curriculum.

         At this writing, we are again in the thick of revision. Our changes will
do two things: first, create courses that build on the work we are already do-
ing. Some examples: a proposal has been submitted that gives students credit
for semester-long work that culminates in the writing retreat; another course
put into the pipeline rewards students for their public performance of work; a
service-learning course has been proposed that will contribute to the commu-
nity and draw strength and resources from various in-house programs already in
place. We're popular, and we recently reduced the number of required courses
and increased the electives. Several courses became designated as "general educa-
tion" courses, thus filling a requirement for many undergraduates. They are now
almost always full. This is certainly a long way from the tightly structured pro-
gram we developed when we began. Student writers can experiment more and,
we hope, find their particular "room with a view" as they near graduation. This
openness is balanced by an increase in the total number of advanced courses we
require, though students again choose exactly which ones. Advanced Creative
Writing, for example, will give students a chance to specialize. 500-level courses
will entice them, we hope, to stick around for a proposed certificate in writing,

128
                                                                          Curriculum, Genre and Resistance

and some of the courses from our newly approved National Writing Project site
will bring teachers-who-write into our program.

         We are obviously in process. We hope that those who, like us, juggle
the various hats one wears while designing a program-those of teacher, scholar,
administrator--will see in this narrative a developmental arc that speaks to their
own curricular work. We have learned to be patient while people figure out
where their abilities and passions lie, and that applies equally to our students as
to ourselves. The curriculum we struggled to perfect is a powerful tool, the most
visible example of our personal, intellectual and pedagogical agendas, but itself
only part of a larger system of writing that stretches from short memos to syllabi
to ponderous state mandates. While it can trace out a history for a student (and
a program), it is an enabling constraint on what is possible. The good judgment
that enables one to change (or resist change) is something that can't be published
in the college catalog or imposed by fiat. We hope, however, that good judgment
is what we have exercised in our revisions over the last few years, and that the
resulting curriculum enables our students to learn the same for themselves.

                                notes

1 I wish to thank my colleagues and friends Drs. Victoria Boynton and Alexan-
der Reid for the intelligence and creativity they shared while we developed this
program together.
2 I found Genre and the New Rhetoric edited by Aviva Freedman and Peter Med-
way (1994) and Genre and Writing edited by Wendy Bishop and Hans Ostrom
(1997) excellent ways in to the growing sub-discipline of genre studies.
3 The nascent "Faculty Writing Group" began meeting regularly during this time
as a way to bring together faculty to discuss their ongoing creative and academic
writing projects. I discuss organizing this group in "Completing the Circle," an
article available at http://dinosaur.cortland.edu/facultywritinggroup.pdf

                           works cited

Adams, Kathleen. "A History of Professional Writing Instruction in American Col-
   leges: Years of Acceptance, Growth, and Doubt." SMU Studies in Composition
   and Rhetoric Series. College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 1995.

Anson, Chris and L. Lee Forsberg. "Moving Beyond the Academic Community:
   Transitional Stages in Professional Writing." Written Communication 7.2, (April
   1990): 200-231.

                                                                                                 129
Franke

Apple Computer: iTunes University. http://www.apple.com/education/products/
   ipod/itunes_u.html.

Bazerman, Charles. "Systems of Genre and the Enactment of Social Intentions."
   Genre and the New Rhetoric. Ed. Freedman and Medway. Taylor and Francis,
   1994. 79-101.

Bazerman, Charles. "The Life of Genre, the Life in the Classroom." Genre and
   Writing. Ed. W. Bishop and H. Ostrom. Boynton/Cook, 1997. 19-26.

Boyer, Ernest. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate. Carnegie
   Foundation for the Advancement for Teaching, 1997.

Bullock, Richard. "Theorizing Difference and Negotiating Differends: (Un)nam-
   ing Writing Programs' Many Complexities and Strengths." Resituating Writing:
   Constructing and Administering Writing Programs. Ed. Joseph Janangelo and
   Kristine Hansen. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 1995. 3-22.

Hult, Christine. "The Scholarship of Administration." In Janangelo, Joseph; Kris-
   tine Hansen (Eds.), Resituating Writing: Constructing and Administering
   Writing Programs. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 1995. 119-131

NeoVox. www.neovox.cortland.edu
Vygotsky, Lev Semenovich. Thought and Language. Ed. and trans. Eugenia

   Hanfmann; Gertrude Vakar [Myshlenie i rech', Moscow, 1956]. Cambridge,
   MA: MIT Press, 1962.

130
7 Composing and Revising the Professional Writing
  Program at Ohio Northern University: A Case Study

   Jonathan Pitts

         Since 2000, when I was hired as an assistant professor to design and
coordinate the professional writing program at Ohio Northern University--a
small (3300 students) university comprised of a college of arts and sciences, a
law school, a pharmacy school, a college of business administration, and an en-
gineering school--the design, coordination, and administration of the program
has gone smoothly and well. As a department of teaching generalists, we have
nothing but success to talk about. The English major has, over the past ten years,
grown from twenty-five majors and minors to just under a hundred, has added
two new faculty and replaced two retired, has completed major renovations and
upgrades of its offices and classrooms, and has added the professional writing
track. Two years ago, the administration approved the hire of a second profes-
sional writing faculty member. Two years ago also, the number of English ma-
jors (and university enrollment generally) was increasing so fast that the faculty
wondered, in a meeting with the university president, if we should try to limit
it. Since then, the number of professional writing majors has leveled off (tied
with journalism for the second-highest number of majors, behind Language
Arts education and ahead of literature and creative writing), but it remains evi-
dence, we like to believe, that the professional writing track has a solid place in
our undergraduate English major.

         Another number that means a lot to us is the amount of our recent
graduates who are getting jobs or admission to graduate schools. Judging by the
number of PW program graduates who are doing what they want to do, the pro-
gram is a success. For me, this means that the program is preparing students well
to enter the world of professional writing. The emails I receive from my students
about their jobs and their graduate programs provide important material for me
to use in selling the program to prospective students and majors--the program
does what it says it will do. I describe three of these recent graduates below.

         But while such student success is in one sense the most important to
us, the English department, and the university, it isn't, and shouldn't be, the

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.07  131
Pitts

only barometer by which to judge the performance of the PW program. As all
university curricula must do, the PW program at Ohio Northern must succeed
at multiple levels in order to be seen by the administration and the university
as "viable." Catherine Latterell is generally correct in her observation that the
contexts of PTW programs at small teaching institutions can be characterized by
interdisciplinarity, an emphasis on writing, and a comparatively close relation-
ship between administrators and faculty. The purpose of this article is to describe
the composition and ongoing revision of an undergraduate PW program at a
small university that prides itself on providing students with a liberal arts educa-
tion with a pre-professional emphasis. I also hope to offer a detailed and perhaps
representative example within Latterell's more general scheme.

          In this regard, the "pre-professional emphasis" of my school might
distinguish the development of our PW program from those at other small
teaching institutions. I realized early in the process that I wouldn't have to do
much selling of the program to the university, since ONU has for years been
committed to the professionalization of liberal education. The idea of an Eng-
lish major devoted to the professions made instant, even compelling, sense to
faculty and administrators, so that often it seemed (and still seems) as if the
professionalization of English studies was an argument to the professionalized
university for the continuing relevance in these times of the English major.
And yet, even as the program enjoys the support of a small university, I found
throughout the process that our students were best served if the professional
writing major was conceived and marketed not as merely a professionalized
version of the English major but as a body of theory and practice inherent in
the study of English and its responses to cultural and technological change.
In other words, at my university there was a nice fit between the disciplinary
origins of a new professional writing major and the desire of those outside the
discipline (students, faculty, administrators) that English respond to the exi-
gencies of the job market. In this way, I would like the example of my program
to be seen as both limited in context but also as a general claim for the genuine
value--"viability"--of professional writing programs at small teaching institu-
tions such as mine.

           planning and curriculum design

                                   The Five-Year Plan

         I was hired by Ohio Northern University in 2000 to define and for-
malize the two-year-old professional writing major. I'd been told that in the

132
                                                                                     Composing and Revising

two years the major was coordinated by my predecessor, it was a collection of
nonfiction writing courses common to English departments--nonfiction writ-
ing, magazine writing, newspaper writing, prelaw writing (Appendix A). The
department had wanted to gather these courses together into a coherent ma-
jor after researching similar curricular initiatives at other departments around
the country. The Dean of the College was excited about a writing program
with a traditional literature and language core integrating the demands of the
"real world" job market English majors faced upon graduation. The Dean had
pledged to back the development of the new major (and would continue to
support the program until his retirement in 2003) and the hiring of a faculty
member, my predecessor, who would leave for another job after two years. "All
we really know is that we don't want a technical writing program, you know,
writing about corn harvesters and so on," a senior English faculty member had
told me at my campus interview. "Beyond that, we'd like you to figure out the
major."

         Like the university itself, the once-small department had exploded in
size in the space of a few years, growing from a total of twenty-five majors in
1993 to more than ninety in 2000, the year I arrived. To further define and
market its course offerings to accommodate growing student interest in the
English major, the department, as many departments did in the eighties and
nineties, developed "tracks" of concentration--Literature, Creative Writing,
Language Arts Education, Journalism, and Professional Writing--linked by a
common core of British and American literature surveys, literature electives,
an introduction to English studies, and a course in linguistics and the history
of the English language. "We're doing the same things we've always done," said
a senior colleague, "we're just marketing ourselves differently. It's a different
world."

         He was right, for the most part. No new courses had been added, the
old courses were simply being presented in new ways. But to represent these
courses is to change them, significantly. The "tracks" approach lays a sheen of
professionalism over the competent generalism of English, suggesting to stu-
dents that there are distinct "jobs" out there for "literature" people or "creative
writers." There is no reason why a straight literature major can't also be an excel-
lent creative writer or professional writer. But as the most recent addition, the
professional writing track implicitly promised students what the other tracks
could not: more vocational preparation for, and thus access to, jobs.

         But we aren't a polytech, so that while we might offer a course in techni-
cal writing or business writing, prelaw writing and desktop publishing, the PW
major had to retain a liberal arts background and a relationship to traditional
English studies. As Anthony Di Renzo has pointed out, PTW programs housed

                                                                                                 133
Pitts

in the Humanities should reflect liberal arts values (50). At a small university,
PTW programs pretty much have no other choice.

         As I thought about the PW curriculum and planned its implementa-
tion, several unique qualities of the program arose naturally from the immediate
institutional and academic context. First, I recognized that the PW program was
intended to function as the English department's contribution to the interdisci-
plinary side of academic life at Ohio Northern. The department's teaching of a
three-course writing and literature sequence had long been valued on campus as
the foundation of the general education curriculum. But with the exception of
new Honors program seminars, there seemed to be little collaboration between
departments and colleges on courses. With the secondary study requirements for
the PW major, the English department had wanted to develop such interdepart-
mental relationships.

         Interdisciplinary collaborations are, of course, difficult to create and
sustain, especially at a small university where departments and faculty with
heavy teaching loads and limited resources struggle to maintain their own pro-
grams. When I thought about the necessity of eliminating the public relations
and art requirements from the existing PW requirements, I wondered if main-
taining the department's relations with Communication Arts and Art was more
important than my curricular ideas. And yet, as it existed, the PW major had
no central narrative, no coherent disciplinary foundation. I argued with myself
that perhaps all the major really needed was some meta-course under which its
existing courses would make "professional" sense.

         The English department had yet to develop courses in media theory
and criticism, cultural studies, information design, or digital culture. There
was, in fact, no course in media theory in any department. In thinking about
the composition of the PW program in the English department, I was, of
course, also composing myself--thinking intensely about my own identity
and role in the department. My doctoral concentration had been in Cultural
Studies and American literature, and I'd had extensive creative, nonfiction,
and technical writing experience. I knew I wanted my PW students to see
themselves as "symbolic-analytic" workers, as Greg Wilson sees himself and
his students and as I'd seen myself for most of my working life. Indeed, if I
was to be a professional model for my students, the theme of my working life
would be "change," often preceded by the word "bewildering." In one sense, I
was your average postmodern information worker; in another, more positive
sense, I was a writer, not a worker. The purpose of the PW program at Ohio
Northern, it seemed to me in the course of my first year, was to help students
understand themselves as I had come to understand myself, as both worker
and writer, as postmodern subject and marketable agent.

134
                                                                                     Composing and Revising

         I saw the program, then, as two-pronged: one side of the major would
be anchored by a cultural studies course, the meta-course counterpart to the
traditional English course in Literary Criticism. The course would introduce
students to cultural and media theory, providing students with a historical and
theoretical context for their symbolic-analytic development. The other side of
the major would be anchored by Rhetorical Theory, an advanced seminar taking
students from classical rhetoric to cyberspace. These two upper-division semi-
nars, Cultural Studies and Rhetorical Theory, would be advanced explorations
of topics surveyed in the sophomore-level introduction to professional writing,
Writing in the Public Sphere.

         Despite our growth, we remain a small department, with eleven full-
time faculty. The recent hire of Dr. Paul Bender, a specialist in rhetoric and digi-
tal communication, was approved by the administration for a variety of reasons,
one of them being the growth of the professional writing major. Dr. Bender was
hired to bridge the professional writing and journalism majors, both of which
consisted of one full-time faculty member. His hire and our latest revisions of
the PW curriculum constitute the final phase in the five-year plan for the devel-
opment of the program that I put together in the beginning of my first year, in
2000. These course revisions are to take effect in the fall of 2005.

                        implementation

         It wasn't simply a matter of adding and deleting courses, my chairper-
son reminded me. Nearly every change we make in our curriculums affects the
course offerings of other departments. In removing PR Writing from the PW
major, for example, I was de-populating a Comm Arts course. In adding Desk-
top Publishing, I was replacing a required two-course sequence in Graphic De-
sign taught by the art department. Since Desktop Publishing would also serve
Journalism majors, I and the journalism professor, Dr. Bill O'Connell, met with
art department faculty and faculty from Comm Arts to explain the revision and
to discuss its implications for their departments. Again, I am fortunate to work
at a small university, where relations between departments, especially those in
the arts and humanities, remain constructive.

         The first year I taught Cultural Studies I focused the course on popular
culture theory and criticism from the Frankfurt School to the present. Many of
my majors were already writing cultural criticism for the The Northern Review,
the student newspaper, and many were double majors in professional writing
and sociology, or political science, or history, where they were also exposed to
some popular culture theory. It seemed to me that the course facilitated the

                                                                                                 135
Pitts

cross-disciplinary thinking and writing that was a central feature of the PW ma-
jor, with its secondary study requirement. In making my case to my department
for the addition of the course, I argued that many of my students wanted careers
in editing and publishing, and that a sophisticated cultural and meta-cultural
literacy were necessary for such jobs (and for the students' work on the PW web
magazine, Delirium).

         Some colleagues wondered about the seeming theoretical orientation
of the major--what was happening to the distinguishing "hands-on" quality of
the major? With Bill O'Connell's help, I argued that Desktop Publishing, which
replaced a two-course sequence in Graphic Design taught by the Art depart-
ment, offered students the practical skills to balance the theory they encountered
in Cultural Studies. Indeed, we argued, the two courses worked hand-in-hand:
students couldn't really understand the publishing software (Dreamweaver, Pho-
toshop, QuarkXpress) they'd use in the course without some knowledge of the
cultural and technological contexts in which such software is used.

         In the spring of 2001, as I prepared to develop these two new courses
over the summer (I received a grant from the Dean to take summer courses in
the three software applications) in order to teach them the following fall, the
department of technology was instituting a digital design minor open to non-
technology majors. In the technology minor, students took a sequence of web
design courses at a level of detail I could not cover in the two weeks I had to de-
vote to web design in the new desktop publishing course. Because our academic
quarters are nine weeks long, students had an absurdly small amount of time
to spend learning very complicated programs. In offering Desktop Publishing,
was I offering "competency," or something much less, and was this okay? Bill
O'Connell and I decided it was okay--we were claiming only to introduce our
students to the software, not that we would make our students experts.

                       program mission

         In the fall of 2001 I prepared a presentation on the PW program for
Explore the Colleges Day in October, when prospective majors and their parents
could find out more about possible majors. Rather than focusing the presenta-
tion on the kinds of careers PW majors might pursue (since those are the same
careers open to all English majors), I planned to speak about the courses in
the major and how they differed from the traditional English literature courses.
Then came September 11th.

         The September 11th tragedy presented a bewildering range of issues
and problems for all of us, students and faculty. And like faculty everywhere,

136
                                                                                     Composing and Revising

we've worked ever since to provide students with the skills and tools to deal with
these issues and problems. The distinguishing feature of the PW program, its
focus on mass media and cyberspace, was suddenly, perhaps, urgently, relevant
to my students' lives. (An English literature major, Nathan, who would take
my Cultural Studies course, later that year wrote his senior thesis on the use of
media by terrorists). The events of 9/11 didn't change the concept or direction
of the PW program so much as reinforcing the existing rationale for the cultural
and rhetorical focus. It was as valuable for my students to learn to think about
mass media and cyberspace as it was for them to spend time on technical writing
problems. But how would I explain all this to parents and prospective students,
who quite rightly wanted to know what training they would get for their money?

         That fall we were putting together the first issue of Delirium. By this
time I had gathered a staff of seven students, and we were preparing to publish a
book-length memoir by an Israeli writer, Ephraim Glaser, about his experiences
escaping the Nazis. We were also publishing an interview with a local survivor of
the Holocaust. We were busy designing, editing and hyperlinking the texts when
the planes hit the towers.

         Discussing the upcoming issue at a staff meeting, we decided that we
would title the issue "Technology and Historical Memory," featuring the mem-
oir, the interview, and an article on Osama Bin Laden and theocracy. By the
time Explore the Colleges Day arrived, we were online with a publication that
was both visually and textually arresting. I used the webzine to show parents and
students what professional writers might do--they could produce our world.

          What kind of world would they make? I asked parents and students at
my presentation. It's a familiar question, a staple of English department orienta-
tions and university commencement addresses. But the question has become
more meaningful for English departments in particular, given the centrality of
images in the postmodern world. English majors no longer simply create and
interpret the texts that give meaning to the world; they (can) create their very
reality. In the Cultural Studies course that winter, we studied the images of 9/11,
read across the recent history of image and media theory from Benjamin to
Debord to Benjamin Barber's Jihad vs. McWorld thesis. Three years later, it was
gratifying to listen to a graduating PW senior (Nathan) chuckle knowingly at a
recent Yahoo! headline announcing that digital photography and Photoshop had
altered our concepts of truth and reality.

         I wish all PW majors could graduate with that kind of critical sophis-
tication and facility--and interest in--the urgent connection between the use
of technology in the real world and the philosophical consequences of its use.
The mission of the PW program as it has developed is to inculcate in students a
level of comfort with change--professional, technological, cultural. I explained

                                                                                                 137
Pitts

to prospective majors and their parents that professional writing is both a career
and an attitude, a goal and a method of reaching that goal.

         The first cohort of the PW program were now writing their senior
theses. What was a professional writing thesis? Anything, really, as long the
project involved intensive reading, research, writing, and some degree of rhe-
torical analysis or genre exploration. Steve's thesis involved a rhetorical (textual
and visual) analysis of minor-league baseball team websites which he presented
using PowerPoint. Allen, a PW major headed to Duke University law school in
the fall, wrote his senior thesis on a topic (the effects on Third World econo-
mies of U.S. economic aid) he had addressed as an intern the previous sum-
mer at a Washington, D.C. think tank. Tracy, a PW/Chemistry double ma-
jor, wrote her thesis on the role of serendipity in major scientific discoveries;
Naomi, wrote (and courageously presented to the public) an unsentimental
memoir of her spiritual journey in the decade following the drowning death of
her father.

         At the presentation of her thesis to faculty, students, and parents,
Naomi broke down numerous times throughout her reading, struggling to
read through her tears. This made the audience uncomfortable, in particular,
two senior colleagues who objected to the overly personal, "unprofessional,"
nature of Naomi's senior essay topic. In the days following the presentation, I
argued for the personal and academic value of Naomi's achievement and for its
direct connection to her professional future.

         Naomi's topic had originated in my Nonfiction Writing course, which
is required of PW majors. Since the journalism major already offers a Literary
Journalism course, for the past four years I've taught Nonfiction Writing as an
introduction to travel writing, the personal essay, and the memoir. In the near
future I might change the course to include business writing, technical writing,
and public relations writing, but for now the purpose of the course is to give
students advanced experience in the writing of extended narratives for a general
audience.

         In focusing the course on the memoir, I believe I'm maintaining a
tie of the PW major to the central, distinguishing purpose of the humanities:
self-knowledge. There will be very few occasions in my students' lives when
they will be both encouraged and assisted in writing about themselves. Of
course, nine weeks is not enough time to gain substantial insight into one's
life, so I make the goal of the memoir (if that's the option the student chooses)
a dramatic narrative that might be developed beyond the course. When one
of my senior colleagues asked me what the connection was between writing
a memoir and a career as a professional writer, I explained the professional
value for students of the ability to both narrate their lives and to conceive of

138
                                                                                     Composing and Revising

their lives as narratives. In fact, perhaps the most important lesson I'd like my
students to learn from the course concerns the narrative quality and thematic
richness of their own lives. I'd like all of my students to be able to say, as Allen
did at the end of the course, "I'm seeing stories everywhere now." Such a lesson
is a crucial one for the journalist, the editor, the freelance writer, the media
consultant, and to a great extent the business and technical writer, to learn.

         Finally, the focus on the memoir in Nonfiction Writing dovetails with
the major project in the Cultural Studies course, an experimental, autobiograph-
ical website produced by each student from theoretical/conceptual guidelines
offered by Gregory Ulmer in his brilliant book, Internet Invention, which we use
with Bolter and Grusin's Remediation: Understanding New Media.

                             revisions

         The latest PW program revisions reflect the final phase of the five-year
plan. The formerly required Advanced Writing course has become an elective.
The formerly required Magazine Writing course has been replaced with Writ-
ing in the Public Sphere. A required Rhetorical Theory course, taught by Paul
Bender, has been added, and Writing Cyberspace has been added as an elective.
With Bill O'Connell, Paul and I had discussed deleting Desktop Publishing.
Students had begun to feel that nine weeks simply wasn't enough time to learn
three applications. But most of the students we spoke with liked the class and
found it useful, so the course remains. Our recent graduates working with tech-
nology in their new jobs continue to assure us that they are learning what they
need to know as they go.

         Magazine Writing had long been taught as a course in freelance writing,
yet so few of the students taking the course were actually interested in freelance
writing (I have yet to meet a student who is!), we thought we might make better
use of those credit hours. We decided to fold it into the more general Writing
in the Public Sphere course. The problem for us was that many of the students
taking Magazine Writing were Comm Arts, Public Relations, or Language Arts
majors who needed the course as an elective. Fortunately, those departments
were amenable to the change. Writing in the Public Sphere now functions as an
introduction to professional writing with an emphasis on civic argumentation
and critical thinking (course text: Donald Lazere's Reading and Writing for Civic
Literacy).

         The final revision is the addition of a required Grammar in Context
course. Most of the English department believes that such a course is sorely
needed, and according to informal surveys, so do our students. As might be

                                                                                                 139
Pitts

the case in other departments, most of us were trained to teach process-cen-
tered writing; some of us, especially the younger faculty, were encouraged in
our graduate school training to avoid teaching grammar altogether. Perhaps the
pendulum swung too far in that direction; in any case, we believe once again in
grammar, even if, as we know, studies show grammar lessons have little effect on
student writing. But the goal of the course isn't necessarily the immediate im-
provement of writing. With knowledge of grammar concepts, and even simply
being able to name parts of speech, students can lay the groundwork for a life-
time of work on their and others' writing. It seems to me now a little shocking
that an English major could graduate without having taken a grammar course,
though I wouldn't have thought so ten years ago. For future professional writers,
the course is even more important.

         A final course addition is actually only the first-time use of a course that
had already been in the curriculum but never activated--the Professional Writ-
ing workshop, a 1-6 credit course on selected writing topics. I wanted to use the
course to bring in working professional writers, preferably successful alumni. In
the spring of 2002 I'd invited two English alumni who'd graduated before the
existence of the PW program to speak to our majors. One alumnus worked as a
senior documentation manager for Microsoft, and the other was editor-in-chief
of a national magazine in San Francisco. The talks were informative and inspir-
ing. The following fall I arranged for another alumnus who ran his own publish-
ing business, to speak to students about his work. He agreed to return in the
spring of 2004 to teach a popular week-long workshop course on the publishing
business.

           results: three recent graduates

                                          Naomi

         I recently received an email from Naomi telling me that after a year of
looking she'd found her dream job with a publishing house in a Midwestern city.
She was starting as an entry-level copy editor and had already received freelance
editing work.

         As a freshman, Naomi knew only that she wanted to write and edit
for a living. I told her that she'd come to the right place--our PW program, of
course--and that we'd help her prepare for the career she wanted. She was not
a particularly strong writer, but she was an excellent student. As she progressed
through her writing courses, she discovered that while she had no serious interest
in either the purely theoretical, more academic side of professional writing or in

140
                                                                                     Composing and Revising

the solely practical and technical, she was passionate about the middle, writing
and editing at the juncture of theory and practice. As the founding editor of the
PW program webzine, Delirium, she was passionate about editing, managing
a magazine, and desktop publishing. It was her work on Delirium that led to
her internship, editing and preparing for publication in Delirium the memoir
of the Israeli sculptor and Holocaust survivor Ephraim Glaser. Her internship
convinced her that she had chosen the right major.

         Naomi's internship was successful for all concerned. As they are in most
PTW programs, our internships are collaborations between faculty and stu-
dents. Our PW students are responsible for finding the internship they want, so
we are flexible as to what constitutes an internship. The only requirement is that
writing be an important aspect of the experience. When Mr. Glaser submitted
his book-length memoir to Delirium, Naomi and I decided that her internship
would consist of editing the book with Mr. Glaser, and of directing its elec-
tronic publication. Naomi and I met once a week for a quarter, when we'd work
through the week's editing of the memoir, and discuss aspects of editing practice.
Naomi found she loved working with authors on their work. She also became
interested in writing her own memoir.

         In the process of editing Ephraim Glaser's memoir and of writing her
own, Naomi found herself making use of some the cultural theory she'd been
introduced to in Cultural Studies. In preparing Glaser's memoir for publication,
she had to confront the nature of the memoir in the digital age--few people
would be willing to sit at a computer to read a lengthy memoir. Novels had al-
ready digitally adapted through hypertext; would hypertext work for the memoir
as well? Such questions inspired and energized Naomi--they were problems she
could seek to solve in her professional life. But they were also personal, intel-
lectual, and professional questions I could not have foreseen in designing and
administering the PW program. But working with Naomi has taught me to see
the PW program as a set of student resources rather than as a one-size-fits-all
training program. And this is appropriate for a small, humanities-based PW
major, where faculty have time to work with students on their preparation and
their career goals.

         Naomi has since begun work on a book project, a historical study of a
pioneer family in her Indiana town, and continues to write and publish maga-
zine articles.

                                           Steve

         In the fall of his sophomore year, Steve came to me and said he wanted
to work in public relations for a professional baseball team. I urged him to con-

                                                                                                 141
Pitts

sider double-majoring in PW and Technology. He declared the double-major,
but after a quarter of computer programming courses, decided to drop Technol-
ogy and to replace it with a minor in business and public relations. He found
that his interest in computers extended no further than the software I was teach-
ing in the new Desktop Publishing and Design course--Dreamweaver, QuarkX-
Press, and Photoshop.

         In the summer before his senior year, Steve applied for and was offered
a paid internship with a minor league baseball team in the Pittsburgh Pirates
system. He said the electronic portfolio he'd been required to create in Desktop
Publishing had helped him get the competitive position. He spent the summer
working in the public relations department, doing everything from cleaning the
stadium to redesigning the team website (and a revealing stint as a play-by-play
announcer). At the end the internship he was offered a full-time position, which
he had to decline in order to finish his senior year. But by the end of that fall, as
he was completing his senior essay project, he'd accepted a full-time position as
webmaster for another minor league team, to begin when he graduated.

         Steve's senior essay project was tied directly to his internship experience
and to his upcoming job, a visual and rhetorical analysis of every minor league
baseball team website currently on line.

         Two months into his employment, he emailed me asking for a reference
for an application to a graduate program in sport management. I told him I
was shocked--I'd thought he was living his career dream. He laughed and said
he still was, he just discovered that he needed more training to move up. Steve
would return to Ohio Northern to work part-time in the sports information
office while working on his graduate degree. (A PW graduate from the previous
year, a double major in PW and Sport Management, has also found career fulfill-
ment in a university sports information office).

                                           Ryan

         Having graduated last year, a year later Ryan has yet to find a job. A
sensitive, quiet, but funny and extremely likeable person, Ryan was an accom-
plished writer and reader. He completed a double major in PW and Sociology,
but decided, halfway through his senior essay project, that he wanted to write
fiction. He'd taken only one fiction writing course, an introduction to fiction
writing, which counts as a PW elective. Ryan hadn't written any fiction since
then. I was hesitant, but knew I had to approve the change in plans, pending
department approval, even if it was a bit late in the game. After all, profes-
sional writers are supposed to be able to do it all. Ryan submitted a project
proposal (a novella) and a writing sample to the department, which approved

142
                                                                                     Composing and Revising

his request. As Ryan's advisor, I agreed to work with him every week as he
learned to write fiction. I was also honest with him about the slim career pros-
pects for fiction writers. If he wanted to go on to graduate school in creative
writing, he could, if he was lucky and he worked extremely hard, find a job
teaching creative writing.

         But had I, or the PW curriculum, misled Ryan, given him an inflated
conception of his skills? Perhaps. But I was also wrong to think so. I've since
reminded myself that we aren't a technical communication program. This isn't
to absolve ourselves of the responsibility to prepare our students for viable ca-
reers; it is to say that our humanities touchstone remains central--a broad back-
ground rather than a narrow specialization. The truth is that a career as a fiction
writer wasn't Ryan's goal anyway, even if fiction was the subject of his senior es-
say. Ryan's creative experience is as important and substantial in his professional
training as a usability study.

         Since beginning the PW program I'd carried around in my head Sul-
livan's and Porter's list of distinctions within the discipline of English--

   Professional writing = writing for organizational forums; stress on corporate
   authorship
   Creative writing = writing outside organizational forums (freelancing, wheth-
   er "literary" or not); stress on individual authorship
   Journalism = writing for public and mass-media forums
   Writing in the academic disciplines = writing for disciplinary forums (i.e., to
   contribute to disciplinary knowledge) (412)

--and of my belief that my PW majors should have some experience with all of
the above. Ryan may be a mediocre fiction writer, but from the correct perspec-
tive, he's an excellent professional writer. The correct perspective for an under-
graduate PW program at a small university like Ohio Northern is double-sided:
"Professional" indicates both a career orientation and a humanities-based gen-
eralism.

                           conclusion

The unique qualities of a small university like Ohio Northern present unique ad-
vantages and disadvantages, limitations and opportunities, for an undergradu-
ate professional writing program. Three main issues are of concern to us at this
point in the progress of our program's five-year plan. In order of priority, they
are:

                                                                                                 143
Pitts

   Writing and Rhetorical Skills:
   While the other four tracks (and every English department) have the same
   worry about student writing, our worry is particularly intense given the close
   relationship in the PW major of writing skills to professional opportunities.
   This is another point I emphasize to students in Writing in the Public Sphere:
   if you can't write well, you're not going to do well as a professional writer.
   Based on real-world demand for professional writing skills, Paul Bender and
   I want to emphasize in our writing courses audience awareness, knowledge of
   grammar, and critical thinking.

   Real-World Connections:
   Of all the PW program's connections to the workplace (publication practica,
   writing workshops, course service-learning projects), our internship require-
   ment is the most important. Our students generally find good and useful
   internships, and we must continue to help students find them. We'll con-
   tinue to expand our relationship with local, regional, and national internship
   opportunities.

   Technology:
   Paul Bender and I agree with Kim and Tolley, who have recently written
   about their own PTW program at the University of Memphis--technology
   is important for their students to learn, but only one aspect of their profes-
   sional writing education (Kim and Tolley 385). Naomi has said that her
   company uses Adobe InDesign rather than QuarkXPress, and while she wishes
   she'd learned InDesign at ONU, she's learning what she needs to know on the
   job. Our graduates seem to be adequately prepared for workplace technology
   requirements, but it's up to us to keep pace with these requirements. It looks
   as if we'll be adding InDesign to our Desktop Publishing course at some point
   in 2006.

But while we must periodically upgrade our computer applications and our use
of technology in our classrooms and courses, as a department we also agree that
the emphasis of the PW program will continue to be on writing skills, rhetorical
sophistication, and a critical cultural literacy. We'd like this foundation to medi-
ate against the vagaries of real world technological, corporate, or market changes,
even as we keep track of and respond to those--and a host of other--changes.

144
                                                  Composing and Revising

                            appendix a

          major in english/professional writing [1998-2000]
                        (56 hours + secondary study)

qtr / yr  course completed                        hours

Professional Writing Core                                              32
Required Courses            Art 222 Graphic Design 1
                            Comm 236 Public Relations Writing
          /                 Engl 243 Magazine Writing
4                           Engl 251 Magazine Practicum
                            Engl 347 Advanced Writing
          /                 Engl 443 Nonfiction Writing
4                           Engl 470 Editing
                            Engl 384 Directed Reading
          /                 Engl 483 Reading for the Senior Essay
4                           Engl 484 Senior Essay 1
                            Engl 485 Senior Essay 2
          /                 Engl 481 Internship
1

          /
4

          /
4

          /
4

          /
1

          /
1

          /
1

          /
2

          /
1

Elective  (Choose 1)                                                              4
4         /                 Art 223 Graphic Design 2

4         /                 Eng 241 News Writing                           4
          /
                            Comm 256 Telecommunications Writing

                                                                           145
Pitts

          /                      Engl 290 Special Topics (in writing)
4                                Engl 342 Fiction Writing
                                 Engl 343 Persuasive Writing
          /                      Engl 346 Prelaw Writing
4                                Engl 377 Professional Writing Workshop
                                 Engl 390 Special Topics (in writing)
          /                      Engl 451 Literary Criticism
4                                Engl 490 Special Topics (in writing)

          /
4

          /
1-4

          /
4

          /
4

          /
4

Language and Literature Core                                                       20

        /                        Engl 210 English Studies

4

        /                        Engl 351 English Language

4

Three literature courses in three core areas, two at the 300/400 level

World Literature (Engl 208, 209, 219, 220, 262, 432, 451)                          4

British Literature (Engl 213, 214, 260 or 412, 310-326, 364, 410)                  4

American Literature (Engl 211, 212, 261, 334, 335, 365, 431)                       4

Other courses, whose content changes significantly with each offering, may

also satisfy these literature requirements: Engl 207, 263, 290, 390, 430, 490.

        /
        /
        /

Engl 001 Enrichment (2 terms a year up to 8 times, depending on time enrolled as a

major)

   /         /  /             /  /  /                                   /       /

Secondary Study
An Option, Minor, or Second Major in a discipline other than English

146
                                                         Composing and Revising

                            appendix b

             major in english/professional writing [2001-2004]

                           (57 hours + secondary study)

qtr / yr  course completed                               hours

Professional Writing Core                                       34

Required Courses                                         30

          /                 Engl 244 Desktop Publishing

4

          /                 Engl 243 Magazine Writing

4

          /                 Engl 347 Advanced Writing

4

          /                 Engl 405 Cultural Studies

4

          /                 Engl 443 Nonfiction Writing

4

          /                 Engl 470 Editing

4

          /                 Engl 481 Internship

1

          /                 Engl 384 Directed Reading

1

          /                 Engl 483 Reading for the Senior Essay

1

          /                 Engl 484 Senior Essay 1

1

          /                 Engl 485 Senior Essay 2

2

Elective  (Choose 1)                                                             4
4                          241 News Writing
4         /       Engl     256 Writing for Broadcasting & Electronic Media
4
4         /       Comm               Engl 290 Special Topics (in writing)
4                                    Engl 342 Fiction Writing
          /                          Engl 343 Persuasive Writing

          /

          /

                                                                                    147
Pitts

          /                      Engl 346 Prelaw Writing
4                                Engl 377 Professional Writing Workshop
                                 Engl 390 Special Topics (in writing)
          /                      Engl 451 Literary Criticism
1-4                              Engl 452 Rhetorical Theory
                                 Engl 490 Special Topics (in writing)
          /
4

          /
4

          /
4

          /
4

Practicums (3 hours in at least two different practicums)                       3

Engl 250-Newspaper; Engl 251-Magazine; Engl 230-Web Publishing; Engl 290-Journal

Publishing; Engl 377-Professional Writing Workshop (1-4); Engl 2XX-Screenwriting

       /                                                                              1

       /                                                                              1

       /                                                                              1

Language and Literature Core                                                          20

       /                         Engl 210 English Studies                             4

       /                         Engl 351 English Language                            4

Three literature courses in three core areas, two at the 300/400 level

World Literature (Engl 208, 209, 219, 220, 262, 432, 451)                       4

British Literature (Engl 213, 214, 260 or 412, 310-326, 364, 410)               4

American Literature (Engl 211, 212, 261, 334, 335, 365, 431)                    4

Other courses, whose content changes significantly with each offering, may

also satisfy these literature requirements: Engl 207, 263, 290, 390, 430, 490.

          /  Enrichment  (2 terms a year up to 8 times, depending on time enrolled as a
          /    /
          /              /    /  /  /                                   /          /
Engl 001
major)
   /

Secondary Study
An Option, Minor, or Second Major in a discipline other than English

148
                                                         Composing and Revising

                            appendix c

      major in english/professional writing [2001-2006]

                           (58 hours + secondary study)

qtr / yr  course completed                               hours

Professional Writing Core                                35

Required Courses                                         23

   /                        Engl 244 Desktop Publishing

4

   /                        Engl 273 Writing in the Public Sphere

4

   /                        Engl 405 Cultural Studies

4

   /                        Engl 445 Senior Seminar

2

   /                        Engl 452 Rhetorical Theory

4

   /                        Engl 470 Editing

4

   /                        Engl 481 Internship

1

Electives (Choose three, two at the 300/400 level)              12

   /              Engl 241 News Writing

4

   /              Comm 256 Writing for Broadcasting and Electronic Media

4

   /                        Engl 290 Special Topics (in writing)

4

   /                        Engl 342 Fiction Writing

4

   /                        Engl 343 Persuasive Writing

4

   /                        Engl 344 Writing Cyberspace

4

   /                        Engl 345 Screenwriting                        4

   /                        Engl 346 Prelaw Writing

4

   /                        Engl 347 Advanced Writing

4

   /                        Engl 390 Journal Publishing

4

                                                                          149
Pitts

          /                      Engl 443 Nonfiction Writing
4                                Engl 447 Advanced Creative Writing
                                 Engl 451 Literary Criticism
          /                      Engl 490 Special Topics (in writing)
4

          /
4

          /
4

Practicums (at least 3 hours in at least two different practicums)3

Engl 250-Newspaper; Engl 251-Magazine; Engl 230-Web Publishing; Engl 231-Journal

Publishing; Engl 377-Professional Writing Workshop (1-4); Engl 290-Screenwriting

        /                                                                             1

        /                                                                             1

        /                                                                             1

Language and Literature Core                                                          20

        /                        Engl 210 English Studies                             4

        /                        Engl 351 English Language                            4

Three literature courses in three core areas, two at the 300/400 level

World Literature (Engl 208, 209, 219, 220, 262, 432, 451)                       4

British Literature (Engl 213, 214, 260 or 412, 310-326, 364, 410)               4

American Literature (Engl 211, 212, 261, 334, 335, 365, 431)                    4

Other courses, whose content changes significantly with each offering, may

also satisfy these literature requirements: Engl 207, 263, 290, 390, 430, 490.

        /

        /

        /

Engl 001 Enrichment (2 terms a year up to 8 times, depending on time enrolled as a

major)

/            /  /             /  /  /                                   /          /

Secondary Study
An Option, Minor, or Second Major in a discipline other than English

150
minors, certificates, engineering
8 Certificate Programs in Technical Writing: Through
  Sophistic Eyes

   Jim Nugent

                         introduction

         Technical communication certificates are offered by many colleges and
universities as an alternative to full undergraduate or graduate degrees in the
field. Certificates typically require only one or two years of coursework strictly
within technical communication, and typically can be earned while working full
time or while seeking another degree. As Sherry Burgus Little notes in "Design-
ing Certificate Programs in Technical Communication," certificate programs
are diverse in their charter and construction. Some programs are geared toward
those entering the field, while others are designed to augment the skills of prac-
ticing professionals. Some programs are designed to serve those in scientific and
technical fields specifically, while others are designed to serve technical com-
municators more generally. Programs are offered at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels, and the courses they require vary widely (Little 276-77).

         According to the CPTSC/STC joint publication Academic Programs in
Technical Communication (third edition), there were sixteen programs offering
technical writing certificates in 1985 (Hayes 1). In 2003, the website of the So-
ciety for Technical Communication (STC) listed about eighty-four individual
certificate programs, representing an approximate fivefold increase in number
over eighteen years. Compared to the approximate doubling of the number of
technical communication programs overall during the same period (Little 274),
we can see certificate programs are an increasingly popular means of meeting the
demand for skilled technical communicators.

         Despite their increasing popularity, however, surprisingly little infor-
mation or discussion exists in the current literature specifically about certificate
programs. (Excepting, of course, the works presented for the first time in this
volume, including Jude Edminster and Andrew Mara's valuable chapter "Rein-
venting Audience through Distance.") This informational and conversational
void is unexpected, as certificate programs are currently situated in the middle of
a number of related conversations in the field. With their vocational emphasis,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.08  153
Nugent

certificate programs are potentially the site of conflict "on the issue of training
opposed to education, or in other words, the conflict between theory and prac-
tice" (Little 278, emphasis in original). With their role in meeting the needs
of local industry, and with their potential as the locations for academy-indus-
try cooperation, certificate programs speak to the conversation of who shapes
technical communication programs: academy or industry (Anderson, Bosley,
Bushnell, Coon, Krestas, Yee, Zimmerman). With certificate programs' role as
a gatekeeper to the profession--that is, the role of "certifying" implicit in their
very name--they shape the professional identity of technical communicators
and they present a number of significant implications to the project of profes-
sionalizing the field (Savage 364-5).

         In this chapter, I seek to begin addressing the informational void sur-
rounding certificate programs with the hope of making way for more produc-
tive dialog in the above conversations. In addition, I hope to provide some in-
formation, considerations, and cautions useful for administrators interested in
implementing their own certificate programs. I begin the chapter by relating a
two-part study of certificate programs that I performed in 2003. In the first part
of this study, I examine sixty-two certificate programs to characterize them in
terms of their curricular requirements. In the second part, I perform a survey of
certificate program administrators to gauge who teaches in such programs, the
age of such programs, and the relationship of such programs to local industry.
Finally, I conclude by drawing from the work of Gerald Savage and others to
suggest a potential framework for theorizing the certificate program in techni-
cal communication, namely sophistic rhetorical theory. Sophistic rhetoric, as
Savage demonstrates, can act as a valuable tool for constructing the professional
identity of the postmodern technical communicator. Likewise, I argue, it proves
to be a valuable tool for theorizing the technical communication certificate pro-
gram.

                   situating my approach

         Before I begin, I would like to step back for a moment and explain
my (perhaps unusual) theoretical and methodological approach. In the course
of completing and relating the work that follows, I have opted to employ a
methodology itself informed by sophistic rhetorical theory. Such theory seeks
to restore the reputation of the ancient sophists against the critiques of Plato.
As part of a flourish of revived interest in rhetoric in general (see Jarratt, Poula-
kos, Crowley, McComiskey, and Leff), the revival of sophism embodies a potent
critique of received Platonic and Aristotelian master narratives: narratives that

154
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

inform the modernist belief in a coherent, external, and absolutely knowable
reality set in opposition to a stable human subject.

         The sophists were--and are--skeptics. Eschewing the foundationalist
impulse toward fixed and transcendent Truths, the sophists maintain that a mul-
tiplicity of truths exist in any given context. The ancient sophists were travelers;
they witnessed localized, multiple truths firsthand and they recognized how to
work with them toward their own ends. However, despite their relativistic ori-
entation, as Kenneth J. Lindblom notes, sophists avoid the paralyzing "trap of
Pyhrronian skepticism"--"a nihilistic abyss of skepticism that refuses to regard
even temporary truths" (93). The sophists are also teachers; the ancient sophists
invented the profession of teaching and offered their instruction to any man
who was able to pay their fees. Furthermore, the sophist is socially engaged. A
sophist believes that the key to meaning-making lies in our social interactions,
and not in an abstract realm of Platonic ideals (Jarratt, Leff, Lindblom). The
sophists, then, provide a very productive metaphorical and historiographic em-
bodiment of a broader postmodern critique.

         Drawing from Susan Jarratt's work on sophistic historiography ("To-
ward"), Bruce McComiskey suggests that "A certain view of historiography
goes along (or should go along) with the neosophistic goal of appropriation and
methods of mining and transporting doctrines, a view [itself ] based on sophistic
principles" (56, emphasis in original). As a researcher, then, I have attempted to
remain aware that the historical instance that I am examining "does not exist in
any essential form," and that even if it did, I "can not know it except through the
process of interpretation" (McComiskey 56, emphasis in original). My assertions
in this study, therefore, do not "strive for cognitive certitude, the affirmation of
logic, or the articulation of universals" (Poulakos 37), but rather are grounded in
conversations within the field of technical communication and in the needs of
those working within the discipline. Put simply, in this chapter I make no pre-
tense of offering anything other than partial, contingent, assailable, contextual,
localized--and hopefully useful--knowledge.

         Throughout this chapter, I attempt to avoid what Donna Haraway
terms the "god-trick": the act of producing knowledge that pretends "to be from
everywhere and so nowhere, to be free from interpretation, from being repre-
sented, to be fully self-contained or fully formalizable" (196). Although I use de-
cidedly empirical methodologies, I make some departures from their traditional
implementation. In Part I, for instance, I develop a heuristic for categorizing the
courses in the certificate programs I look at. However, in no way do I conceive
of this heuristic as taxonomic or representative: it is not a bijective mapping
between the spaces of objective reality and a higher Platonic realm. Rather, I rec-
ognize that this heuristic is a product of my perspective on certificate programs,

                                                                                                 155
Nugent

and it simultaneously--not to mention paradoxically and recursively--shapes
that very same perspective.

         I have done my best to avoid the rhetorical moves common to "god-
trick" scientific narratives: I try to resist using the passive voice to disguise my
own interpretive role; I attempt to avoid the familiar conceits of the scientific
report genre which serve to obscure its own constructedness; and I attempt to
bracket my findings not as articulated universals, but as paths for moving for-
ward in conversation. These ethical moves are what I believe to be necessary to
remain consistent with the situated and contingent practice of technical com-
munication as a sophistic profession.

 part i: looking at certificate program curri-
                                cula

         As I mentioned earlier, little information exists in the literature about
technical communication certificate programs (see Bosley, Hayes, Bridgeford,
Little). Little's chapter in the 1997 volume Foundations for Teaching Technical
Communication is perhaps the most expansive work specifically on certificate
programs. Here, Little provides a general review and synthesis of the informa-
tion on certificate programs found in the four editions of Academic Programs in
Technical Communication published between 1976 and 1993. While this over-
view provides useful conclusions about the diversity of certificate programs, it
does not attempt a systematic or detailed characterization of them. In this part
of the study, I attempt to gauge in greater detail what certificate programs in
technical communication require in terms of coursework.

         The Society for Technical Communication (STC) maintains an online
Academic Programs Database containing information on technical communi-
cation programs at all levels, and which served as the origin of this study. This
database is publicly available at http://www.stc.org/academicDatabase.asp, and
the data held there include the name of programs, the department that houses
them, contact information (address, phone, email, and homepage URL), the
programs and degrees offered, the number of credits required to graduate, the
approximate time of completion, the number of students in the program, the
number of graduates per year, and a brief description of the program. In the
spring of 2003, I used the database's web interface to select all programs listed as
offering a certificate program, yielding 122 records. I copied the data from those
records into a Microsoft Access database.

         Next, I attempted to visit the websites for all 122 programs using the
URLs provided in the database, or by performing a general web search when

156
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

I found no working URL. My initial goal was to determine which programs
I would include in the study, and then later to collect program curricula and
course descriptions from online sources. I selected for inclusion programs that
met all of the following criteria:

   · The certificate program was expressly in technical communication or tech-
       nical writing

   · The certificate was an independent degree, and was not required to be
       earned concurrently with another degree as a minor would be (however,
       programs could prerequire a degree for admission to the program)

   · Sufficient information was available online to determine the program's
       curriculum and course requirements

   · The program information was available in English and courses were taught
       in English

         Of the 122 initial records, I determined that sixty-two met the above
criteria for inclusion. Of the sixty records that I excluded:

   · Six were duplicates of other records
   · Thirty-two were misidentified as certificate programs or offered no identi-

       fiable certificate program in technical communication
   · Nine were for programs that required a concurrent degree (specifically, a

       bachelor's degree)
   · Nine were for programs that did not have sufficient program information

       available online to determine their curricula
   · Four were for programs in a foreign language

         I should note that these criteria may be the source of possible selec-
tion bias in the results that follow. By excluding nine programs for not having
sufficient information online, for instance, I may have encouraged an overrep-
resentation of digital technology courses, as the lack of sufficient web presence
at those institutions may conceivably also reflect the lack of major technology
initiatives, training, or funding. In addition, by limiting the study to indepen-
dent certificate programs (which do not require a concurrent degree), I may have
also encouraged a small overrepresentation of industry-connected programs in
the surveys for Part II, below. Such programs, lacking the "captive audience" of
an undergraduate student body, may have a greater incentive to recruit students
and feedback from local industry. Although I don't feel that these decisions sig-
nificantly impair the usefulness of the data I developed, I do feel that a sophistic
approach compels me to point out these possible biases here.

                                                                                                 157
Nugent

         For each of the sixty-two certificate programs I identified, I obtained
the requirements for completion from the institution's website or online course
catalog. Next, I compiled a list of every one of the 863 non-unique course titles
counting toward certificates in these programs. By iterating through this list
several times, I developed a course title coding heuristic that identified nine ma-
jor categories of courses: General Technical Communication/Technical Writing,
Technical Communication Genre Writing, Other Writing, Editing, Communi-
cation and Rhetoric, Management, Visual Design, Digital Technology, and Mis-
cellaneous. From these categories, I further identified subcategories, and where
necessary, sub-subcategories. By making the heuristic hierarchical in this way,
I was able to adapt the level of particularity to meaningfully group courses to-
gether, while still being able make claims about broader trends across programs.
For instance, the Title Software subcategory of Digital Technology is for courses
dedicated solely to specific titles of software. In order to determine further what
kind of software is being taught--while still maintaining Title Software as a
meaningful course category--I created sub-subcategories for the specific types
of software titles: Layout and Publishing, Digital Graphics, Documentation and
Help, etc.

         After refining the heuristic to contain over sixty categories and sub-
categories--an early indication of the breadth of course offerings in certificate
programs--I went on to examine the individual curricula for each of the sixty-
two programs, coding their course titles according to the heuristic. In addition
to coding the category courses belonged to, I also noted whether they were
required or elective according to the following definitions:

   · Required courses are courses that are required of all certificate students
       and are not elective

   · Elective courses are courses that are selectable from a list of two or more

In Table 1, I show the data I developed in the course of this study. In the left
column, I list the categories and subcategories of the course heuristic. The first
column (#R) lists the number of surveyed programs I found requiring at least
one course in that category, and the second column (%R) lists the same quantity
expressed as a percentage of the sixty-two surveyed programs. Similarly, the third
column (#E) lists the number of surveyed programs I found offering at least one
course in that category as an elective and the fourth column (%E) lists the same
quantity expressed as a percentage of the sixty-two surveyed programs.

         The certificate programs I examined require on average 7.6 courses for
completion, but they range in number from three to fourteen courses. While a
vast majority of the programs follow a typical fifteen-week university semester

158
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

schedule, several follow a different schedule according to the policy of their in-
stitution--a small few of which are non-academic. Since my primary focus was
on the topic of instruction in certificate programs, I made no attempt to record
the length of time required for program completion.

         The first and most immediately apparent finding of this study, I believe,
is that certificate programs include a very wide variety of courses in an equally
wide variety of curricula--confirming Little's 1997 conclusions regarding pro-
gram diversity (276). This is supported by the fact that, in order to meaningfully
categorize program courses, I had to develop a heuristic with over sixty different
course types. Of these course types, I was unable to identify a single one com-
mon to each and every certificate program curriculum, whether as a requirement
or as an elective. In addition, I found only one broad course type that is required
by a majority of certificates. With such a disparate makeup of programs, I main-
tain, there is no such thing as a "standard" or "core" technical communication
certificate curriculum.1

         But despite the breadth of certificate programs' course offerings, I found
some courses to be clearly more popular than others. The most popularly re-
quired courses, I argue, could be said to represent a "not uncommon cluster."
These courses fall into the following categories:

   1. General technical communication (including introductory and advanced
        technical communication/writing service courses)

   2. Editing
   3. Technical communication genre courses
   4. Digital technology

         The most commonly required courses are in general technical com-
munication, with 71% of surveyed programs (44) requiring at least one. The
advanced general course--which frequently goes by the title Technical Commu-
nication II or Advanced Technical Writing--is the only specific course subcat-
egory that I found to be required in a majority of the programs surveyed, with
56% of programs (35) requiring it. The next most commonly required courses
are in editing, with 45% of programs (28) requiring at least one course in some
form of editing (including the subcategories of technical editing, copyediting/
proofreading, and grammar). After editing, the most commonly required group
of courses are those dedicated solely to a specific genre of technical writing such
as reports, procedures, and proposals, with 40% of identified programs (25)
requiring at least one course. The most popular genre courses are dedicated to
manuals and procedures (with 18% of programs requiring at least one) and
computer documentation (with 16% of programs requiring at least one). Fi-

                                                                                                 159
Nugent

nally, over a third of programs surveyed (22) require at least one course related
to digital technology, with courses dedicated to specific titles of software making
up the largest portion of both required and elective offerings.

         The courses I classified into the "Miscellaneous" category are those that
were difficult to meaningfully include in other groups. The most prevalent such
courses include projects and practicum courses (with 15% of programs requir-
ing at least one course), internship courses (13%), and courses in usability or hu-
man factors (13%). Also within the "Miscellaneous" group, I found that some of
the least commonly required certificate program courses provide an interesting
glimpse at the competing priorities for certificate programs. A very small minor-
ity of the surveyed programs' curricula reflect the historically common situation
of technical communication within departments of English: 3% of programs
(2) offer a course in literature as an elective, 6% of programs (4) offer a course
in creative writing as an elective, and 3% of programs (2) offer a course in the
teaching of writing as an elective. While none of these programs went so far as
to explicitly require these offerings, they nonetheless reflect the priorities of an
English studies curriculum and not necessarily those of technical communica-
tion.

         However, I found that the least commonly required courses also suggest
a different, emerging set of priorities for technical communication certificate
programs. One program requires a course in the history of technical commu-
nication for certificate completion, and two programs offer such a course as an
elective. Meanwhile, two programs require a course in law or ethics, and 8%
of programs (5) offer a similar course as an elective. The very least common
courses--those that were so singular that they defied classification as anything
besides "Miscellaneous-Other"--included course titles such as: Job Search for
Technical Writers, Applied Psychology of Technical Communication, Starting
a Technical-Writing Career, People Skills for Technical Writers, and Marketing
Technical Writing Services. These courses reflect a surprising specificity to indi-
vidual certificate program curricula, as well as reflect the diversity of technical
communication as an emerging discipline.

         In summary, I found that the technical communication certificate pro-
grams I surveyed vary widely, and no core curriculum can be said to exist among
them. The programs I looked at in this study, although disparate and wide-
ranging, clearly favor four major groups of courses, which we can consider to
be a "not uncommon cluster" of certificate program courses: general courses
in technical communication (including the technical communication/writing
service courses, particularly the advanced course), courses in editing, courses
devoted solely to specific technical communication genres, and courses in digital

160
                                                         Certificate Programs

technology. Finally, while the least commonly required courses can't be said to
reflect the pedagogical priorities of certificate programs most broadly, I believe
that they may reflect those of either the past (those of an English studies curricu-
lum) or the future (those of an emerging technical communication discipline).

 course category                                      #R1 %R2 #E3 %E4

 Technical Communication/Technical Writing            44 71% 26 42%
        Introductory General Course
        Advanced General Course                       16 26% 3  5%
        Other General Course
                                                      35 56% 10 16%
 Technical Communication Genre Writing
        Reports                                       17 27% 16 26%
        Manuals and Procedures
        Computer, Software, and Online Documentation  24 39% 25 40%
        Proposals
        Portfolio and Resumé                          6  10% 8  13%

 Other Writing                                        11 18% 7  11%
        Composition
              Introductory Service Course             10 16% 22 35%
              Advanced Service Course
              Other                                   6  10% 10 16%
        Business and Professional Writing
        Science and Medical Writing                   1  2% 1   2%
        Journalism and Newsletter Writing
        Creative Writing                              18 29% 22 35%
        Other
                                                      12 19% 5  8%
 Editing
        Technical Editing                             10 16% 2  3%
        Copy Editing and Proofreading
        Grammar                                       3  5% 1   2%
        Other
                                                      1  2% 4   6%
 Communication and Rhetoric
        Speech and Presentation                       9  15% 7  11%
        Business and Professional Communication
        Public Relations                              1  2% 7   11%
        Marketing and Advertising
        Interviewing                                  2  3% 9   15%
        Training and Instruction
        Rhetoric                                      0  0% 4   6%
        Other
                                                      2  3% 9   15%
(more)
                                                      28 45% 27 44%

                                                      15 24% 8  13%

                                                      10 16% 6  10%

                                                      8  13% 6  10%

                                                      0  0% 1   2%

                                                      17 27% 33 37%

                                                      6  10% 12 19%

                                                      2  3% 10 16%

                                                      1  2% 5   8%

                                                      0  0% 6   10%

                                                      2  3% 2   3%

                                                      2  3% 6   10%

                                                      4  6% 4   6%

                                                      2  3% 8   13%

                                                                161
Nugent

Management                                   17 27% 8                            13%
      Project Management
      Organizational Management              11 18% 5                            8%
      Information and Knowledge Management
      Other                                  2  3% 3                             5%

Visual Design                                6  10% 3                            5%
      Layout
      Graphics and Graphic Design            0  0% 2                             3%
      Multimedia
      Photography                            19 31% 20 32%
      Illustration
      Other                                  9  15% 9                            15%

Digital Technology                           6  10% 10 16%
      Introductory
      General Web                            2  3% 3                             5%
      Desktop Publishing
      Title Software                         0  0% 2                             3%
             Layout and Publishing
             Digital Graphics                0  0% 1                             2%
             Documentation and Help
             Word Processing                 2  3% 5                             8%
             Web
             Other                           22 35% 20 32%
      Programming Languages and Protocols
      Database and Information Technologies  6  10% 4                            6%
      Other
                                             4  6% 10 16%
Miscellaneous
      Usability and Human Factors            6  10% 8                            13%
      History of Technical Communication
      Internship                             11 18% 14 23%
      Projects and Practicums
      Law and Ethics                         0  0% 2                             3%
      Linguistics
      Literature                             0  0% 5                             8%
      Mathematics
      Print Production                       5  8% 8                             13%
      Research and Critical Thinking
      Teaching Writing                       3  5% 2                             3%
      Other
                                             3  5% 3                             5%

                                             2  3% 0                             0%

                                             1  2% 6                             10%

                                             2  3% 4                             6%

                                             4  6% 7                             11%

                                             21 34% 27 44%

                                             8  13% 5                            8%

                                             1  2% 2                             3%

                                             8  13% 10 16%

                                             9  15% 6                            10%

                                             2  3% 5                             8%

                                             0  0% 2                             3%

                                             0  0% 2                             3%

                                             1  2% 0                             0%

                                             1  2% 5                             8%

                                             0  0% 9                             15%

                                             0  0% 2                             3%

                                             5  8% 12 19%

table 1: the data i developed in part i

1 The number of surveyed programs requiring at least one course
2 #R expressed as an approximate percentage of the sixty-two surveyed programs.

162
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

3 The number of surveyed programs offering at least one course as an elective.
4 #E expressed as an approximate percentage of the sixty-two surveyed programs.

    part ii: survey of program administrators

         During the fifteenth annual meeting of the Council for Programs in
Technical and Scientific Communication (CPTSC) in 1988, the workshop
group on certificate programs recommended that the council perform a nation-
wide survey to "gather information on the context of existing Certificate pro-
grams" and to determine the status of instructors in such programs (Hayes 29).
In Spring 2003, I sought to respond to this long-unheeded call by surveying
the administrators of certificate programs included in Part I of the study. My
survey included questions on the size of the program; the status, qualifications,
and specialization of instructors in the program; the age of the program, and the
relationship of the program to local industry. The survey was sent by email to the
contacts specified in the STC database, and of the sixty-two surveys I sent, 42%
(twenty-six) were returned complete. The results are summarized as follows:

   · Most certificate program instructors are required to have at least a master's
       degree, and much less frequently, a doctorate. A majority are required to
       have experience in industry as well. When asked what qualifications were
       required of their certificate program instructors,
        · 96% of respondents (25) indicated a bachelors degree
        · 85% of respondents (22) indicated a master's degree
        · 31% of respondents (8) indicated a PhD
        · 62% of respondents (16) indicated industry experience
        · 4% of respondents (1) indicated other experience, specifically, "Ex-
             perience with relevant software or markups such as FrameMaker,
             RoboHelp, HTML, Word, Powerpoint, Acrobat, Dreamweaver,
             Photoshop depending on course."

   · The mean reported age of certificate programs (in 2003) was 10.4 years,
       with programs ranging in age from one to twenty-two years

   · 54% of respondents (14) indicated that their program makes use of an
       industry advisory board, while 42% (11) indicated that they do not

   · 58% of respondents (15) indicated that their program actively recruits
       from local industry

   · 62% of respondents (16) indicated that their program employs other pro-
       cedures or mechanisms to gather feedback from local industry, while 35%
       (9) indicated that they do not

                                                                                                 163
Nugent

   · 38% of respondents (10) indicated that their program requires work in
       industry as a part of courses required for program completion

   · When asked how industry feedback is solicited, the most commonly
       specified sources were: professional associations such as the STC or the
       CPTSC (five respondents), followed by feedback from students (four re-
       spondents), feedback from internship partners (four respondents), guest
       lecturers (four respondents), program-sponsored events (three respon-
       dents), and alumni contacts (two respondents).

         In summary, I found that almost all of the responding certificate pro-
grams require a master's degree or better for their program instructors, and a
strong majority require instructors to have had industry experience. Most signif-
icantly, I found that the programs I surveyed demonstrate close ties to industry:
most programs actively recruit from local industry, maintain industry advisory
boards, or employ other less formal mechanisms for industry feedback. How-
ever, only 38% of programs (10) indicated that they require students to actually
work in industry for program completion.

        part iii: some possible implications

         The data and findings I develop here only begin to address the infor-
mational void surrounding technical communication certificate programs. In
an attempt to draw this work closer into existing conversations, I would like to
conclude this chapter by suggesting a potential framework for theorizing the
certificate program. As Gerald J. Savage demonstrates in his chapter "Tricksters,
Fools, and Sophists: Technical Communication as Postmodern Rhetoric," the
sophist provides a compelling model for the identity of the technical communi-
cator:

   [T]he work of technical writing seems to be consistent with a sophistic prac-
   tice in which knowledge is always contingent, in which rhetorical purpose
   must be reconciled to the needs of a particular audience at a particular time
   and place. Technical writing as we find it today has emerged in relation to
   particular economic, political, and technological circumstances which com-
   bine in complex and contradictory ways that make the work our practitioners
   do both useful and disruptive, both materially rewarding and risky [...] Yet
   these circumstances present us with the strongest argument for accepting the
   apparently weak role of the non-expert, unrecognized, incompletely profes-
   sionalized, uncertified, hard to define sophist-technical communicator. (189)

164
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

By situating technical communication as a sophistic profession, its members be-
come "politically and socially engaged communicators who recognize the inevi-
tability of their texts as socially transformative" (171). Its members also embrace
their status as "liminal subjects," "occupying marginal zones between the subject
matter expert and the lay audience, trading status both in the corporation and in
larger society for relative freedom to travel across the boundaries of these social-
cultural domains" (180).

         Certificate programs in technical communication can be seen as oc-
cupying a similar liminal zone: that between academy and industry; theory and
practice; education and training; local and universal. Just as sophism concen-
trates on the individual locations and contexts of knowledge production at the
expense of universal precepts and monolithic Truths, certificate programs often
situate themselves to meet the practical needs of local industry at the expense
of teaching more generalizable academic theory (Little 278). Just as sophism
threatens the modernist distinction between theory and practice (Leff 24, Scott
193), the situation of the certificate program between academy and industry
lends it the potential to collapse theory and practice into postmodern praxis.
Certificate programs, I assert, are theoretically consistent with--and are poised
to support the work of--technical communication as a sophistic profession.

         Existing programs, as I explored in this chapter, support this assertion.
In Savage's characterization of technical communication as sophistic, the field
avoids the modernist impulse to gain professional status and market closure.
At the expense of achieving fixity in its professional identity and knowledges,
then, the field gains the ability to remain flexible in the face of an ever-changing
postindustrial workplace (188-9). As I show in this chapter, existing certifi-
cate programs display a programmatic and curricular flexibility that is consistent
with this characterization. In Part I, I suggest that the curricula of certificate
programs are so wildly disparate that no core curriculum can be said to exist
among them. And in Part II, I show that the certificate programs I surveyed
display strong ties to local industry, with most employing some means of solicit-
ing industry feedback. These findings together are consistent with a conception
of technical communication as a postmodern profession in a market where no
standard, universally-required skill set has emerged--whether from the collec-
tive needs of industry or as a result of professionalizing gestures from elsewhere.

         However, while technical communication certificate programs are de-
cidedly sophistic in their flexibility, this very feature makes them fraught with
the potential for appropriation. By embracing flexibility alone, certificates could
easily become "value added" degrees that serve the most immediate material
interests of schools and students while failing to provide any relevant prepara-
tion for the situated practice of technical communication. Fortunately, sophistic

                                                                                                 165
Nugent

theory addresses this concern by suggesting a number of vital caveats for cer-
tificate program design. Platonic curricula--which sophistic curricula can be
said to be articulated against--would hold that the practices of technical com-
munication are entirely reducible to formalizable first principles, and therefore
such curricula only demand sufficient classroom time to facilitate the "transfer"
of formalized knowledge from teacher to student. By contrast, a thoroughly so-
phistic curriculum must recognize that the practice of technical communication
is contingent, localized, and social, and should therefore make space beyond the
classroom for students to develop appropriate professional capacities in context.
In other words, a sophistic curriculum demands social engagement.

         As Susan Jarratt notes in Rereading the Sophists, "the sophists could be
termed the first public intellectuals in a democracy" (98). Sophism is, by its
nature, publicly accountable and "immersed in the adjudication of immedi-
ate cultural concerns" (Crowley 318), an attribute that Savage foregrounds in
his own characterization of the sophist technical communicator. An important
consequence of this social orientation, I believe, is that sophistically conceived
certificate programs must include opportunities for students to take their work
beyond the walls of the academy. Although I found that the programs in this
study demonstrate a commitment to the interests of local industry, the fact that
only 38% (10) of the surveyed programs in Part II require students to work
in industry for program completion suggests that, at least at a curricular level,
certificate programs could do more to prepare students for their social roles in
a sophistic profession. This thesis is further corroborated by the findings in Part
I: only 13% (8) of the sixty-two certificate programs I surveyed require an in-
ternship for course credit, and only 18% (9) require a project or practicum for
course credit. Nonetheless, it remains to be seen if programs enact social engage-
ment at other levels: for instance if students already work extensively in local
industry, or if individual courses and pedagogical methods already emerge from
local needs.

         Another strategy that sophism suggests for program design is the incor-
poration of reflexive professional development. When seen as a sophistic profes-
sion, the qualification of a technical communicator is not a discrete skill set that
he or she possesses; rather it is a professional ethos that he or she has developed.
Phrased another way, the identity of the sophist-technical communicator can
be seen not so much as a subjectivity (one who possesses knowledge in the Pla-
tonic sense), but rather as an intersubjectivity (one possessed of a certain ethos,
or way of acting within and among social realms). This intersubjectivity is not
assumable by rote and it cannot be taught through a Platonic curriculum of dis-
jointed courses; it must be developed instead by allowing students to make the
connections between their coursework and the social realm of technical com-

166
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

munication in practice. This development can be facilitated, I believe, through
self-conscious reflexivity.

         Such reflexivity is comprised of an explicit engagement on behalf of
the student with the issue of what it means to be a practitioner of technical
communication. It can take the curricular form of retrospective portfolios,
capstone projects, student symposia, close instructor advising, or even devel-
opmental journals; but the end goal of these activities should be for students
to self-consciously adopt the professional ethos of a technical communicator
within--and as shaped by--their specific social and cultural contexts. To be
sure, such reflexive practice is conceived here not as a Platonic act of philo-
sophical contemplation but as a sophistic act of rhetorical engagement: each of
these activities should be constructed with a genuine audience, purpose, and
context. Through these kinds of reflexive activities, students are provided with
the curricular space to make developmental connections through social and
discursive means. Although it is not certain the extent to which the kind of re-
flective professional development that I am sketching here is a part of current
certificate programs, it remains an intriguing issue for future research, as well
as a compelling consideration for the design of any technical communication
curriculum.

         I hope I have made clear that I do not see the value of sophism as
a means to excuse programmatic configurations that are convenient, but oth-
erwise inexcusable. Rather, in offering a model of professional identity as an
alternative to those of market closure and fixity, sophistic rhetoric provides a
more situated and responsible figuration for the technical communicator. As
I find in this chapter, certificate programs in technical communication show
great potential as the sites for realizing this sophistic model. My research on
existing certificates shows that they are consistent with a sophistic model of
programmatic flexibility and concern for local needs. However, the sophistic
model also provides important cautions for the design and administration of
certificate programs. A sophistically-informed certificate program must remain
socially engaged, and it should present opportunities for students to work in real
social contexts. In addition, a sophistically informed certificate program must
be reflective: it should present opportunities for students to reflexively and self-
consciously develop their professional ethos.

         Again, I make no claims to transcendence or universality in the research
and interpretations I present here, and I hope that I have avoided any of the
familiar rhetorical techniques that would suggest otherwise. I also hope that the
information and discussion I have presented are useful--either for participants
in conversations within the field or for those considering the development of
their own certificate programs. Sophistic rhetorical theory, I believe, provides an

                                                                                                 167
Nugent

invaluable theoretical model--one that is both descriptive and prescriptive--for
building and understanding certificate programs in technical communication.

                      acknowledgments

         Of course, my sophistic approach compels me to recognize the social
origins of this work. Thanks to Gerald Savage for his invaluable guidance and
help with the program research; thanks to Ken Lindblom for his assistance;
and thanks to Ann Brady, Robert Johnson, Lori Ostergaard, Anne Parker, and
Marika Seigel for their responses to drafts.

                                notes

1 An identical conclusion was reached about baccalaureate degree programs in a
comparable 2005 study by Sandi Harner and Anne Rich. There they conclude:
"It is clear from this study that there is no standard curriculum for technical
communication programs" (219).

                           works cited

Anderson, Paul V. "Evaluating Academic Technical Communication Programs:
   New Stakeholders, Diverse Goals." Technical Communication 42.4 (1995):
   628-633.

Bosley, Deborah S. "Broadening the Base of a Technical Communication Pro-
   gram: An Industrial/Academic Alliance." Technical Communication Quarterly
   1.1 (1992): 41-50.

Bosley, Deborah S. "Building a Graduate Certificate Program: Making Connec-
   tions With the Community-at Large." Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
   Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication (24th, Austin,
   Texas, October 16-18, 1997). Socorro, NM: New Mexico Institute of Mining
   and Technology, 1998.

Bosley, Deborah S. "Collaborative Partnerships: Academia and Industry Working
   Together." Technical Communication 42.4 (1995): 611-619.

Bridgeford, Tracy. "Thoughts on Designing a Master's Certificate Program." Mod-
   els for Strategic Program Development. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
   Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication (27th). Ed.
   Bruce Maylath. Menomonie, Wisconsin, 19-21 Oct, 2000. http:// www.cptsc.

168
                                                                                          Certificate Programs

   org/conferences/conference2000/program2000/issuesfacingmastersprograms/
   bridgeford.pdf.

Bushnell, Jack. "A Contrary View of the Technical Writing Classroom: Notes
   Toward Future Discussion." Technical Communication Quarterly 8.2 (1999):
   175-188.

Coon, Anne C., and Patrick M. Scanlon. "Does the Curriculum Fit the Career?
   Some Conclusions from a Survey of Graduates of a Degree Program in Profes-
   sional and Technical Communication." Journal of Technical Writing and Com-
   munication 27.4 (1997): 391-399.

Crowley, Sharon. "A Plea for the Revival of Sophistry." Rhetoric Review 7 (1989):
   318-334.

Haraway, Donna J. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New
   York: Routledge, 1991.

Harner, Sandi, and Anne Rich. "Trends in Undergraduate Curriculum in Scien-
   tific and Technical Communication Programs." Technical Communication 52.2
   (2005): 209-220.

Jarratt, Susan C. Rereading the Sophists: Classical Rhetoric Refigured. Carbondale:
   Southern Illinois UP, 1991.

Jarratt, Susan C. "Toward a Sophistic Historiography." PRE/TEXT: The First De-
   cade. Pittsburgh Series in Composition, Literacy, and Culture. Ed. Victor J.
   Vitanza. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1993. 263-85.

Krestas, Shirley A., Lori H. Fisher, and JoAnn T. Hackos. "Future Directions for
   Continuing Education in Technical Communication." Technical Communica-
   tion 42.4 (1995): 642-645.

Leff, Michael C. "Modern Sophistic and the Unity of Rhetoric." The Rhetoric of the
   Human Sciences. Eds. Allan Megill, John S. Nelson, and Donald N. McCloskey.
   Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1987. 19-37.

Lindblom, Kenneth J. "Toward a Neo-Sophistic Writing Pedagogy." Rhetoric Re-
   view 15.1 (1996): 93-107.

Little, Sherry Burgus. "Designing Certificate Programs in Technical Communica-
   tion." Foundations for Teaching Technical Communication: Theory, Practice, and
   Program Design. Ed. Katherine Staples and Cezar Ornatowski. Greenwich, CT:
   Ablex, 1997. 273-85.

McComiskey, Bruce. "Neosophistic Rhetorical Theory." Gorgias and the New So-
   phistic Rhetoric. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 2002. 55-76.

Poulakos, John. "Toward a Sophistic Definition of Rhetoric." Philosophy and Rhet-
   oric 16 (1983): 35-48.

Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Council for Programs in Technical and Scien-
   tific Communication (15th, Minneapolis, Minnesota, October 19-21, 1988). Ed.
   Laurie Schultz. Minnesota, 1988.

                                                                                                 169
Nugent

Savage, Gerald J. "The Process and Prospects for Professionalizing Technical Com-
   munication." Journal of Technical Writing and Communication. 29.4 (1999):
   355-381.

Savage, Gerald J. "Tricksters, Fools, and Sophists: Technical Communication as
   Postmodern Rhetoric." Power and Legitimacy in Technical Communication, Vol-
   ume II: Strategies for Professional Status. Ed. Teresa Kynell-Hunt, and Gerald
   J. Savage. Baywood's Technical Communications Series. Amityville, NY: Bay-
   wood, 2003. 167-193.

Scott, Blake J. "Sophistic Ethics in the Technical Communication Classroom:
   Teaching Nomos, Deliberation, and Action." Technical Communication Quar-
   terly 4.2 (1995): 187-199.

Society for Technical Communication Academic Programs Database. 2004. Society
   for Technical Communication. August 2004 <http://www.stc.org/academic-
   Database.asp>.

Yee, Carole. "Can We Be Partners?: Industry/Corporate Advisory Boards for Aca-
   demic Technical Communication Programs." Publications Management: Essays
   for Professional Communicators. Ed. Jane O. Allen and Lynn H. Deming. Bay-
   wood's Technical Communications Series. Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1994.

Zimmerman, Donald E., and Marilee Long. "Exploring the Technical Commu-
   nicator's Roles: Implications for Program Design." Technical Communication
   Quarterly 2.3 (1993): 301-317.

170
9 Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional
  Communications Minor: A Multidisciplinary
  Approach

         Carla Kungl
         S. Dev Hathaway

         To meet increasing student interest in technical and professional oppor-
tunities for post-graduate career preparation, Shippensburg University, PA, has
recently developed an interdisciplinary Technical/Professional Communications
Minor, bringing together a variety of pertinent courses from across the college
curriculum and organizing them into a minor that is substantive, coherent, and
flexible. This article discusses the development and implementation of Ship-
pensburg University's new interdisciplinary minor. While the program's final
structure sprung primarily from necessity, its multidisciplinary status will allow
our students to reap many unforeseen benefits. We feel this program could be
a successful model for other smaller schools to follow, schools that have neither
the student numbers nor the resources to begin their own majors or minors in
technical communications.

                 background: who we are

         Shippensburg University is a public university in the State System of
Pennsylvania of about 6600 students. We attract an increasingly competitive
student body, with SATs averaging about 1100. Most are from across Pennsylva-
nia, and a number are from rural areas and are first-generation college students,
who especially see college as an important and vital step in preparing for a pro-
fessional career. At the same time, our university is committed to its traditional
liberal arts curricula: we maintain a strong general education program, expose
students to many fields of inquiry, and encourage close faculty-student relation-
ships and community service.

         Thus, though the English Department felt pressures (from an array of
sources which I'll discuss) to provide a more "professional" education--to teach
more overtly the workplace skills our students might need--our faculty believed
whole-heartedly that our liberal education was best suited to instill the knowl-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.09    171
Kungl and Hathaway

edge, judgment, and skills base for all college-educated citizens, for the greater
community as well as the professional workplace.

         In determining how to supply our graduates with the higher-education
communications skills we felt they needed to succeed in professional careers, we
looked to contributions from across the university and developed a multidisci-
plinary model to help give students access to a range of courses and skills. This
model allows us to marshal resources and course offerings heretofore segregated
among various college departments. In so doing, it provides a career-enhancing
program for students while maintaining a meaningful liberal arts backdrop.

  striking a balance: the pressure to profes-
 sionalize vs. maintaining a liberal education

         One of the most obvious pressures to update our students' skills
came from outside academia--the need to meet demands of the information
technology job market. Professionals capable of combining technical exper-
tise with communication skills are sought after, and the increased numbers
for and roles of technical communicators in various industries has therefore
impacted university instruction. Aimee Whiteside, in her survey of the skills
that the new generation of technical communicators need, reiterates the feel-
ing that the working world's rapid changes "created a profound challenge for
academia, which grappled to balance pedagogical strategies and foundational
critical thinking skills with specific skills that technical communication stu-
dents need to be successful in business and industry" (303). Universities have
tried different strategies for giving their graduates the necessary skills: some
have added whole departments in technical or professional writing; some have
implemented new majors and minors in technical writing or communication;
some have created writing tracks within an existing department (in our own
geographical area, for example, the number of major or minor programs has
nearly doubled in the past five years).

         But for many schools it is hard to know exactly what kind of program
or how much of a program to create to fulfill the demands of their community.
They then run the risk of leaving either professional or pedagogical gaps in their
students' education, or both. Rude and Cargile Cook's recent article on the aca-
demic job market in technical communication discusses this problem in light of
the issue of an inadequate number of trained faculty to teach this burgeoning
population of students. But the assumptions governing the fates of both groups,
faculty and students, stem from the same set of problems: uncertain job markets
and difficulties adequately assessing future need "on the basis of current de-

172
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

mand" (50). Their point that "the growth of academic programs [in PTW] and
the parallel demand for new faculty seem tied to growth of the role for technical
communicators in the corporation" is a nice piece of information, but one that
is hard to address logistically (50). What's a small regional school to do?

         The other major pressure we were feeling came from the State System
Chancellor's Office. Like most program innovations, our Technical/Professional
Communications Minor arose several years ago from discussions effected by
mission and curricular changes already in the air if not in the works. Our admin-
istration was increasingly underscoring the need for competitive professional
preparation programs (though offering little in the way of additional resources
to underwrite them). In response to this, for example, the History Department
retooled their Master's Degree to offer an MA in "Applied History," providing
training in more practical applications of a History degree: how to be an archi-
vist, or a tour guide, or a curator. Our own MA came under the hatchet at about
the same time because we couldn't come up with a suitable way to make it more
professionally oriented (now we offer just a few graduate courses per year in the
Department of Education's Curriculum and Instruction degree).

         We also felt pressures a little closer to home. In the fall of 1999 our
English Department underwent a constructive five-year review. One of the sug-
gestions that came out of that review was to revamp our degree programs to
include, among other new features, a Writing Emphasis option to accommodate
those students who wanted more practical skills but who were not interested in
teaching (nearly half of our majors are Secondary Education students). Our new
writing track came with a commitment to hire faculty with expertise in techni-
cal writing and to develop two new courses, Technical/Professional Writing I &
II. By creating this Writing Emphasis, we saw a way not only to supply students
with new courses but also to provide a new professional slant on existing courses,
such as Reviewing the Arts.

         While serving as department chair at that time, Prof. Hathaway had
concerns of two opposing kinds. First, in agreement with the department's out-
side reviewer, he saw the need to better prepare the majority of our English
graduates for their immediate future in the professional workplace. But at the
same time, he and the rest of the department wanted to stem the "workforce
prep" mentality that we felt was beginning to threaten the liberal arts heart of
higher education in the State System. He discussed options with the now-former
Dean of College of Arts and Sciences, who, though appreciative of our dilemma,
communicated the State System's increased professional preparation emphasis.
At the same time, she was very supportive of realigning our options in the ma-
jor and adding Technical Writing courses; she also paid to send the one faculty
member with some background in the field to the ATTW conference to gather

                                                                                                 173
Kungl and Hathaway

ideas. That faculty member came back armed with the realization that profes-
sionalizing our courses meant more than teaching memo-writing; if we were
serious, we had to come up with a way to incorporate some of the theoretical
and pedagogical background that constituted a meaningful professional writing
program.

         There was one big problem: we had neither the fiscal resources nor the
student population to consider a separate program. Nor did we necessarily want
to. We knew that other departments were undergoing similar struggles to com-
bine their traditional offerings in the major with more skills-based courses--the
Art Department, for example, had added Computer Design I and II. And the
Computer Science Department was working on an emphasis in software design,
and wishing that someone on campus taught technical writing. The chair of the
department mentioned this to the Dean, who relayed the good news that the
English Department was adding just such a course. She discussed with Prof.
Hathaway her desire to require that software engineering students take it even
though it was an "English Major" course, and the two began wondering what
else they could combine. In a strange confluence of need, therefore, members of
faculty from several departments looked around and saw that a shift was occur-
ring and that the best way to capitalize on it was to combine forces.

         From here, Prof. Hathaway asked the Dean if he could convene an
interdisciplinary committee to come up with a program design, knowing the
strain on resources that creating a new minor can put on departments: hiring
new faculty, adding new courses, updating facilities. Creating an interdisciplin-
ary minor seemed to be the best option: it would give students some substantive
breadth and depth to preparation for the professional workplace, and it would
spread the responsibility for this program among a number of participating de-
partments, so as not to overly burden or alter the curricula of any one depart-
ment. We believed we could answer the call for professionalization by adding
several new courses in various disciplines and pooling existing departmental re-
sources.

         Thus, in the Fall of 2000, we convened a Technical and Professional
Skills Committee, with representatives from the Computer Science, Commu-
nications/ Journalism, and English departments. As the committee considered
the objectives and prospective course inclusions for such a program, we invited
in the Art and Speech departments as well. In our deliberations over that year, we
reviewed the various technical and professional communication programs in the
region and studied student need to better determine the service and draw of such
a program.

         We followed up by designing an eighteen-hour program that had a six-
hour core of two 100/200 level courses: Technical/Professional Writing I from

174
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

the English Department and either Overview of Computer Science or Business
Computer Systems, which students in the College of Business could take in lieu
of Computer Science. The other available courses provide the minor with the
variety the Committee was hoping for, with offerings from the following depart-
ments:

   · Art Department: Computer Design I & II
   · Communications/Journalism Department: Advertising Copy Writing,

       Feature Writing, Writing for Broadcast Media, and News Writing
   · History and Philosophy Department: Ethical Issues and Computer Tech-

       nology
   · English Department: Technical/Professional Communication II
   · Computer Science: Web Programming
   · Speech/Theater Department: special topics course in either Communica-

       tion in Training or Organizational Communication

         To insure that students in the program would benefit from the variety
of course offerings and not end up taking a facsimile of a participating depart-
ment's existing minor program, we stipulated that, excepting internships, no
more than two courses from any one department could count for minor credit.
This allows students who might be interested in graphic design to focus more
computer courses, for example, while allowing those interested in Communica-
tion to create a "different" minor with courses more suitable for them, selecting
two courses from the Communications/Journalism Department and two from
somewhere else. Thus, the program we envisioned and eventually put into place
is more comprehensive and diverse than almost any program in the area. And
though creating a multidisciplinary program was logistically our best option, it
has provided us with some unforeseen pedagogical benefits as well.

                             The Multidisciplinary Edge

         Financial considerations were one of those pragmatic realities that we
faced when we set about creating the new minor. When developing the pro-
gram, we were very mindful of finite resources on campus and other concerns
that the Chancellor's Office might raise down the road, and so we worked to
allay fears. For example, recent university-wide technological initiatives meant
that regular technology and software updates kept departmental computer labs
and equipment up to par; thus we did not have to ask for any start-up money.
The Communications/Journalism and Art departments not only upgraded but
also expanded their computer labs, which helped make space for students in the

                                                                                                 175
Kungl and Hathaway

minor. To insure that there would be available space in the participating depart-
ments without the burden of new sections, we proposed an initial program cap
of thirty students; in fact, we did a seating-availability breakdown, course by
course.

         But spreading the burden of a new minor to various departments has
sound pedagogical as well as resource benefits. Allowing only two courses from
any one department to count for minor credit, for example, certainly eases po-
tential department overload. But the benefits our graduates will get from a mul-
tidisciplinary approach, by exposing them to fields other than their own, is even
more important. Few English majors will take a computer science course, the
other core course in the minor, if they don't have to. Some classes in the Art and
Communication/Journalism departments are closed to students outside of the
major or minor, so without declaring this minor, students would not be able to
take certain courses. Even if our university was large enough to have a technical
writing minor track in the English department, these types of courses would not
be available to them.

         And exposure to a variety of courses in other fields is vital for technical
communicators, since it is so often their job to serve as a liaison in the work-
place. Whiteside's survey of recent technical communication graduates and their
managers in the field is applicable. While there were some differences between
what students perceive they need and what managers wish they had (like learning
computer software and languages), there was strong agreement that students need
more preparation in the following four areas: business operations, project manage-
ment, problem-solving skills, and scientific and technical knowledge (313). It is
our hope that students get some preparation in these areas during the time they
are in the minor, working as they will in different departments. Writing students
with a knowledge of business systems, which they can receive in our minor, will
be able to understand more completely the role of technical communicators in the
workplace, a need that many managers in Whiteside's survey noted. In addition,
we saw the opportunity to expand our students' writing, judgment, and speaking
skills by including courses such as advertising copy writing, ethical issues and com-
puter technology, and topics in organizational communication. This range of skills
is not often emphasized in technical programs, yet it reflects a broader preparation
that is very applicable in the professional workplace.

         Another example of the unforeseen benefits of the multidisciplinary mi-
nor concerns the directorship of the minor. Because the program is not housed
in any one department, the potential burden of directorship will not be limited
to one department, where course-release for the director might cause hardship.
But this has an additional benefit of reminding the students (and the university)
of the true multidisciplinary nature of the minor. Though the English Depart-

176
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

ment was one of the departments that spearheaded the proposal, we did not
have the intention or the desire for it to be particularly our minor. There is
question as to whether even a "regular" technical writing or communication pro-
gram should be housed in the English Departments of universities, as MacNealy
and Heaton describe in "Can this Marriage be Saved?" Their survey questions
where the right home for such programs is, based on the difficulties that some
technical communication faculty members have in English departments, where
they get neither respect nor support from their colleagues. One of the solutions
these authors propose is to make the program interdisciplinary, a choice "which
would seem to suit a large group of respondents in our survey" (58). Thus, while
a revolving directorship serves the practical function of lessening possible strain
on departments, it also insures the long-term interdisciplinary character and
ownership of the program.

         Our proposal for the interdisciplinary Technical/Professional Com-
munications Minor passed university review in Fall 2001. However, it sat un-
responded to for a year and a half in our State System's Chancellor's office. When
it was finally readdressed, we took the opportunity to update the information in
it and expand on our vision of its apparatus. Finally, in the Spring of 2003, we
were given approval to begin implementing and advertising the minor.

         The next section, focusing specifically on revisions to our original pro-
posal, describes the overall rationale for creating a totally new professional com-
munications minor. It discusses the strategies we used to support our claim for
the need for this type of program, through analyzing both other colleges' pro-
grams and student need, and our plan for the program's assessment.

                     program rationale

         In our original proposal from the Fall of 1999, we completed a survey of
area colleges (within a one hundred mile radius) to see what kinds of courses or
programs in technical communication they had. One of our concerns was that
after two years, our rationale for the program's importance and the area's need
for it was a little outdated. We set out to prove our minor was now even more in
demand.

                           Showing Need for the Program

         In updating our proposal, we expanded our hunt for technical commu-
nication programs to all schools in Pennsylvania and in the Baltimore area. We
discovered that several area colleges were now offering either tracks within a ma-
jor or an actual degree in Technical, Professional, or Business Writing, a fact that

                                                                                                 177
Kungl and Hathaway

we found both welcome and alarming. On the one hand, the increase in techni-
cal communication programs implied a need for graduates of such programs in
the workforce and lent support to our assertions; on the other hand, it meant
that we needed to get our own program going, so as to not get left behind.

         But we were able to draw two other conclusions from our survey that
were more satisfying. First, while a number of State System schools have simi-
lar tracks or minors, none are located in South Central Pennsylvania. Thus,
within our own system of universities, this minor would fill an area need. And
second, while a few schools had an interdisciplinary focus to their tracks, our
range of multi-departmental offerings made our program unique. This could
potentially draw students to our school who might have otherwise attended a
different one in the system.

         Another way we showed the importance of our program was to relate
the growth of the technical communications field to our Chancellor's Office in a
meaningful way. We knew that jobs in the field were on the rise; we weren't sure
they knew. So we passed on the fact that the Bureau of Labor Statistics antici-
pates that opportunities for technical writers are excellent: "Demand for techni-
cal writers and writers with expertise in specialty areas, such as law, medicine,
or economics, is expected to increase because of the continuing expansion of
scientific and technical information and the need to communicate it to others"
(Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Outlook).

         To give this data a local slant, we pointed out the increased enrollment
in area chapters of the Society for Technical Communicators (STC), a non-
profit group dedicated to highlighting the work of technical communicators
and the largest of its kind. Even more exciting was that a whole new chapter of
the STC centered in the Harrisburg area, the Susquehanna Valley chapter, had
been created in 2000. Like in most chapters, members include both profes-
sionals in academia and professionals out in the field. Its thriving status speaks
to the large presence of technical communicators in our area and their desire
to participate meaningfully in their careers and in their community. We plan
to have at least one member of our Advisory Committee members (see section
IV) join this chapter, helping foster connections between the university and
area companies.

         We also highlighted the excellent salary opportunities in the techni-
cal communications field, based on the survey of national salaries that STC
performs every year. By comparing the salaries for 2000 to those in 2003,
we were able to show that salaries were not only highly competitive but that
they continued to rise. We also noted STC's assertion that there existed a very
small difference in pay between men and women--women can earn 97% of
their male counterparts. Judith Glick-Smith, the 2002-2003 past president of

178
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

STC, writes that "this smaller `gender gap' points to financial opportunities for
women in the growing field of technical communication" ("Salary Survey").
This fact is significant because one of the things the Chancellor's office wanted
to see was how the minor would attract women, minority students, and non-
traditional students. We were proud that we could provide such a telling sta-
tistic.

         Lastly, we turned that knowledge into a more personal recommenda-
tion, interviewing Shippensburg's Director of the Career Development Pro-
gram, Dan Hylton. He reiterated for the Chancellor's Office what our research
showed:

   For the past several years, the National Association of Colleges and Employ-
   ers (NACE) has published research indicating that communication skills top
   the "Perfect Candidate" list of desired qualities in candidates being inter-
   viewed for entry level professional positions. In particular, technical writing
   and computer literacy are highly sought in new hires. [...] From our campus
   and job fair feedback to national trends and research, we would strongly sup-
   port the implementation of a technical/ professional communications minor
   at Shippensburg University.

         Having researched the need for a program like the one we envisioned in
the area and in our own university, we felt confident that the new minor would
succeed.

                          Attracting Students to the Minor

         Another item the Vice-Chancellor wanted to see was how we would
attract students to the program, especially minority students, nontraditional stu-
dents, and undeclared students. We contacted our Dean of Admissions and our
Dean of Undeclared Students to see what they thought. Both were highly sup-
portive, recognizing that the combination of computer and business skills with
writing and communication skills created a highly desirable program of study.
Joseph Cretella, Director of Admissions, agreed that prospective students might
be attracted to the minor, something we had hoped would be the case: that its
uniqueness might actually draw students to Shippensburg instead of to another
college in the State System. He writes:

   I do believe the combination of technical writing and computer skills could
   be the key to elevating the interest in the program. We get a ton of inter-
   est in computer design programs. Instead of computer graphics with a huge

                                                                                                 179
Kungl and Hathaway

   amount of math and programming, your proposal could be an alternative,
   which would fine tune their writing skills supported by the computer.

         Dr. Marian Schultz, Dean of SU Academic Programs and Services, who
works with both undeclared majors and minority students, was very enthusias-
tic. In discussing the minor's appeal to students who enter the university unde-
clared, she said:

   Philosophically, we encourage undeclared students to see their college degree
   more broadly and to select academic programs and experiences that will help
   them develop lifelong skills that are transferable to many occupations. Pri-
   mary among these are good oral and written communication skills, as well as
   technical proficiency with various computer programs and applications. [. .
   .] The proposed Technical/Professional Communications Minor, which helps
   students develop these skills [. . .] will provide them with a competitive edge
   in the work place.

         She also thought the program would be attractive to students of col-
or, many of whom are enrolled in business programs, as undeclared, and in
communications majors. She writes, "The Technical/Professional Commu-
nications Minor will provide our students of color with the opportunity to
enhance their educational experience and to increase their employability by
helping them to develop the communication skills employers are looking for."
As the minor grows, the director will make a strong effort to meet with leaders
of programs like Ethnic Studies, Multicultural Student Affairs, and Women's
Studies to discuss ways to best attract a diverse student population to this
minor.

         Lastly, in keeping with other minors on campus, the program has no
grade-point average requirements, so that any student who is attracted to the
minor can take it. While it might be tempting to use the popularity of this
minor to set minimum entrance requirements and attract stronger students, to
do so could box out some students who might particularly benefit from the
professional knowledge and skills afforded by this program, in particular these
non-traditional or under-prepared populations.

         When the minor was approved, we sent our promotional flier to all aca-
demic advisors prior to scheduling, and Prof. Hathaway visited with department
chairs at our College Council meetings. We also put an article in our student
newspaper and in the undeclared majors' newsletter to let students know that
the new minor had arrived.

180
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

                                   Assessment Tools

         A final concern of the Provost and Chancellor was our assessment strat-
egy. Our original proposal did not outline an assessment plan in any detail;
when we went about revising it, therefore, we took more time thinking about
what goals we wanted to accomplish with the minor and how we might design
an assessment strategy to meet those goals.

         In our case, we had an additional difficulty in trying to develop an as-
sessment plan for a program that hadn't even been implemented yet. But we
knew that a well-thought out assessment plan was invaluable for meeting our
program's goals. As Jo Allen suggests, assessment can be "powerfully effective for
planning, designing, and promoting distinctive programs and then recruiting
desirable students and faculty"(93). Further, we agreed with our Provost that a
solid assessment plan was especially vital for an interdisciplinary minor, which
lacked the curricular structures found in single-major programs.

         But first, we needed to clarify what we wanted our assessment to do. Jo
Allen echoes the types of questions we were asking ourselves: what do we want to
accomplish with the assessment, and how will the information we receive from
the assessment be used (98)? The committee had a clear sense that it wanted to
focus on student-outcomes assessment, looking at what students learned from be-
ing in the minor. We thus developed goals and objectives of the assessment plan:

   · To measure student learning and skills as appropriate for professional and
       post-graduate educational opportunities

   · To review student attitudes and feedback about strengths and weaknesses
       of the program experience

   · To solicit program alumni feedback
   · To review appropriate design and effectiveness of constituent courses
   · Based on the above, to make periodic program changes as deemed ap-

       propriate

         Similarly, we needed to better clarify how our program assessment
would benefit from the evaluation criteria we had decided upon. We had briefly
listed some evaluation tools in our initial proposal--course evaluations, student
portfolios, exit interviews, and alumni surveys--but we hadn't really thought
about what we were looking for with all this information. Thus, when we went
back to flesh out our proposal, we began with some goal statements: what did
we want the students to know when they completed the minor? What skills did
we deem most important?

                                                                                                 181
Kungl and Hathaway

         We outlined four basic skills we wanted out students to graduate with:

   · Shows facility with appropriate computer applications
   · Has knowledge of and can apply the conventions of professional writing
   · Presents material in an organized, clear fashion
   · Demonstrates critical thinking appropriate for professional tasks

         These are clearly broad, broader than what is listed in most programs'
skills assessment. But with such a range of courses in the minor, and the vari-
ous combinations of courses that each student could take, we felt it necessary
to think as broadly as possible. Nonetheless, these items can be used by each
department or course instructor as meaningful indicies of student growth and
preparation.

         From there we felt we had a better sense of how the tools we would
use to measure these skills would help us monitor the program and evaluate its
effectiveness, based on a student-outcomes assessment. These tools consist of a
portfolio system, samples of which would be reviewed every other year, and both
an exit questionnaire, taken by students in non-core courses, and an Alumni
questionnaire, surveying graduates two and five years after their graduations.

         Portfolios form the basis of our assessment, as they serve so many vital
functions: they provide us with a body of work from both core and elective
courses; they provide a way to sample the actual work students are doing, and
they give students some control over the work by which they choose to be evalu-
ated (though when we use the portfolios for assessment purposes the students'
names will not be provided). Since having experience with appropriate comput-
er applications is one of our skill outcomes, in addition to the traditional writing
skills, we want to collect both electronic and written projects for the portfolio.
Each portfolio will contain work from both of the core courses, Tech Writing I
and either CMP 102 or BUS 141, and then two additional projects from other
courses, one of which must be 300-400 level or an internship.

         Figure 1 shows an edited copy of the assessment rating form (on the
actual form, all courses are listed), which clearly lists our goals for the students
and the rating scale. Faculty in pertinent courses will make anonymous num-
bered, dated copies of designated minor students' projects and turn them in each
semester to the program director.

         We also plan on administering two sets of questionnaires, separate from
the university's standard course evaluations. Both the Exit and Alumni question-
naires will be written and will use the same numerical scale as the portfolios. The
categories we plan to cover include: the program overall, the students' individual
courses, and the students' own assessment of their professional knowledge and

182
                     Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

skills. For the Alumni questionnaire, we will add a place where the students can
update us on any professional or post-graduate education. These questionnaires
are currently being developed, as we graduate our first batch of students who
have completed the minor this December.

Student Year ______         Student No._______

            Shows facility  Has knowledge of    Presents       Demonstrates
            with            and can apply       materials in   critical thinking
            appropriate     the conventions     an organized,  appropriate for
            computer        of tech writing     clear fashion  professional tasks
            applications

ENG 238

CPS 103

ART 217

(list
continues
for all
courses)

Internship

Scale: 1, excellent; 2, good; 3, adequate; 4, unsatisfactory

figure 1. technical/professional communication minor port-
folio assessment rating form

         After fine-tuning our assessment plan, we feel that we have a good blue-
print to help us begin to evaluate our program and how the minor will contrib-
ute to our students' career possibilities. The next section discusses the program's
administration and its immediate success with the students, verifying the con-
fidence we had about the program and its attractiveness to students from across
the college.

    program organization and administration

         Once approval to begin was in hand, we set about preparing to inau-
gurate the minor program. Several concerns faced us that had not been part
of our original plan. First was the changed state of availability in participating

                                                                                                 183
Kungl and Hathaway

classes. The university had admitted record-size entering classes for two years
running since 2001; overall enrollment, including increased transfers, was up
several hundred. Some of the participating courses, such as Technical/Profes-
sional Writing I and Computer Design I, had experienced unforeseen demand
and were turning some students away every semester. This meant that seniors
and juniors were filling most if not all of the available seats and that some who
would want to declare the minor might not have enough credit hours remaining
to take it. In addition, we knew, anecdotally, that the word of pending T/PC
Minor approval had already generated considerable student and faculty interest.

         We decided to pursue two solutions: first, to make passing the core
courses a prerequisite to declaring the minor, which would require students se-
riously interested in the minor to establish their eligibility; and second, to try
making a number of summer sections available online, particularly those for the
core courses. The College of Business and the English and Communications/
Journalism departments took up the online invitation; in fact, the request from
the minor program gave them the final nudge in a direction already being seri-
ously considered. Thus, seven of the thirteen courses in the minor were offered
this past summer, and five of those, including the two core courses, were offered
online, making our capacity for enrollment in the minor potentially unlimited,
without stretching existing resources.

         Once we lined up our courses and had the online offerings arranged,
we began advertising. In early October of 2003 we sent out our promotional
flier to all faculty and academic departments. We also sent a flier and a note to
all enrolled students who had already taken one or more of the core courses and
who had sufficient credit hours remaining to undertake and finish the minor in
time to graduate. Our efforts paid off, as we had expected. Advising for spring
semester began mid-October of 2003, and as of mid-November, we already had
thirteen students registered for the minor with additional students signing up
daily for advising conferences. This substantial early response clearly indicates
that our new minor will be a highly attractive offering to students from across
the university.

                                     Looking Ahead

         To fully complete the goals we set out for ourselves in our proposal, we
still need to finalize several tasks within the next year. One of the first items on
our list is to create and convene our advisory board, composed of area profes-
sionals, faculty, and students. We plan to use this body to help us to evaluate and
assess the program, but particularly, to help develop off-campus internship op-
portunities and aid in career planning. To that end, we have scheduled meetings

184
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

with the College of Business to discuss promoting the minor and assembling
business professionals in the surrounding Carlisle-Harrisburg areas.

         Our second major task is to begin initiating our assessment plan cycle.
When we revised our proposal and included a detailed assessment strategy, we
included a timetable for when those instruments would be used. All of the as-
sessments will be performed by the Program Director in conjunction with the
advisory board.

         Below are the assessment instruments and our planned timetable for
their implementation.

   1. Portfolios
         Written and electronic student portfolios of key course projects:
          · one each from each of the two core courses;
          · two additional from other courses, one of which is 300-400 level or
             an internship.
         Portfolio folders, record sheets, and student consent forms:
          · to be set up, signed, and explained by program director when stu-
             dents sign up for minor;
          · to be shared with participating faculty.
         Completed portfolios to be reviewed:
          · starting third year of program;
          · every other fall, from a significant sample of program students com-
             pleting requirements the previous two years

    2. Exit Questionnaire
         Anonymous exit questionnaires:
          · one for each student completing requirements, in his or her last pro-
             gram semester;
          · to be distributed by professor in all non-core courses near the con-
             clusion of each semester.
         Exit questionnaires to be reviewed:
          · starting third year of program;
          · every other fall.

    3. Alumni Questionnaire/Survey
         Periodic alumni questionnaires:
          · one for each program alumna/alumnus of a given year;
          · to be mailed on the second and fifth anniversary of SU graduation;
          · Second anniversary mailings in spring of even years;
          · Fifth year anniversary mailings in spring of odd years, by program
             director.
         Alumni questionnaires to be reviewed:

                                                                                                 185
Kungl and Hathaway

          · starting fifth year of program;
          · every other fall.
    4. Syllabi Review
       All participating courses' syllabi/descriptions for the most recent year to
         be reviewed:
          · starting third year of the program;
          · every other spring.

         We also needed to establish our program's publications, a newsletter
and a website in support of the program. The website was completed this past
fall, as was an informational brochure to be placed in the admissions office. We
hope that either a graduate assistant or an intern can be regularly appointed to
help with a newsletter and other program maintenance. In addition, we want to
begin implementing several other services in support of the minor. First, we plan
on instituting annual job fairs and resume/professional portfolio workshops. We
also want to continue to improve our marketing of the minor to incoming and
prospective students by promoting the minor during freshman orientation and
by holding open houses.

         Lastly, we will begin reviewing other courses for possible inclusion in the
minor. We initially developed the minor's course offerings based on the strengths
that our faculty had and by choosing classes that were already available. We fore-
see that a number of departments will wish to contribute courses to the minor
or to increase the number of courses they currently supply. Also, if demand for
the program continues to rise, it is possible, based on exit and alumni question-
naires, that new courses can be created to fill certain gaps or student desires. This
will continue to provide our students with the interdisciplinary focus we want
the program to supply.

                           conclusion

         To meet increasing student interest in technical communication op-
portunities, faculty from a number of disciplines met and developed a unique
multidisciplinary program, bringing together a variety of courses from across
the college curriculum and organizing them into a flexible and substantive mi-
nor. The Technical/Professional Communications Minor will allow participat-
ing departments to better integrate shared expertise and to better utilize existing
resources, with a minimum of additional resource needs. Most importantly, the
skills and knowledge available in this program will offer a synthesis of academic
and professional preparation that truly reflects the liberal arts core of Shippens-

186
                              Shippensburg University's Technical / Professional Communications Minor

burg University. We are particularly proud of our ability to integrate, rather than
segregate, professional skills and traditional higher-education skills, and meet in
the best way possible the whole of the university's mission.

                           works cited

Allen, Jo. "The Impact of Student Learning Outcomes Assessment on Technical
   and Professional Communication and Programs." Technical Communication
   Quarterly 13.1 (Winter 2004): 93-108.

Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Outlook. 2003. Bureau of Labor Statistics. United
   States Department of Labor. 22 July 2004. http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos089.
   htm

Cretella, Joseph. Email Interview. 18 April, 2003.
Dan Hylton. Email Interview. 18 April, 2003.
Johnson-Eilola, Johndan. "Relocating the Value of Work: Technical Communica-

   tion in a Post-Industrial Age." Technical Communication Quarterly 5.3 (Sum-
   mer 1996): n.p. Academic Search Premiere. EBSCOHost. Shippensburg Uni-
   versity Library. 5 July 2004.
MacNealy, Mary Sue, and Leon B. Heaton. "Can This Marriage Be Saved: Is an
   English Department a Good Home for Technical Communication?" Journal of
   Technical Writing and Communication 29.1 (1999): 41-65.
Rude, Carolyn, and Kelli Cargile Cook. "The Academic Job Market in Technical
   Communication, 2003-2004." Technical Communication Quarterly 13.1 (Win-
   ter 2004): 49-71.
"Salaries Rise for Technical Writers & Editors." October 2003. Society for Techni-
   cal Communication. April 2003. http://www.stc.org/pressrelease_srise.asp
"Salary Survey 2003." Society for Technical Communication. April 2003. http://
   www.stc.org
Schultz Marian. Email Interview. April 16, 2003.
Whiteside, Aimee. "The Skills That Technical Communicators Need: An Inves-
   tigation of Technical Communication Graduates, Managers, and Curricula."
   Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 33.4 (2003): 303-318.

                                                                                                 187
10 Reinventing Audience through Distance

   Jude Edminster
   Andrew Mara

         The following describes our attempt to extend and resituate the grad-
uate programs in Scientific and Technical Communication at Bowling Green
State University. Our revisioning of our program includes developing an on-
line graduate certificate program in international technical communication.

               overcoming disciplinarity

         One of the challenges in offering a certificate program in Northwest
Ohio comes from the lack of high-technology jobs in the area. Although on-
line programs ostensibly hold the promise of erasing distance limitations alto-
gether, there still seems to be a general rule that people will look for programs
in their area. This is not surprising, considering that people who work in tech-
nology centers like Austin, Palo Alto, and the Research Triangle have likely
heard little to nothing about Bowling Green State University. So, with few
technology workers to train, our S & TC program wanted to offer something
more recognizable to the business writers that physically and professionally
inhabit the area from Columbus to Detroit, an area that roughly corresponds
with the I-75 corridor. Thus, our challenge included thinking of courses that
would apply more generally to professional writers of all stripes. Because our
goal was a graduate certificate program, and not a full-blown online graduate
degree (we already had a resident graduate program in S & TC), it was easier
to create a more generalized program.

         Although the strategy of adding a certificate program may seem either
an overt attempt at pure growth, or even a step back from our resident under-
graduate and graduate degree programs, it really has had more of a leavening
effect. By demonstrating that a program can occur exclusively online, and by
demonstrating its value to the enterprise community, our program can make
a case that future expansion and curricular realignment can and should take
these two approaches. Fortunately for us, this also helps the S & TC program

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.10  189
Edminster and Mara

integrate two new professors who both have expertise and experience in both
business and online issues and practices.

         Having experience and expertise are not enough in the competitive
forum of acquiring academic resources, though; Bowling Green State Uni-
versity has programs in both Communications and Visual Communications
Technology which have also been eyeing the creation of writing programs that
serve the business community. Fortunately for us, the English Department
has been at the front of efforts to offer online courses. That fact, coupled with
our program's reputation for more cutting-edge approaches within the depart-
ment, gave us some leeway in creating an online certificate.

              new faculty/new directions

         The use of an online certificate to develop our Scientific and Technical
Communication program is one that combines institutional and personal his-
tory. As new members of our English Department, both of us were immediately
thrust into the formidable job of heading up our program (Dr. Edminster in
her third year and Dr. Mara in his second). Like many other institutions shift-
ing their curricular focus to digital approaches (University of Central Florida's
"Text and Technologies" program, North Carolina State's PhD in "Communica-
tion, Rhetoric, and Digital Media," and Michigan State University's "Rhetoric
and Writing" program just to name but three), Bowling Green State Univer-
sity's English department has been enjoined to find ways to offer more courses
through online distance education and hybrid computer classes with online
components. In point of fact, our Dean for Continuing Education urged our
department to take "bold measures" (a prompting that has led our department
to offer more online courses than any other academic department).

         BGSU's English Department hired both authors in the midst of the
increased academic pressure to offer more online and distance courses. Impor-
tantly, both new S & TC professors have an expertise in electronic communica-
tion (Edminster in electronic theses and dissertations and Mara in hypertext
rhetoric and histories). While these hirings may be nothing more than coinci-
dence, they offered a kairotic opening to propose the certificate and to shift our
programmatic focus from more traditional technical communications concerns
(rhetorical approaches, documentation) to some newer issues (technical market-
ing, entrepreneurship, and globalization). Issues such as audience, departmental
territory, resource allocation, and finding personnel to teach courses were all
complicating factors that needed addressing before the certificate was proposed.
Proposing the certificate introduced complications as well as providing a certain

190
                                                                     Reinventing Audience through Distance

amount of institutional cover to solve these problems because of the promise of
online course delivery. As more experienced faculty well know, proposing un-
tested solutions to enduring problems like scarce resources can be a dangerous
business. A new faculty member might propose a bold solution; two new faculty
can get downright giddy when looking for possible solutions.

         More than just an empire-building opportunity, this certificate program
has proved advantageous in helping the English Department bridge the gap
between different programs. In the process of formulating the new certificate
program, we serendipitously connected with another member of the faculty who
also specializes in digital issues, Dr. Kristine Blair. Through our discussions, we
quickly ascertained that there was much common ground and many similar
aspirations percolating in the English Department. Our literature program is
reorganizing around a textual studies paradigm and our Rhetoric and Writing
program has increasingly integrated online components like Electronic Dis-
sertations and eportfolios. All of these trends indicated a migration towards a
more digitally-oriented curriculum--a migration that a Scientific and Technical
Communication graduate certificate could propel. Working in concert with the
Rhetoric and Writing Program, and by including a proposal to help all English
faculty develop online courses, Drs. Edminster, Mara, and Blair all applied for
an Ohio Learning Network grant for a "Digital Studio." Using a learning com-
munity model, we carved a conceptual space to evaluate, and even migrate some
of our curriculum towards an online environment. The studio repurposed then-
unused offices and computer labs to host group workshops, one-to-one training
forums, and curriculum revision document drafting in order to help stimulate
discussions and eventually to help drive curriculum change. The Ohio Learning
Network "Digital Studio" grant allowed the three co-Primary Investigators to
hire a small staff and fence off time that would otherwise be taken up with teach-
ing, and granted a certain credibility in justifying our declaration of off-hour
facilities as studio space. In short, the grant allowed us the ethos to structure an
otherwise unauthorized environment. By re-mapping idle classrooms and offices
as studio spaces and calling meetings to fill those spaces with digital training
or future planning, two non-tenured faculty members were able to triangulate
several programmatic needs in the department and eventually create a new pro-
grammatic iteration.

          going digital/recreating context

         While English departments have traditionally deployed a range of com-
mon objects, referents and places to define what we do (the classroom, the novel,

                                                                                                 191
Edminster and Mara

Shakespeare, Nineteenth-Century American Literature), many of these referents
take on a different embodiment when they go digital. While English Depart-
ments have been entirely comfortable disputing which referent should have
precedence, there has been a tangible avoidance of discarding these common
referents in all but a few universities. Technical and Scientific Communication
programs are no different. Stuart Selber's and Johndan Johnson-Eiola's recent
compilation, Central Works in Technical Communication signals a traditional
gesture of binding departments, programs, and academic disciplines together
with artifacts like editions and anthologies. While this is neither surprising nor
alarming, it does signal a sort of disciplinary inertia that we have to face when
proposing something more negotiated and ephemeral, like online transactions,
as a centrally-organizing principle of a program. In the case of our program, the
organizational principle--creating a mutually-negotiated space--involves em-
phasizing the ground upon which these negotiations can occur.

         Much recent discussion has ensued on the role of different types of elec-
tronic contexts and contextual aids. Websites, MUDs, MOOs, blogs, WIKIs,
and other hybrid electronic fora have all provided fodder for journal, confer-
ence, and even blog discussion. Instead of positing which form best facilitates
student interaction and learning (along with the multiple political connota-
tions), our program has decided to emphasize the importance of providing the
ground and emphasizing the constructedness of both place and agreement. The
negotiations will include not only approaches to coursework and pedagogy, as
were mentioned earlier, they will also include notions of techne, technology, and
even evaluation. Program evaluation provides the tool through which traditional
notions of success will be challenged.

         Using BGSU's Provost-championed University Academic Plan (Inquiry,
Engagement, and Achievement) as both exigence and starting point allowed us
an additional measure of freedom in establishing the program. In the Academic
Plan, Bowling Green State University emphasizes the new ways to integrate on-
line technology as part of the university learning experience--in fact, the push
towards a vaguely defined "New Media and Emerging Technologies":

   By providing focus to the current activity and a platform for investigation
   into emerging technologies, we can achieve national prominence in creative
   teaching, innovative research, and industrial collaboration. (Plan 19)

The push towards new media (officially one of five "themes") granted potential
power to two relatively powerless faculty members (at least in the hierarchy of
tenure-line faculty members and administrators). Realigning our program with
a broader, university-wide planning document allowed two young professors to

192
                                                                     Reinventing Audience through Distance

create a future vision that might help staff, senior faculty, and even administra-
tors make future requests for funds (or at the very least, request smaller cuts in
funding).

         Seizing upon the general impetus of building a technologically savvy
university, we were empowered by the dean of Continuing Education to craft
our online certificate. As a way to build upon an already large commitment to
online curricula, our certificate presents a wider strategy to migrate online en
masse. Also voiced in the Academic Plan is the university's renewed commit-
ment "to develop students who seek intercultural and international engagement
and who possess a capacity to relate to diverse others at home and abroad." The
international focus of the certificate will support this institutional commitment
as well.

         Further support for the graduate certificate's international focus is con-
textually situated in the university's exchange program agreement with Xi'an
Foreign Languages University (XFLU) in China. Under this agreement, Bowl-
ing Green State University has the flexibility of sending either two or three facul-
ty members or graduate students (holding an M.A.) to Xi'an Foreign Languages
University in exchange for three XFLU graduate students who come to Bowling
Green. Our Scientific and Technical Communication MA Program regularly
accepts and enrolls exchangees from XFLU under this agreement, and S & TC
faculty have also participated in the exchange, teaching courses in technical writ-
ing at Xi'an and working with Chinese graduates of our MA program to try and
establish a technical writing program at XFLU. As Ping Duan and Weiping Gu
point out in their article, "The Development of Technical Communication in
China's Universities" (434) technical writing, as a subject of study, is virtually
non-existent in China. At least two of our Chinese MA students have produced
master's theses documenting the current need for technical writing programs in
China and exploring the feasibility of establishing such programs at XFLU and
other, more technically focused universities. As the need for such programs to
support China's rapidly expanding technological and global economic develop-
ment continues to grow, an online graduate certificate program such as the one
we have developed may appear extremely attractive to a variety of Chinese busi-
nesses and industries interested in developing employee communication skills as
a long-term, quality management strategy.

         When Edminster arrived as a new hire in the S & TC Program in the
fall of 2002, tentative plans for the online graduate certificate program were
already germinating in the mind of the current (and veteran) S & TC Program
director. The desire to create the certificate arose, in part, out of the program
director's desire to move S & TC from the confines of the English Department.
A year or two earlier, the director had tried to convince the Dean of Arts and

                                                                                                 193
Edminster and Mara

Sciences and the Provost that S & TC belonged in the College of Technology
rather than in the College of Arts and Sciences as part of the English Depart-
ment. The administers were not persuaded, so the director calculated a different,
less dramatic move in the direction of independence--a collaboration with the
Continuing Education Program to develop and market an online graduate cer-
tificate program. This collaboration coincided with the university's new initia-
tive--developing and offering more online courses campus-wide.

         However, plans for the certificate were embryonic, requiring a good
deal of brainstorming and late afternoon coffee as Dr. Edminster and the former
program director began to target and assess the needs of a market, to conceptual-
ize courses that would meet those needs, and to negotiate with an associate dean
of Continuing Education, who is also a member of the English Department.
Many of the potential students for this program are in industry seeking ways to
increase job security or to improve their abilities to communicate in an expand-
ed, global market, but lack the flexibility of being able to come to campus for
primarily daytime classes. Others reside in other countries, either in residential
programs in those countries (including those who teach and/or study at Xi'an)
or also working in business and industry without the flexibility of leaving jobs
and countries to enroll in residential programs. Still others are seeking upgrades
or updating (certification) of skills and knowledge without need for a degree.
The program is designed so that students who are enrolled in a degree program
can substitute some courses for residential requirements for the degree, while
others can pursue the entire certificate program.

         Gradually, student performance objectives for the program began to
take shape. After completing the program, students were supposed to possess the
ability to:

   · Create common technical vocabularies within "transaction" cultures as
       they are socially constructed through intercultural interaction

   · Analyze cultural bias
   · Employ forms of project management that facilitate intercultural collab-

       orative writing (dialogic rather than hierarchical)
   · Apply "learning organization" management concepts in order to learn

       from diversity
   · Develop collaborative relationships that generate mutual knowledge with-

       in "transaction" cultures
   · Assess and reflect on their collaborative processes
   · Design effective usability tests for documents with international or cul-

       ture-specific audiences
   · Develop evaluation criteria for processes and products

194
                                                                     Reinventing Audience through Distance

   · Analyze processes by which specific cultural values interact

Courses eventually included: (1) Technical Communication for a Global Mar-
ketplace, (2) Technical Editing for a Global Marketplace (3) Research in Inter-
national Technical Communication, (4) Ethics in International Technical Com-
munication, (5) Visual Displays of Information for International Audiences.

         In our field, international technical communication has traditionally
focused on developing both the awareness and the skills necessary to understand
how cultural difference affects communication in various technical contexts and
to plan for and design documents that meet the needs of an audience that is
both culturally diverse and culturally specific. This certificate program relies to
some extent on this traditional approach by teaching such skills as (1) how to
analyze cultural bias, (2) how to analyze international and nationally specific
audiences, (3) how to design effective usability tests for documents with inter-
national or culture-specific audiences, and (4) how to translate the culture as
well as the language of technical documents. In addition, the program places
significant emphasis upon the growing awareness within technical communica-
tion research that the application of static notions about particular cultures on
the part of technical communicators can degenerate into the reinscription of
cultural stereotypes that obstruct communication rather than facilitate it. Thus,
our certificate program also emphasizes the need for technical communicators
to understand that: (1) every communication situation is context-specific, (2) al-
though context includes culture, cultures do not communicate with each other,
individuals do, and (3) the culture that defines individual international commu-
nication situations is a "hybrid" or "transaction" culture, which is constructed
by the participants as they interact and negotiate their cultural differences. The
certificate is designed to prepare students to function in the global workplace by
instructing them in how to apply both knowledge about culture and knowledge
about negotiating cultural difference in individual communication contexts.
The online certificate will situate communicators from different cultures in a
mutually constructed third space via the use of online discussion boards and
virtual classroom courseware tools. This hybrid space cannot be mapped out in
advance of the communication situation, but instead must be negotiated with
the paralogic hermeneutic approach described below.

                 paralogic hermeneutics

         As we sketched out the specifics of the certificate building process (some
of which occurred before we arrived at BGSU) we found it useful to employ

                                                                                                 195
Edminster and Mara

Thomas Kent's theory of paralogic hermeneutics as a lens through which to view
negotiations between the Department of English and the Department of Con-
tinuing Education, which oversees all online course development and marketing
at our institution. In his work Paralogic Rhetoric, Kent describes a communica-
tive approach that fits well in what Bill Readings might have affectionately called
the postcultural university. Kent recognizes the need to serve a wide range of
students who do not necessarily buy into a liberal arts or strictly cultural educa-
tion; he forwards the proposal to refocus education on contextual practice:

   Paralogy is the feature of language-in-use that accounts for successful com-
   municative interaction. More specifically, paralogy refers to the uncodifiable
   moves we make when we communicate with others, and ontologically, the
   term describes the unpredictable, elusive, and tenuous decisions or strategies
   we employ when we actually put language to use. (3)

The uncodifiable moves make it impossible to definitively map a curricular path
for students (especially considering that we have an active international student
population and are seeking to increase our focus on international/post-national
communication issues). Instead, our certificate program seeks to acknowledge
and facilitate the future interactions/decisions/strategies that our students will
inevitably take throughout their time in our program.

         In order to help our students articulate the contingent and increasingly-
diverse communications scenarios that they will face in trans-national, interna-
tional, and even intra-national situations, we have shifted our focus from the
more concrete matters of "content" to include the more ephemeral matters of
setting (online) and even unpredictability as an (un)grounding feature. We are
not making radical shifts into relativity, however; instead, our certificate pro-
gram seeks to distribute responsibility across the range of participants. Kent calls
this process of distributed responsibility triangulation:

   In order to surmise if our marks and noises create any effect in the world, we
   require at least an-other language user and objects in the world that we know
   we share. In order to communicate, we need to triangulate (90).

Kent's use of the term "triangulation" refers to the interaction between two com-
municators and the world they share. Other language users and worldly objects
take on a different dimension in an online curriculum, especially insofar as we
cannot count on common facilities and classroom locations to create boundaries
and occurrences as our objects of commonality.

196
                                                                     Reinventing Audience through Distance

         At the same time, this paralogic challenge helps our program enact
workplace strategies that students will employ in their future workplace settings.
Technical writers increasingly have to face writing situations where they will
likely never meet or physically interact with their users. Internal documentation
increasingly gets fed into websites that will be read and implemented in different
countries. External documentation is likewise sent to multiple places and audi-
ences who never physically intersect (often translated by localizers to match an
even greater array of paralogic, triangulated interactions).

     triangulating in a third cultural space

         This triangulation provides us with a guiding tool for constructing a
new certificate. Classes will include few "plug-and-chug" formulas that give the
impression that audiences are unchanging, workplaces stable, and technologies
separate from interaction. The pedagogy will integrate the back-and-forth mo-
tion between students in group interactions. If triangulation provides a good
guiding tool for course construction, it provides an even more powerful heuristic
to dealing with the complications we face as new faculty, new program directors,
and new technologists.

         In order to help students triangulate, we are attempting to simultane-
ously empower them to participate in meaning-making and to recognize their
role in meaning-making. In order to spur communicators who likely understand
their possibilities as negotiators of meaning, we have created a program that
allows a certain degree of accountability while offering some flexibility in creat-
ing a route for negotiating cultural difference within the socially constructed
spaces in which students work as technical communicators. Indeed, as Carl Lo-
vitt notes, organizational cultures and professional discourse communities may
shape communication in international contexts more significantly than national
culture does (8). In his dynamic, process-based model of international profes-
sional communication, "international professional communication is construct-
ed by the participants through dialogue, improvisation, and negotiation" (11), a
view we think complements Kent's notion of how parology and triangulation as
processes operate in any communication context. For Lovitt, international com-
munication situations can "neither be described nor understood as the juxtapo-
sition of two preexisting cultures; rather, the "culture" that defines this encoun-
ter is constructed by the participants during their interaction" (10). Through
paralogic dialogue and improvisation, a third culture, whose dimensions cannot
be anticipated in advance, is negotiated. These are theoretical positions that in-
formed our conception of the certificate program.

                                                                                                 197
Edminster and Mara

 the "other" spaces of technical discourse and
                       online education

         As we undertake this curricular re-mapping process, we are also finding
it useful to adopt a cultural studies perspective--specifically, a postcolonial one.
When they began to administer writing instruction to future engineers, scien-
tists, and students in other technical fields, English departments in effect "col-
onized" emerging technical discourses arising out of those disciplines. Several
articles in the field have questioned the efficacy of the marriage between English
and Technical Communication. In a 1994 article, Charles Sides concludes that
successful relations between English and Technical Communication programs
are rare, and that communications or media studies departments provide a more
suitable marriage. And in "Can This Marriage Be Saved: Is an English Depart-
ment a Good Home for Technical Communication?" Mary Sue MacNealy and
Leon B. Heaton report on their results of an exploratory survey to assess the
validity of both the anecdotal and documented evidence that "the relationship
between teachers of technical writing and their English department colleagues
is anything but blissful" (42). Of the sixty-six subjects who responded (39%),
thirty were housed in English departments and thirty-six in other departments.
The difference in these two groups' perceptions of departmental support for
their programs proved statistically significant. Those faculty whose programs
were housed outside English were significantly more satisfied with the level of
support they received. Moreover, tenure and promotion problems for technical
communication faculty in English departments have been significant enough for
ATTW to publish a 180-page booklet on this issue.

         Given these misgivings, we chose the postcolonial approach as a way
to analyze (and perhaps successfully counsel toward a healthier relationship)
this sometimes "odd couple(ing)" of English and Technical Communication.
As Bernadette Longo has discussed in her book Spurious Coin, early technical
communication textbook authors reinscribed in their texts the tension between
liberal arts curricula and technical curricula in various ways. Crouch and Zetler's
texts for technical writers clearly differentiated between technical writing and
more general composition courses; they encouraged technical students to read
more widely by referring them to an appended reading list of canonical literary
works. The notion that science and engineering students' educations were "de-
ficient for producing the type of well-rounded engineer who could understand
human issues" (Longo 137) was prevalent among many academics, including
science and engineering researchers and teachers themselves (135-137).

         Interestingly, however, the tension between curricula played out quite
differently in the work of Philip McDonald, author of the 1929 writing text

198
                                                                     Reinventing Audience through Distance

English and Science, who advocated that technical students would benefit more
from reading the histories of civilization and science than works of great litera-
ture. Still, the intended outcome was the same--to bridge the gap between the
arts and the sciences by implying and attempting to convince students of diverse
technical specializations to accept the notion that they possessed a "common
background of culture and humanism, which would...weld together the various
groups of technical specialists..." (McDonald quoted in Longo 138). The focus
on working to efface the differences between technical fields with an appeal to
a common humanistic background is interesting we think. We see it as hav-
ing much in common with politically motivated attempts to "unify" multiple
subjectivities and "paper over" difference--difference which might more pro-
ductively be acknowledged, legitimated, and negotiated. Indeed, the certificate
program itself, with its diverse audience (both technically and culturally diverse)
will not efface these differences, but rather allow for negotiation and articula-
tion of difference among technical specializations and cultural backgrounds by
providing a forum in which to apply, archive and observe the unpredictable and
elusive strategies students employ in those negotiations--using the features of
synchronous and asynchronous dialogue in the online chat and discussion board
spaces of Blackboard.

         In any process of colonization, forms of difference are articulated
(Bhabha 66-68). With respect to scientific and technical communication pro-
grams, these forms of difference are often understood as:

   · Differences in style
   · Differences in the burden of information carried by text vs. visuals
   · Differences in genre
   · Differences in purpose
   · Differences in audience (includes international now)

However, if we acknowledge, as Bhabha does, that these forms of difference
have no "original" identity (as something called "technical communication")
but are, instead, authorial choices that remain "polymorphous and perverse,"
that cut across a variety of writing situations variously identified with mul-
tiple programs and curricula within English studies, and that always perform a
specific, strategic, and contingent calculation of their audience effect (Bhabha
67), then the boundaries drawn around scientific and technical communica-
tion programs can become more fluid and flexible, allowing for the establish-
ment of stronger collaborations between and among programs such as the
Rhetoric and Writing and Scientific and Technical Communication programs
in our own department. Such fluid and flexible spaces can become highly

                                                                                                 199
Edminster and Mara

generative of innovative, hybrid instructional methods and artifacts like our
online graduate certificate program.

         Bhabha's description of the cultural `beyond' that humanity found itself
seeking at the twentieth century is illuminating for us as well. We see that as
education moves online, the culture of the academy finds itself in a space/time
transition analogous to that which Bhabha characterizes:

   We find ourselves in the moment of transit where space and time cross to
   produce complex figures of difference and identity, past and present, inside
   and outside, inclusion and exclusion. For there is a sense of disorientation, a
   disturbance of direction, in the `beyond': an exploratory, restless movement
   caught so well in the French rendition of the words au-dela--here and there,
   on all sides . . . hither and thither, back and forth (1).

As members of the academy we find it useful to analyze the subject position of
traditional, face-to-face education and its claim to "original" identity among
other forms of learning. This analysis will help us "to think beyond narratives of
originary and initial subjectivites and to focus on those moments or processes
that are produced in the articulation of . . . differences" (1). We see our online
graduate certificate program as an `articulation of difference'--a collaborative,
interstitial space capable of generating an alternative identity for our program.
This identity cannot and should not be prescribed by us, but will be shaped by
that restless, exploratory, back and forth movement Bhabha describes--a move-
ment emerging from the disorientation and disturbance of direction experienced
within our program, the English Department, and the university as we seek our
own `beyond' in the world of online education.

         There are at least two interstices (Bhabha defines interstices as "the over-
lap and displacement of domains of difference") that our certificate program
problematizes (2). One is the interstice that emerges from the border drawn be-
tween the English Department and the Department of Continuing Education.
The other is the interstice generated by the border drawn around the programs
of Scientific and Technical Communication and the English Department. We
see our online graduate certificate program as a cultural hybridity--an artifact
that is emerging in the moment of historical transformation that is online edu-
cation. We want to exploit the "productive ambivalence" of online education as
"Other"--to reveal the boundaries of traditional education's master narratives
and to transgress these boundaries from the space of "otherness" that online
education has been constructed as within the academic community.

200
                                                                     Reinventing Audience through Distance

                           conclusion

         At the same time we use the certificate to help us articulate a new iden-
tity for our program from an interstitial perspective, we also seek a new solidarity
and community with other programs in the department, such as Rhetoric and
Writing, from this interstitial perspective. On the one hand, we want to claim
program agency from the in-between space of the overlapping domains of dif-
ference out of which our identity has been constructed by the colonial moves of
English studies. On the other hand, we want to explore the imaginary of spatial
distance--to live beyond the dual borderlands of traditional education/online
education, and technical communication/English studies.

         Toward these ends, we have successfully negotiated our institutional
bureaucracy and received approval from the Graduate College to accept applica-
tions for admission to the certificate program. The program is advertised on the
university website at both the Graduate College pages (link) and the Continuing
Education pages (link). As such, these two links effectively serve as doorways
into an as-yet-unnegotiated program space. So as we wait for applicants to ma-
terialize and triangulate these conceptual spaces, we continue to reinvent our
institution through the perspective of a distant audience.

                           works cited

Bhabha, Homi K. The Location of Culture. New York: Routledge, 1994.
Duan, Ping and Weiping Gu. "The Development of Technical Communication in

   China's Universities." Technical Communication 52.4 (2005): 434-48.
Inquiry, Engagement, and Achievement: The Bowling Green State University Aca-

   demic Plan. 2005. 22 February, 2006. <http://www.bgsu.edu/offices/provost/
   BGSUAcademicPlan1.PDF>
Kent, Thomas. Paralogic Rhetoric: A Theory of Communicative Interaction. Lewis-
   burg, Bucknell University Press, 1993
Kynell, Theresa. "Technical Communication: Where Have We Been?" Technical
   Communication Quarterly 8.2 (1999): 143-151.
Longo, Bernadette. Spurious Coin. New York: SUNY Press, 2000.
Lovitt, Carl. "Rethinking the Role of Culture in International Professional Com-
   munication." Exploring the Rhetoric of International Communication. Ed.
   Carl R. Lovitt. New York: Baywood Publishing Company, Inc., 1999.
Readings, Bill. The University in Ruins. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1996.

                                                                                                 201
11 Introducing a Technical Writing Communication
  Course into a Canadian School of Engineering

   Anne Parker

                         introduction

         Introducing technical communication into the curriculum of a Cana-
dian engineering school has created its own set of challenges, particularly when
some of the engineering professors continue to believe, as Mathes, Stevenson
and Klaver suggested in 1979, that the subject is best taught by engineers. Do-
ing so proved to be only modestly successful at my school. Yet, even without
the push to use engineering faculty as my assistants, establishing one's authority
as an expert in a non-engineering field can create a very real tension between
the insider (the engineer) and the outsider (the technical communication in-
structor). As a female and as a non-engineer, I have occasionally felt like the
"outsider." After all, a school of Engineering may well be the epicenter of what
McIlwee and Robinson brand the "culture of Engineering," a culture that is both
male-dominated and seemingly closed to the outsider.

         The false perceptions of the engineering students only complicate the
issue. On the one hand, many still perceive the subject as the study of "Eng-
lish," seemingly unaware that analyzing literature and writing essays about it is
an activity quite different to writing engineering reports and giving technical
presentations about technical problems and engineering designs. On the other
hand, some students consider technical communication to be nothing more
than grammar and composition, packaged though it may be in technical read-
ings and exercises. Even some engineering professors also adhere to the latter
view, and are surprised to discover that the field has grown to be such a rich and
varied one (and one, incidentally, that demands the talents of a communication
specialist).

         Nevertheless, in spite of these misconceptions and challenges, I have
found that, if an instructor can focus on the application of the technical com-
munication field to the engineering profession, then many of these erroneous
ideas can be dispelled. Indeed, over the years, the technical communication
course at our school has met, if not anticipated, current trends within the engi-
neering profession, exemplified most notably by the expectations of the national

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.11  203
Parker

accreditation board. And this growing awareness of its relevance to the profes-
sion has resulted in the course's becoming more and more integral to the Faculty
of Engineering at the same time as I have become less and less the outsider.

         For example, in the 1970s, many potential employers simply wanted
engineering graduates to be able to write more effectively, and the perceived ab-
sence of such a skill prompted complaints to the administrators of our engineer-
ing school. To address that need, our school then introduced a technical com-
munication course in 1982, and students' writing skills noticeably improved.
Later still, in the 1990s, the workplace had become more team-based, so the
accreditation boards of both the U.S. and Canada urged engineering schools to
introduce collaborative projects into the curriculum, partly because these proj-
ects helped to nurture the skills that were in high demand, such as interpersonal
and project management skills. At the University of Manitoba, the technical
communication course was already team-based, and thus served as a "prequel"
to an emerging and significant trend - the inclusion of collaborative projects and
instruction in teaming skills in the engineering curriculum.

         Thus, to be successful, a technical communication specialist should be
prepared to both adopt and adapt engineering practices. As this essay will dis-
cuss, the technical communication course offered in the engineering school at
the University of Manitoba can serve as a case study to show how the tension
between "insider" and "outsider" can be ameliorated and, more importantly,
how the synergy between the practice of engineering and the communication of
that practice can be effectively nurtured.

  the synergy of the engineering faculty and
  the communication specialist: meeting the

     challenges and establishing authority

         When the technical communication course was first introduced as a
compulsory component of the undergraduate program at my institution, we
first thought that I would coordinate the delivery of the course as well as teach
it. Given that at the time we had close to two hundred students per term, I
couldn't do everything on my own, so we initially used engineering faculty
as "assistants"; in other words, we did what Mathes, Stevenson and Klaver
suggested we do. Such an arrangement was short-lived, to say the least. After
one or two terms of teaching and marking the written assignments, most of
these colleagues withdrew from the experiment, eager to return to their own
courses and their own research. The technical communication course, in their
view, was just too "demanding" and "time-consuming." In this sense, then,

204
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

my colleagues were quite willing to acknowledge my expertise and "leave me
to it." We then hired a part-time assistant for me, generally a graduate student
in English, and, for a time, a graduate student in Civil Engineering. Interest-
ingly enough, this latter arrangement worked surprisingly well, presumably
because of his commitment to the course and to the principle of teaching
engineering students the basic communication skills. After he graduated, we
once again hired a series of assistants who had more of a humanities back-
ground.

         However, in spite of the faculty's obvious willingness to leave me to
teach the course, my place within the faculty hierarchy has been, at times, an ill-
defined one, and one that occasionally even baffles my colleagues. For example,
when I applied for tenure or promotion, they were at a loss as to how to evaluate
me. They found they had to rely on the expertise of others in the technical com-
munication field or in related fields. In Canada, that can at times be problematic
because there are so few senior professors of technical communication. Most
are instructors in two-year colleges or, if they do have a university appointment,
they are usually junior members of the faculty - quite unlike my position at my
school where I am now a fully tenured associate professor.

         Another area where my position in the faculty has not always been
clear is program and curriculum development. Over the years, even though
the engineering faculty has frequently discussed the importance of building
on what the technical communication course provides, there have been times
when decisions about the curriculum have been made that did not include my
input. Even today that happens, partly because these are professional engineers
who are quite used to making decisions on their own; indeed, they expect to.
They also see themselves as problem-solvers, and will therefore take what they
consider as appropriate action to solve the problem. Once I remind them that
I am the one with the "English" expertise, they will usually willingly accept my
input and defer to my judgment in most matters of content and delivery.

         In fact, establishing my authority and the place of technical com-
munication within the engineering program has become easier over the years;
now, there is much more of a cooperative effort between my engineering col-
leagues and me than there was at that time, although I have also had to work
hard to promote both the field and myself. I have done this by joining engi-
neering-related societies (like IEEE) and becoming an active member in them;
by speaking to department meetings; by inviting colleagues into the class to
observe what I do; by talking to them as often as I can about technical com-
munication in general and the course in particular. They, in turn, keep me
informed as to any developments within engineering that will impact what I
do in the course.

                                                                                                 205
Parker

         So, all in all, the effort to introduce technical communication into the
engineering undergraduate curriculum has been a worthwhile one. Further-
more, developing the technical communication course so that it accomplishes
what both the profession and the faculty expect of it, while daunting at times
and certainly time-consuming, has been an exciting challenge over the years.
Now, the effort to integrate communication skills into the more senior level
courses, including the graduation project, exemplifies the kind of synergy that is
possible between communication specialists and engineering faculty (and, inci-
dentally, the students, the end-users).

 the professional context: technical commu-
    nication and the problem-solving model

         We can define engineering as the application of highly specialized, and
technical, knowledge to a practical end that either remedies a problem or repre-
sents the "best" solution to a problem, usually within a set of defined constraints.
We can then argue that engineers are essentially problem solvers. Following the
Mathes and Stevenson model, enunciated in their book Designing Technical Re-
ports, we can also say that most communication in the professional context of
engineering comes about because of an engineering problem, a problem that
someone has determined needs to be addressed (31). Thus, learning a problem-
solving strategy - particularly one that helps to illustrate the connection between
engineering design and the communication that must accompany it - will help
students prepare for their professional lives in a way that a less practical approach
might not achieve. While providing students with clear-cut steps to follow to
accomplish their tasks, such a strategy must nonetheless be flexible enough to
allow students to move freely between the steps, to pause and reflect, to test and
explore, but without the kind of "lock-step" procedure that may stifle creativity
and lead to a less satisfying conclusion (Winkler 119).

         Some years ago, I began to develop such a problem-solving strategy af-
ter I realized that the processes used to describe both the writing practice, on the
one hand, and the scientific and engineering practice, on the other, were remark-
ably similar, so much so that, in using the old scientific formula of "observe, test
and solve," I could effectively talk to my engineering students about how they
could proceed with their writing tasks. Indeed, these basic steps mirror those
described by many other scholars who talked about the link between commu-
nication and problem solving (such as Barton and Barton; Dunkle and Pahnos;
Flower; Maki and Schilling; Moran; Robinson; Souder; Tryzna and Batschelet;

206
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

and Winkler); those who discussed engineering design (such as Krick and Beak-
ley et al); and those who studied engineering problem solving (such as Woods et
al). These steps include: define the problem; brainstorm possible solutions to the
problem; define the criteria to be used to assess any options offered as solutions
to the problem; develop the prototype of a possible solution; test the prototype;
and, finally, create the final product or document.

         Eventually, I developed this connection into a more formal model that
my students abbreviated to "C.A.T.S.," the acronym for Classify, Analyze, Test
and Solve, as illustrated below ("Two Hats"; "Problem Solving"; "Implement-
ing Collaborative Projects"; Handbook). This problem-solving model, stressing
as it does both the methodology and the process, as Plants et al suggest, guides
students as they work so that they are able to proceed fairly quickly and effec-
tively. At the same time, the model is flexible, giving students the option to go
back and forth between the steps or skip steps altogether. All in all, this model
highlights the importance of problem solving to the entire engineering activity
, and it is in this professional context that the model is so useful (Parker "Case
Study Workshop" 40, Halstead & Martin 245).

Procedure/Activity  Engineering Design    Communication Design

                    · Problem Definition

                    · Gathering Data

C - Classify        · Brainstorming

                                          Audience Analysis

                                          Purpose Formulation

A - Analyze         · Developing Ideas/Possible Solutions
                    · Examining Technical Alternatives
                    · Developing Working Solutions

                                                 Communication
                                                 Alternatives (patterns,
                                                 outlines)

figure 1: problem solving in engineering and communica-
tion design

                                                                                              (more)

                                                                          207
Parker               · Evaluating the Working Solution
           T- Test   · Developing Prototypes

                                                  Draft Version

S - Solve            · Implementing Solution
                     · Delivering Final Product

                                                  Final Document

figure 1: continued

  the academic context: a team-based course
             and the collaborative model

         Of course, the problem-solving model also has a place within the aca-
demic context, since it highlights at least one of the skills a prospective engi-
neer must have. So, too, with a team-based course, such as the one offered at
my school, which helps students develop the skills they will need as practicing
engineers in an increasingly team-based workplace (Reimer 94, 99; Sageev and
Romanowski 688; Vest et al 14-15). Indeed, both the Canadian Engineering
Accreditation Board and its American counterpart, the Accreditation Board of
Engineering and Technology, have come to recognize the need for such skills
and have recently argued that collaborative projects should be integrated into
the undergraduate engineering curriculum because such projects develop the
requisite skills, the so-called "soft skills," such as project management, and inter-
personal and teamwork skills.

         In working on a team-based project, for example, students will work
collaboratively through a "series of stages ranging from initial brainstorming
to final report writing"; as they do so, "they become acquainted with such pro-
cesses as participating in meetings, demonstrating leadership, and providing
useful feedback to their colleagues"(Ingram and Parker "Influence of Gender"

208
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

7). Indeed, fairly recent work on the subject of collaboration, including Mary
Lay's and my own, has supported the view that such projects help students
to learn the values and protocols and language of their chosen profession.
They do so by engaging in a process (collaboration) that ultimately leads to
a product (a final report). If the process of communication instills the social
element so critical to the success of the team's interactions, then the product
of that communication represents the intellectual or learning outcome of that
process. In this way, students become more familiar with their profession's dis-
course community, since they are researching an engineering topic and writing
about it from an engineering point of view. Just as importantly, by writing and
working as a team and by generating a product, students also become more
"communicatively competent," more ready to assume their professional status
(Bogdanowicz 1).

         For these reasons, and also partly because I felt that such projects
would encourage intelligent, but generally quieter, students to become more
actively engaged in both the class and their own learning, I had already intro-
duced collaborative projects some years earlier in the technical communica-
tion course offered at our school. Unlike their other engineering courses, the
technical communication course enabled them to engage in a project where
social processes (such as interpersonal and teaming skills) were as important
as the intellectual ones. Along the way, at the same time as they learned more
about an engineering topic, students would also be developing their oral and
written communication skills.

         However, most definitions (such as those of Allen, Blyler, Duin, and
Flynn) tend to focus primarily on the social nature of collaboration - as I
also did in some of my earlier work, defining collaboration as "a series of in-
teractive activities that [are] social in nature" ("Influence of Gender" 9). The
team's interactions help to provide the necessary "social knowledge" (Ingram
and Parker "Gender and Modes" 34), gained as it is by "socially constructed"
tasks ("Influence of Gender" 8). But to focus solely on the team and its indi-
vidual members is to minimize the importance of what they produce, so this
emphasis on its social nature should not ignore other important elements that
will help to define and describe collaboration. While such factors as decision-
making, responsibility and interaction are critical to an understanding of col-
laboration, so, too, is the purpose or the goal of collaborating; namely, to
produce a document that, as a finished product, must "speak" for itself. Thus,
the collaborative model that I will present here will include three essential ele-
ments - the project, the team and the collaborative process - all intertwined as
illustrated below:

                                                                                                 209
Parker

figure 2: the collaborative elements

         The "project" will be a document or report; in other words, a finished
product. It is also a product that someone else has requested and needs. Since,
in technical communication, it is always reader-centered (and it is often a client
who is the reader), this product will be the goal, a necessary outcome, of the col-
laboration. The students who interact so they can reach that goal are clearly the
"team," and the "collaborative process" is the way they will reach that goal. Lead-
ership theory likewise speaks of a variety of needs that relate to these elements.
The project, for example, entails task needs or the jobs to be done; the social and
emotional needs concern the team; and the procedural needs, such as how to
accomplish the tasks, relate to the process of collaboration (Morgan 205-206).
Together, these elements will describe what collaboration is within the academic
context of an engineering classroom.

         Nevertheless, introducing these collaborative projects into the technical
communication course (and gradually changing the course into a team-based
one) was not an easy task, and certainly not as straightforward as I had at first
envisioned. For one thing, a classroom does not, and cannot, replicate the work-
place, where things like group maintenance and team unity, the process, are less
critical than producing what needs to be done, the product (Dannels 152 Freed-
man and Adam 402-418, Freedman and Artemeva 5). As well, the classroom
imposes its own set of restrictions, from the physical space available for team
meetings to the constant presence of an authority figure, namely, the professor.
In the final analysis, perhaps all we can try to do, as Artemeva et al have sug-
gested, is help our students transfer the skills we teach to the workplace ("From
Page to Stage" 313).

210
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

         But the greatest challenge confronting a professor who wants to in-
troduce team projects into the classroom is evaluation. Initially, I believed that
marking team reports would be less work than marking individual ones. In real-
ity, though, what needs to be graded is not just the product itself, but also each
individual team member who helped to create it. In fact, evaluation is perhaps
the single most challenging aspect of collaborative projects, as I discuss at greater
length in an earlier paper ("Evaluating Collaborative Projects"). And group proj-
ects certainly do not reduce your workload; rather, they increase it.

         But a collaborative model and a team-based course do provide flexibil-
ity within the academic context. Unlike the more prescriptive lecture format, a
team-based course demands that students have enough in-class time for group
work. Once the professor has provided both the overview of the tasks at hand,
such as reviewing each other's documents, as well as the framework needed to
complete the work, students then have the chance to be actively involved in
their own learning. Just as the workplace demands that teams be self-contained
units, so, too, does the technical communication class. Students are expected to
work on their own, resolve problems on their own, produce on their own. In
other words, to be effective and to make that transfer of skills to the workplace
possible, student teams should have roughly the same degree of autonomy as a
workplace team would have.

         Having said that, however, it is nonetheless important that the profes-
sor, unlike an employer, be available to intervene as needed. After all, these
are still students who, unlike their professional counterparts, have no salary
to compensate them for a poor group experience. Their grades depend on the
smooth functioning of the team within the context of the classroom. There-
fore, they shouldn't ever feel that they must "sink or swim"; rather, the profes-
sor is there to help them achieve their goals.

 the synergy of the professional and the aca-
 demic contexts in the technical communica-

                            tion class

         The technical communication course that is offered at our school has
certainly evolved over the years, but it has faced many challenges along the way,
not the least of which is helping students to develop the "soft skills" they will
need when they graduate. While I would argue that the problem-solving model
described here provides students with a way of approaching their communica-
tion and design problems whether they are in the classroom or the workplace,
the collaborative model reflects, rather than duplicates, the realities of the work-

                                                                                                 211
Parker

place. It nonetheless provides students with the kinds of skills they will need to
succeed as professional engineers, such as project management, interpersonal
skills and teamwork skills. Together, these models help to create a synergy be-
tween the professional and the academic contexts, a synergy that is as important
as it is unique.

         A representative series of tutorials that I have developed will illustrate
this process. Organized according to the technical elements of the project,
the communication elements and the team elements, the tutorials guide the
students as they produce a document that both reflects the practice of the
workplace and incorporates the attributes expected of the engineering gradu-
ate. For example, once students have either been assigned to a team according
to their majors or have chosen their own team according to their common
interests - and these team assignments occur early in the term, usually within
the first two weeks of classes - we begin by detailing the two models and offer-
ing examples of how they work.

         The early technical communication tutorials then focus on the team ele-
ment and offer strategies to help students plan how they will proceed and how
they will manage the team itself; for example, who will assume which leadership
roles and how will they organize their meetings and their time. A subsequent
tutorial encourages the teams to consider the collaborative process as a whole
and, specifically, to discuss and begin to define such things as what their goals
as a team will be and what standards of behavior they expect from each other.
We build on this initial introduction to the process of collaboration later in the
term, of course, but we try in these early tutorials to get students thinking about
the whole "teaming" process and the kinds of skills they will need to develop if
the group is to be a functional, productive team (and not merely a loose collec-
tion of individuals). Later in the course, other tutorials emphasize the various
steps in the process of writing, revising and producing a document, including
writing and revising strategies, document design, visual aids, and so on.

         Other tutorials, meanwhile, have teams begin the work on their proj-
ects. Because the project must deal with an engineering topic, teams need to
consider what technical issues they will have to consider. If, for example, they
want to study traffic congestion on campus, they will have to decide how they
will approach the issue; they might want to look at it from the perspective of
traffic jams and line-ups or from the perspective of parking shortages. They
will also need to determine how many cars do in fact create a problem and how
you determine that number in the first place. From the discussion of the tech-
nical problem, these tutorials then talk about the need to evaluate any possible
solutions, so teams must also develop criteria (such as cost or size or speed) by
which to judge any options they are considering. As well, they need to define

212
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

these as specifically as they can. About this time, too, another tutorial has the
team looking at defining both audience and the document's purpose.

         Thus, in preparing their document, students must first write a propos-
al suggesting they look at a particular engineering topic; then give periodic up-
dates on their progress, including formal oral reports as well as informal brief-
ings to the class; eventually deliver the completed written report; and, finally,
orally present their findings to the class at the end of term. At the same time,
as the Canadian Council of Engineers suggests, they have gained "a knowledge
of the basic principles of project, human resource and time management" (3)
through the series of tutorials, each of which emphasizes the different phases
of the task while focusing on the technical, communication and team elements
of the project.

                           conclusion

         In 1982, when the Faculty of Engineering at the University of Manitoba
first introduced the technical communication course into its first-year program,
few engineering schools in Canada had taken this bold step, although many
schools in the U.S. had already developed technical communication courses for
engineering students. But there was a distinct difference between the American
precedent and what we were doing. Rather than being a member of another de-
partment altogether, like English, I was a member of the Faculty of Engineering.
As well, rather than being offered as a service course, technical communication
was a compulsory - and an integral - component in each student's program
of study. In contrast, many technical communication courses in Canada, even
now, are offered either by English departments or by writing centers that offer a
variety of communication-related courses to a variety of disciplines.

         Only recently, with the growth of academic programs dedicated to the
study of technical and professional communication, do specialized departments
with specialized instructors teach technical communication to future practitio-
ners. But, again, this trend seems to be more pronounced in the U.S. than in
Canada. One reason is the earlier development of such programs in the U.S.
Conversely, in Canada, there are fewer programs offering only technical and
professional communication, and most of these tend to be offered in the two-
year colleges, although this may be slowly changing. So, all in all, there do seem
to be some very real differences between the U.S. and Canada in terms of devel-
oping these professional writing programs.

         Lilita Rodman, a leading Canadian scholar in the field of technical
communication, addresses some of these differences when she suggests that what

                                                                                                 213
Parker

Canadian scholars focus on and what American scholars tend to emphasize in
their research are not always the same. As Rodman notes, many of our scholars -
scholars like C. Schryer, to name just one - have contributed greatly over the last
while to current topics like the study of genre in technical communication. Be-
sides these kinds of contributions, though, because Canada is a bilingual coun-
try, many of our Canadian scholars have also become increasingly interested in
linguistics, a subject that seemingly has less interest for our U.S. counterparts
(Rodman 13). Canadian scholars, then, do seem to have found their own par-
ticular niche in the field over the years.

         Similarly, my position in the Faculty of Engineering at our school also
seems to represent quite a unique niche - in Canada, at least - and the techni-
cal communication course that I have developed likewise holds a unique place
in the development of technical and professional communication at our school
since it is connected so closely to the undergraduate engineering curriculum.
In essence, because I am so tied to the Faculty of Engineering itself, the course
has come to be viewed as integral to engineering by students and staff alike.
Additionally, over its twenty-year lifespan, this course has evolved into a smaller
version of a technical communication program, one that is linked to both the
Faculty of Engineering and the engineering profession. Indeed, as I have sug-
gested here, it serves as a case study to illustrate the synergy that is possible
between engineering and technical communication.

         Initially offering instruction only in writing (and only to undergradu-
ate students), now the course encompasses collaborative projects, project man-
agement, peer review, oral presentations, document design, textual illustrations
and, recently, research methods. In the future, we hope to be able to offer a
course in technical communication to our engineering graduate students; as an
elective in a student's graduate engineering program, such a course will include
topics related only to the academic side of engineering, such as thesis writing,
preparing academic articles and oral defenses. Currently, we are also looking
at ways to integrate technical communication into the graduation thesis and
design project in a more formal way. These developments reflect trends in both
technical communication and engineering (Ford & Riley 325-326).

         Therefore, this paper has explored the academic and professional con-
texts for the study of technical communication in our school by looking at two
primary topics: first, how a problem-solving model, as a way of approaching
the communication task, adapts what is a common engineering practice to the
teaching of technical communication and, secondly, how introducing collabora-
tive projects into the technical communication classroom can be an effective
way to prepare students for the demands of the workplace and the profession.
Thus, within the professional context of engineering, the technical communica-

214
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

tion course can reflect the changing communication needs of the workplace and
the engineering profession where team-based projects are increasingly the norm.
Just as importantly, within the academic context, the course can reflect many of
the developments in two seemingly disparate disciplines, technical communica-
tion and engineering.

                           works cited

Allen, N., Atkinson, D., Morgan, M., Moore, T., & Snow, C. "What Experienced
   Collaborators Say About Collaborative Writing." Journal of Business and Techni-
   cal Communication 1:2 (1987): 70-90.

Artemeva, N. & Logie, S. "Introducing Engineering Students to Intellectual
   Teamwork: The Teaching and Practice of Peer Feedback in the Professional
   Communication Classroom." Language and Learning Across the Disciplines 6
   (2002): 62-85.

Artemeva, N., Logie, S. & St-Martin, J. "From Page to Stage: How Theories of
   Genre and Situated Learning Help Introduce Engineering Students to Dis-
   cipline-Specific Communication. Technical Communication Quarterly 8:3
   (1999): 301-316.

Barton, B.F. & Barton, M.S. "The Case Method: Bridging the Gap Between En-
   gineering Student and Professional." Courses, Components, and Exercises in
   Technical Communication. Ed. D. W. Stevenson. Urbana: National Council of
   Teachers of English, 1981. 22-33.

Barton, B.F. & Barton, M.S. "Toward Teaching a New Engineering Professional-
   ism: A Joint Instructional Effort in Technical Design and Communication."
   Technical and Professional Communication: Teaching in the Two-Year College,
   Four-Year College, Professional School. Ed. T.M. Sawyer, Professional Communi-
   cation Press, Inc., 1977. 119-128.

Beakley, G.C., Evans, D.L. & Keats, J.B. Engineering: An Introduction to a Creative
   Profession. 5th Edition. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986.

Blyler, N.R. "Theory and Curriculum: Reexamining the Curricular Separation
   of Business and Technical Communication." Journal of Business and Technical
   Communication 7:2 (1993): 218-245.

Bogdanowicz, M. "Communicative Competence: Business Savvy and the Techni-
   cal Writingriter." Technostyle 6:1 (1987): 1-5.

Canadian Council of Professional Engineers (CCPE). Report of the CCPE Accredi-
   tation Review Committee. November, 1996.

Dannels, D. P. "Teaching and Learning Design Presentations in Engineering:
   Contradictions Between Academic and Workplace Activity Systems." Journal of
   Business and Technical Communication 17:2 (2003): 139-169.

                                                                                                 215
Parker

Duin, A.H. "Computer-Supported Collaborative Writing: The Workplace and
   the Writing Classroom. Journal of Business and Technical Communication 5:2
   (1991): 123-150.

Dunkle, S.B. & Pahnos, D.M. "Decision-Making and Problem-Solving: An Ho-
   listic Writing Assignment." Courses, Components, and Exercises in Technical
   Communication. Ed. D.W. Stevenson, Urbana: National Council of Teachers
   of English, 1981. 205-209.

Flower, L. Problem-Solving Strategies for Writing. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Pub-
   lishers, 1981.

Flynn, E., Savage, G., Pentik, M., Brown, C., & Watke, S. "Gender and Modes of
   Collaboration in a Chemical Engineering Design Course." Journal of Business
   and Technical Communication 5:4 (1991): 444-461.

Ford, J.D. & Riley, L.A. "Integrating Communication and Engineering Educa-
   tion: A Look at Curricula, Courses, and Support Systems." Journal of Engineer-
   ing Education 92:4 (2003): 325-328.

Freedman, A. & Adam, C. "Learning to Write Professionally: `Situated' Learning'
   and the Transition from University to Professional Discourse. Journal of Busi-
   ness and Technical Communication 10:4 (1996): 395-427.

Halstead, A. & Martin, L. "Learning Styles: A Tool for Selecting Students for
   Group Work." International Journal of Electrical Engineering Education 39:3
   (2002): 245-252.

Ingram, S. & Parker, A. "Building an Effective Team: The Influence of Leadership
   Style on Modes of Collaboration." Technostyle 19:1 (2004): 82-108.

Ingram, S. & Parker, A. "The Influence of Gender on Collaborative Projects in
   an Engineering Classroom." IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication
   45:1 (2002a): 7-20.

Ingram, S. & Parker, A. "Gender and Modes of Collaboration in an Engineering
   Classroom: A Profile of Two Women on Student Teams." Journal of Business
   and Technical Communication 16:1 (2002b): 33-68.

Krick, E. An Introduction to Engineering: Methods, Concepts, and Issues. New York:
   John Wiley, 1976.

Lay, M. "The Androgynous Collaborator: The Impact of Gender Studies on Col-
   laboration." New Visions of Collaborative Writing. Ed. J. Forman, Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers, 1992. 82-104.

Maki, P. & Schilling, C. Writing in Organizations: Purposes, Strategies, and Pro-
   cesses. McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1987.

Mathes, J.C., Stevenson, D.W., & Klaver, P. "Technical Writing: The Engineering
   Educator's Responsibility." Engineering Education 69:4 (1979): 331-334.

Mathes, J.C. & Stevenson, D.W. Designing Technical reports: Writing for Audiences
   in Organizations. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Educational Publishing, 1976.

216
                                                  Introducing a Technical Writing Communication Course

McIlwee, J.S. & Robinson, J.G. Women in Engineering: Gender, Power and Work-
   place Culture. Albany: SUNY Press, 1992.

Moran, M.G. "A Problem-Solving Heuristic." Technical Communication 29:3
   (1982): 38.

Morgan, M. "Women as Emergent Leaders in Student Collaborative Writing
   Groups." Journal of Advanced Composition 14:1 (1994): 203-219.

Parker, A. (with contributions from C. Strong & S. Ingram). Handbook for Techni-
   cal Communication. Boston, MA: Pearson Custom Publishing, 2004.

Parker, A. "Evaluating Collaborative Projects and Evaluation Tools: Putting the
   Pieces of the Collaborative Puzzle Together." Technostyle 12:1(1995): 99-115.

Parker, A. "Implementing Collaborative Projects into the Technical Writing Class-
   room." Technostyle 10:2 (1992): 30-48.

Parker, A. "Problem Solving Applied to Teaching Technical Writing." The Techni-
   cal Writing Teacher 17:2 (1990): 95-103.

Parker, A. "A Case Study Workshop and a Problem-Solving Approach to Technical
   Communication." Technostyle 8:1/2 (1989): 38-51.

Parker, A. "`Two Hats, One Head': The Problem-Solving Approach to Technical
   Writing." Technostyle 1 (1984): 7-16.

Plants, H.L., Dean, R.K., Sears, J.T., & Venable, W.S. "A Taxonomy of Prob-
   lem-Solving Activities and Its Implications for Teaching." The Teaching of
   Elementary Problem Solving in Engineering and Related Fields. Ed. J.L. Lub-
   kin, Washington, D.C.: ASEE Monograph, 1980. 21-34.

Reimer, M.J. "English and Communication Skills for the Global Engineer." Glob-
   al Journal of Engineering Education 6:1 (2002): 91-100.

Robinson, P.A. Fundamentals of Technical Writing. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
   1985.

Robinson, P.A. "Technical Writing Workshops: An Alternative to Lectures." Engi-
   neering Education 73:4 (1983): 314-315.

Rodman, Lilita. "From Service Course to Discipline: The Evolution of Technical
   Communication (1960-2002)." Bulletin, Canadian Association of Teachers of
   Technical Writing (Spring 2003):13-14.

Sageev, P. & Romanowski, C.J. "A Message from Recent Engineering Graduates
   in the Workplace: Results of a Survey on Technical Communication Skills."
   Journal of Engineering Education 91:4 (2001): 685-693.

Schryer, C.F. "Genre and Power: A Chronotopic Analysis." The Rhetoric and Ideol-
   ogy of Genre. Ed. R. Coe, , Lingard, L. & Teslenko, T. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton
   Press, 2002. 73-102.

Souder, W. E. & Ziegler, R.W. "A Review of Creativity and Problem Solving
   Techniques." Managing Professionals in Innovative Organizations: A Collection of
   Readings. Ed. R. Katz, Harper Business, 1980. 267-279.

                                                                                                 217
Parker

Trzyna, T. & Batschelet, M.W. Writing for the Technical Professions. Belmont, Cali-
   fornia: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1987.

Vest, D., Long, M., Thomas, L. & Palmquist, M.E. "Relating Communication
   Training to Workplace Requirements: The Perspective of New Engineers. IEEE
   Transactions on Professional Communication 38:1 (1995): 11-17.

Winkler, V.M. "The Role of Models in Technical and Scientific Writing." New
   Essays in Technical and Scientific Communication: Research, Theory, Practice. Ed.
   P.V. Anderson, Brockmann, R.J. & Miller, C.R, Farmingdale, N.Y.: Baywood
   Publishing, Inc., 1983. 111-122.

Woods, D.R. "Problem Solving and Chemical Engineering, 1981." Problem Solv-
   ing 79. Ed. J.T. Sears, Woods, D.R. & Noble, R.D., New York: American
   Institute of Chemical Engineers, 1983. 11-27.

Woods, D.R., Wright, J.D., Hoffman, T.W., Swartman, R.K. & Doig, I.D.
   "Teaching Problem Solving Skills." Engineering Education 66:3 (1975): 238-
   243.

218
12 English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

   Brian D. Ballentine

It is impossible, without giving offense to college authorities, to express one's self ad-
equately on the English production of the engineering students...Most of them can be
described only by the word "wretched." 1

                                                                --English for Engineers

         While some engineering schools have tried to manage their own writing
programs, this chapter concerns itself with a professional and technical writing
course created for junior-level engineering students at Case Western Reserve
University, but housed, directed, and staffed from the English department. Al-
though the course is a core requirement for all Case engineering majors, includ-
ing aeronautical, biomedical, chemical, civil, computer, electrical, mechanical
and software, it is administered from outside the school of engineering, auto-
matically complicating staffing and curriculum.

         These complications do not present insurmountable obstacles, how-
ever. To contextualize how we have established a workable system at Case
Western, I begin with a discussion of the relationship between English depart-
ments and engineering schools in general. I then turn to the specifics of Case
University's professional and technical writing course (English 398N). As I
explain in more detail, one must be careful to present the course to students
as a core engineering skill, one that has direct application to the engineering
workplace. Given that audience awareness is key to success in technical writ-
ing, I address an effective and successful assignment on audience.2 Finally,
because our course is so large (over 350 students distributed into 18 sections
each year!), I discuss the structure and goals of our graduate pedagogy seminar
for PTW teachers, English 506. I end by discussing how this symbiosis of
graduate and undergraduate courses functions without unnecessary compli-
cation, integrating well with the English department's rhetoric program yet
distinguished from the required graduate composition pedagogy course.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.12  219
Ballentine

          engineering schools and english
                          departments

         As the professional field of engineering continues to grow, engineer-
ing schools frequently reassess core requirements and course curricula for their
majors. Under these conditions, adding or even retaining courses focusing on
"English production" becomes increasingly difficult. Engineering programs feel
pressure from industry as well as competing institutions to produce graduates
trained in the latest technology and engineering trends.3 While an English de-
partment might consider an engineering school a unified monolith, the school's
needs, wants, and ideas regarding a professional and technical writing program
are actually fragmented. This fact should not be interpreted entirely as a fault,
considering how varied fields of engineering attach varying degrees of impor-
tance to different types of communications.

         As a result, engineering schools raise a number of concerns with English
programs, the first of which is constructing a curriculum that can best meet the
needs of a diverse group of engineering majors. In the past, English departments
have attempted to teach similar courses by either using literature as a model for
writing or teaching conventional rhetoric. Such approaches have been received
unfavorably by engineering faculty or students. If anything, as Robert Connors'
synoptic historicization of technical writing instruction made clear, these ap-
proaches helped create a "cultural split between English and engineering teach-
ers."4 That is, engineering students resist curriculum designed around English
literature or technical writing scenarios where engineering is not the primary
focus.

         Although Connors' historical essay places the negative reception of
technical writing in the past tense, engineering professors and students alike
still refer to technical writing classes "disparagingly."5 These remarks and the
negative attitude towards such courses partly result from a curriculum that
does not embrace the needs of a working and researching engineer. If the
course is to succeed, the curriculum must be modeled around situations in
business and industry where engineers will rely on communication skills to
advance their work and careers. However, that criterion does not mean that
English departments must compromise their own agendas for writing and
communication. Case University's professional and technical writing course
(English 398N) requires students and instructors to engage with both rhetori-
cal elements of engineering discourse and the technical and scientific elements
of an engineering project. As I will demonstrate, curricular flexibility and ad-
ditional efforts on the part of the instructor to understand students' research

220
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

and engineering interests are essential to integrating engineering topics and
interests with professional and technical writing.

  professional and technical writing at case:
  promoting an "open" curriculum in english

                                398n

         Case Western Reserve University, a private research university located
in Cleveland, Ohio, was formed in 1967 by the federation of Case Institute of
Technology (founded in 1880 by philanthropist Leonard Case Jr.) and Western
Reserve University (founded in 1826 in the area that was once the Connecticut
Western Reserve). Ohio's largest independent research university, Case is most
highly regarded for its medical school, ranked by US News at fifteen and twenty,
respectively, in primary care and research, and for its engineering school, par-
ticularly the biomedical department, which consistently ranks in the top five
among the nation's undergraduate biomedical engineering programs. For these
reasons, Case receives the twelfth largest amount of federal research funding
among private universities and spends nearly a million dollars a day on research.

         Given the campus culture and environment, the Case English De-
partment wisely made hands-on research the central concern when designing
English 398N: Professional and Technical Communication for Engineers. This
advanced writing course is structured around students identifying, proposing,
researching, and presenting an engineering feasibility study spanning the entire
semester. Research on the subject matter for the project needs to begin imme-
diately. Students work in groups of their choice, preferably of three or four, and
begin by completing a project outline form. The form helps break down the
problem, the purpose and the audience for their proposed projects. Student
conferences are recommended to assist groups in adjusting the proper scope of
the project as well as addressing issues of scheduling and time management.

         Flexibility and choice are central to English 398N. As mentioned, the
growth of core requirements for engineering majors has impinged on students'
ability to explore other interests. That is why our department invites students
to use this PTW course as a chance to investigate a facet of engineering that is
either not offered by their school or offered as an elective for which they may not
have time. Flexibility is also encouraged regarding the makeup of the student
groups. While some in the school of engineering may argue for corralling stu-
dents into groups comprised of like majors, personal industry experience reveals
that practicing engineers spend a large portion of their time collaborating with

                                                                                                 221
Ballentine

engineers outside of their own disciplines.6 Indeed, for new products and solu-
tions to function they often must integrate into other new or existing systems
which automatically require cooperation from other engineers.

         Pedagogically, students should be asked to identify and select their
own research. Granted, instructors do guide and provide counsel for the proj-
ects. Nevertheless, instructors should not spoon-feed students prefabricated or
"closed" case studies for these long-term projects.7 Research by such scholars
as Barbara Walvoord and Virginia Anderson suggests that allowing students to
select their own areas of research can also significantly increase a student's in-
trinsic involvement in a course.8 Martin Covington and Sonja Wiedenhaupt
define intrinsic motivation as the "pursuit of intellectual inquiries which carry
no immediate obligation to perform, nor any necessity for tangible payoffs
except for the sake of satisfying one's curiosity or for the productive exercise of
the mind."9

         Of course, instructors must continue to attach grades and performance
reviews (extrinsic motivators) to such assignments. However, giving students an
opportunity to pursue areas of interest for which they might not otherwise have
time can create a dynamic environment for the course and for class projects. Ken
Bain's article in the Chronicle of Higher Education, "What Makes Great Teachers
Great?" identifies the creation of a "natural critical learning environment" as the
foundation for a successful course. Bain explains:

   "Natural" because what matters most is for students to tackle questions and
   tasks that they naturally find of interest, make decisions, defend their choices,
   sometimes come up short, receive feedback on their efforts, and try again.
   "Critical" because by thinking critically, students learn to reason from evi-
   dence and to examine the quality of their reasoning, to make improvements
   while thinking, and to ask probing and insightful questions.10

         The challenge for English 398N instructors is that engineers view dif-
ferent project tasks as intrinsically or naturally more interesting than others.
As Dorothy Winsor documents in her landmark ethnography, Writing like an
Engineer: A Rhetorical Education, young engineers tend to devalue documenta-
tion, reporting, and presenting, the very communication tasks which technical
writing instructors believe are essential to invention, knowledge production, and
productive engineering. Instead, the invention and creation of material artifacts--
glorified by engineering since the days of Vitruvius--captures our students' at-
tention. Even so, successful invention, discovery, and problem solving require
communication skills in the engineering workplace, to say nothing of the public
realm. Vitruvius, after all, never would have become the father of Western engi-

222
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

neering if he could not write a courtly cover letter to Augustus, the father of all
clients. When students grasp this political and rhetorical lesson, English 398N
becomes central to their education and future careers.

         A well-designed PTW curriculum, therefore, not only will encourage
students to respect all components of an engineering project but demonstrate
to students that persuasive communications are not external and extraneous to
the engineering process, but rather internal and inherent to their field. To ac-
complish this crucial goal, instructors must use course assignments to orient
students towards their prospective readers. Accordingly, the next section details
all of the assignments in the course's semester-long sequence: such print texts as
the project topic form, client letter, proposal, progress report, feasibility study, and
feasibility study presentation and such electronic texts as a web site and a web site
presentation.

  course assignment sequence: bringing audi-
            ence and engineering together

         By creating a series of persuasive documents throughout the semester,
English 398N students learn to develop solutions to the unique challenges and
circumstances they encounter as their research progresses. The student research
and the semester-long project strive to answer one question: Is this engineering
project feasible? At the beginning of the semester, the answer to this question is
indeterminate. By the end of the assignment sequence, students must present
their results, their discoveries, their recommendations, or in other words their
answer, to the rest of the class. Each student group must convince the class that
their solution and recommendation on how to respond to a particular engineer-
ing problem are not only viable but optimal.

         The groups' first assignment requires them to begin completing a proj-
ect topic form. The form contains five short categories designed to help students
identify: 1) the engineering problem, 2) the purpose of the research, 3) the spe-
cific audience, 4) the desired change within that audience, 5) available resources
for their proposed projects. As students begin to detail their problem, they must
discuss how their engineering studies relate to their proposed project. This cor-
nerstone assignment ensures students witness the centrality of engineering to
writing and of writing to engineering. For the best results, instructors should
schedule student conferences in order to assist groups in adjusting the proper
scope of the project as well as addressing issues of scheduling and time manage-
ment. While the project topic form asks students to begin analyzing their audi-
ence, the actual engineering project retains prominence.

                                                                                                 223
Ballentine

         However, as student groups begin completing their project topic forms,
instructors need to reinforce the importance of not just investigating a particular
engineering problem but also identifying the audience receiving the communi-
cations. Focusing on both audience and engineering addresses what I consider a
critical concern: Too many textbooks tend to conceive of audience and audience
interaction as external to the engineering enterprise. Thus, audience in all its
specificity is never adequately treated, or is treated only impressionistically. To
compensate for this deficiency, student groups refer to their primary audience as
the "client," a common practice in business and engineering.

         Since the group projects run the duration of the semester, students are
required to nurture relationships with their determined client from the start.
Appropriately, before actually drafting their research proposals, student groups
must introduce themselves to their clients. The group collaborates on a letter
in which the students introduce themselves, give an overview of the identified
problem, let the client know about the coming proposal, and begin to establish
credibility. Although students are given the option of researching and respond-
ing to a formal request for proposal or RFP, the student projects are largely
unsolicited proposals. In this course, the client introduction letter simulates the
real-world scenario of drafting an unsolicited proposal. Rife with uncertainty,
unsolicited proposals are often much harder to construct than proposals tailored
to a specific RFP.

         The project topic form, the client letter, and the actual proposal are the first
three assignments in the course's interlocking assignment sequence. At the be-
ginning of the course, the instructor must explain each assignment's individual
purpose and how the assignments dovetail into each other. The client letter, for
example, prepares the audience for the reception of the proposal, while the goal
of the proposal itself is to gain the client's permission to proceed with the pro-
posed engineering feasibility study. While this sequence does not mirror industry
one-hundred percent of the time, it is common for companies to propose studies
that report on the feasibility of an engineering project before investing more of
their resources.

         Generally, the proposal begins with background information and com-
ponents of the current situation the student group proposes to investigate. The
groups elucidate the engineering problem and state their objectives surrounding
that problem. The degrees to which all of the components of a standard pro-
posal, such as criteria, method, solution, schedule, cost, conclusions, and rec-
ommendations, come into play vary from project to project. Instructors should
note that the use of forms, like a standard proposal which may seem "natural" as
a basis for instruction in the classroom, are only effective if they have a relevant
engineering purpose and situation attached to them.11 That is, leading instruc-

224
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

tion with forms without exigency will not persuade students of the importance
of communications in engineering.

         Charles Bazerman states the issue succinctly, if sternly: "As teachers, if
we provide our students with only the formal trappings of the genres they need
to work in, we offer them nothing more than unreflecting slavery to current
practice and no means to ride the change that inevitably will come in the forty to
fifty years they will practice their professions."12 To overcome these "trappings,"
researched engineering projects must teach students how to apply genres to an
authentic engineering research project. Again, student conferences are recom-
mended so instructors may manage the projects as they grow. For the purposes
of this class and this structure, all proposals end with the request that the audi-
ence authorize the group to move forward with a feasibility report. That is, with
successful proposals the groups have effectively persuaded their audiences that
the identified issue is serious enough or potentially beneficial enough to justify
the cost of doing the research for the feasibility study.

         After students receive permission to move on to the feasibility report the
interlocking assignment sequence contains additional work for the students.13
Just as in industry, clients want updates on the engineers' work. Student groups
are responsible for a formal progress report written for their defined audience.
Clients who have invested resources in a project desire ready access to reporting.
To that end, student groups are asked to develop a web site that supports their
studies. In terms of communicative goals, the site is an efficient means of pro-
viding up to date progress information. In industry, many engineering firms use
web sites to manage tasks and schedules for their projects. Students prepare and
deliver short presentations on the design of their web sites in order to prepare for
their upcoming final presentations.

         The last stage of the assignment sequence is for each group to deliver a
formal presentation to the rest of the class reporting on the results found in their
feasibility report. Each group must make a recommendation and defend their
findings in a question and answer session. Each of these stages presents instruc-
tors with the opportunity to teach systematically all of the standard forms for a
professional and technical writing course including proposals, progress reports,
feasibility studies, and formal presentations. The curriculum for this course
avoids promoting the mere "trappings" mentioned by Bazerman by allowing
student groups to begin and end with an engineering project containing goals
and objectives that are their own.

         The assignment sequence for professional and technical writing pro-
vides evidence for the "open" versus "closed" approach to the course. In this
open model, students identify and investigate a real engineering project and
audience. In a closed model with a fabricated audience, however, "if students

                                                                                                 225
Ballentine

want to know more about these fictional readers' motives, values, or attitudes,
they find that these important issues are not available. Or, worse yet, they
discover that the teacher is making up answers to these important audience-
analysis issues off the cuff."14 Instead of the instructor fabricating audience
characteristics the students are charged with researching their real audience
just as they would in a professional engineering situation. The open model
thus reduces the chance of "pseudotransactional" writing or "writing that is
patently designed by a student to meet teacher expectations rather than per-
form the `real' function the teacher has suggested."15 In the professional and
technical writing course the "real function" is to investigate the feasibility of
an engineering project.

sample student project: a feasibility study on
                                linux

         The above section provided an outline of English 398N's major assign-
ment structure; but to better demonstrate the curriculum for the professional
and technical writing course, I have included a sample project and traced its
steps. This example is an original student project and is detailed here with per-
mission of the student group.

                                   The Linux Project

         In this project, a work group begins with premise of proposing a study
to overhaul the university's server platforms because as young software and com-
puter engineers they are dissatisfied with Windows NT. According to these stu-
dents, other equally robust Linux-based applications could meet the university's
needs. Ambitiously, the group wants to explore the possibility of developing
their own brand of Linux for the campus. They cite security issues and potential
cost benefits as primary arguments for their case and indicate their audience
would be the chief information officer and his or her staff. The project form is
brief but engages student groups with their engineering ideas.

                                  Project Topic Form

The engineering "problem" you intend to investigate:
   The feasibility of replacing the Windows NT servers that support the univer-
   sity's network infrastructure with a student developed system based on the
   Linux operating system.

226
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

Purpose of and need for this project:
   Conservative estimates in regards to money lost due to security issues
   with Windows software are calculated to be in hundreds of millions of
   dollars. Instead of relying on and waiting for Microsoft to develop and
   release patches for their software the university could actively develop its
   own repairs when problems arise. Code for Linux is distributed under the
   terms of a General Public License (GPL) that states the code is free as long
   as any improvements or alterations that are made to the code are not hid-
   den from others. Linux is part of a unique on-line phenomenon known as
   "open source" development where programmers from around the world
   share their work to improve applications such as Linux. Microsoft, on the
   other hand, intentionally obfuscates its code from users and developers.

Description of target audience(s):
   University CIO, department of computer science and engineering, engineer-
   ing students, and non-engineering students.

Desired changes in target audience(s):
   That the audience will recognize the opportunities to not only save money
   and reduce network "down time" but also provide students with a unique
   learning opportunity. The audience will attain a clear understanding of the
   technical and economic feasibility of this plan.

Available resources to support this project (internet, library, personal, etc.):
   Library, university network administrators, software engineering professors,
   Linux development web sites.

                                 Student Conferences

         The course instructor and the student group meet to confer on their
project. During the meeting, the group specifies that they want to replace the
server platform with Linux not only to make it more secure but to integrate it
into the global open source software movement. The group will need to define
this movement to all members of their audience and explain why it would ben-
efit the school to become a part of it. The instructor suggests that the option
of developing their own brand of Linux could be difficult to maintain long
term. The team therefore decides to explore existing Linux packages, such as Red
Hat and SuSE, as an option. They also expand their identified audience beyond
members of the IT department to include high-level administrators who would
also be involved in the decision-making process.

                                                                                                 227
Ballentine

                                      Client Letter

         The letter introduces group members as computer and software en-
gineering students, who have recognized a potential security problem in the
current system. The group believes that a Linux implementation may save the
school money as well as bring the engineering school recognition for the innova-
tive project. They inform their audience members about the forthcoming pro-
posal, when to expect it, and that they hope to gain authorization to complete a
feasibility report.

                                         Proposal

         The group proposal discusses the background information on the uni-
versity's use of NT and some of the known security issues surrounding that tech-
nology. Its objectives include eliminating security breaches, cutting down on
maintenance and down-time, and increasing network compatibility. For their
proposed feasibility study to succeed, the students will have to examine statistics
on Linux security, investigate other institutions or businesses that have imple-
mented it, determine initial costs, long-term maintenance costs, training needs,
and time to implement to name a few. The work done towards developing the
proposal helps groups identify their criteria and objectives for success with the
final projects. In short, the group begins to get a clear sense of what they will
have to uncover for their study to succeed.

                                    Progress Report

         After the students turn in their proposal and the instructor autho-
rizes them to proceed with their feasibility report, communication with the
client becomes even more critical. The progress report is assigned in an effort
to demonstrate that business and engineering groups are held accountable for
their work. In this particular case, the audience for the report is understood
to be the university CIO but students must bear in mind that anyone on staff
could potentially be a reader. Again, since student groups are preparing engi-
neering planning documents for each assignment they should be discovering
all of these potential audience members. Instructors warn that a manager
can ask for a "progress report" at any time and while people are generally
pleased to hear about past success they are more interested in whether or
not the group will meet upcoming deadlines and if the project will finish on
schedule.

228
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

                                         Website

         A great deal of communication occurs online, and many engineering
projects are managed via the internet or corporate intranets. While the web
portion of the course is in place for this reason, it also requires students to con-
ceptualize how to organize and structure their data in a digital environment.
The group members will need to ask themselves questions unique to a digital
environment such as, "What is the first thing the audience for this project will
want to see if they come to the site for a quick update?", "Where is all of the
empirical data going to be placed?", "How does the audience contact the group
and who is in charge of what parts?" At this stage, it may benefit the student
groups to dissect other web sites, particularly those related to similar engineering
issues. Students will want to discuss what makes some sites succeed and others
fail in terms of navigation, organization, and information availability. Engineers
are often managing large data-sets and this assignment helps introduce that task.

                                 Website Presentation

         The web assignment is an excellent opportunity to discuss the power of
communication as it relates to the specific group projects as well as to give stu-
dent groups the opportunity to keep abreast of their peers' research. Instructors
may find it advantageous to ask the groups to give informal presentations on
their web sites so they may explain their communication and hierarchy decisions
to the rest of the class. This is an effective way to generate dialogue between the
student groups. This presentation exercise introduces the student groups to pre-
senting as a team, which many of them have not had to do. In the engineering
workplace, teams often present as a group and not individually. Also, instructors
should note that with the web presentation coming first, the final presentations
on the feasibility study recommendations generally excel due to the additional
practice.

                                    Feasibility Study

         Finally, the feasibility report is due. In the Linux case, instructors can
expect to see a detailed cost breakdown in terms of servers, initial installation
fees, software fees, maintenance, additional personnel, training, and total cost
of ownership models. There also should be a convincing amount of data on
security benefits realized by other institutions or corporations, unbiased testing
centers and user testimony. There should be a concise timeline for installation

                                                                                                 229
Ballentine

and implementation. Naturally, there will be a recommendation on whether or
not to develop a brand of Linux, buy and implement an existing Linux package,
or leave the NT system unchanged. Instructors advise the students that in busi-
ness feasibility studies are researched and written by engineers so companies do
not make costly investment mistakes. That is, despite all of their hard work and
fondness for Linux, student groups may conclude that the best solution is to stay
with the present system.

                            Feasibility Study Presentation

         All of the group's findings are reported to the class in the final presenta-
tion. Instructors may wish to create a setting that is more formal than casual and
place a good deal of importance on the groups persuading their peers that their
data and their recommendations are sound. Peer groups have the opportunity to
challenge the presenting groups and their recommendations in a question and
answer session.

 integration within the rhetoric concentra-
   tion and the training of ptw instructors

         Despite its careful calibration, the curriculum design for English
398N would have proven ineffective, if the Case English department had not
implemented an effective instructor training and credentialing system. The
question we faced is how can we train fledgling rhetoric scholars, well-versed
in Aristotelian concepts and the uses of logos, ethos, and pathos, to teach engi-
neering students communication skills? The problem is complicated by con-
sidering who is most likely to teach such a professional and technical writing
course. With even smaller-sized engineering programs placing heavy teaching
demands on English departments, that demand is often met by graduate stu-
dents (at Case the number of students enrolled in engineering necessitate offer-
ing eighteen sections of the course a year with approximately twenty students
per section). An advanced professional and technical writing course presents
young instructors, most of whom have only limited experience teaching com-
position courses, with many new challenges, including a diverse engineering
audience as well as advanced software and technology.

         According to Connors, as technical writing "grew up" in the second
half of the twentieth century, the "age-old battle raged on between those who
wished to teach technical students to write and those who wished to teach them
to read and appreciate great literature."16 Despite the growth and acceptance

230
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

of professional and technical writing programs coexisting with English depart-
ments, a divide can be felt between those who teach writing and those who teach
literature. This national trend is evinced primarily by the low number of senior
faculty involved with or interested in teaching professional and technical writing
in traditional English departments. For scholars pursuing careers in professional
and technical writing, the struggle for acceptance and legitimacy within an Eng-
lish department remains challenging. But, as members of PTW programs are
discovering, there are opportunities to effectively integrate with and contribute
to English departments without being dismissed as "second rate."17

         For example, Case's graduate technical writing pedagogy seminar is not
a freestanding anomaly without ties to our department's other research foci.
In fact, for a PTW pedagogy seminar and a PTW curriculum to secure recep-
tion as legitimate scholarly activities worthy of any English department, both
must be understood in terms of that department's larger offerings. To illustrate,
the Case English department offers a concentration in "Writing History and
Theory," referred to as the WHiT program. This program resembles other rheto-
ric programs which have been gaining momentum in academia; but because it
also examines the practice if writing as historically, culturally, and technologically
situated, it can more easily accommodate a professional and technical writing
pedagogy course.

         PhD students in the WHiT program study rhetorical theory and his-
tory, the history of writing and publishing practices, authorship, linguistics and
semiotics, and digital communication theory. The program examines relation-
ships between textual elements such as word-image interface, lexical and gram-
matical choices, document design, and global and rhetorical issues, such as text
production and circulation, copyright, audience, ethics, and rhetorical effect.18
Equally important, especially for PTW purposes, the program allows graduate
students to develop an in-depth understanding of the way that writing functions
not only in cultures and society but in individual disciplines, organizations, and
institutions.

         Graduate students interested in WHiT, must enroll in a course on rhe-
torical theory, which serves as an overview and a backbone for the program.
Beyond this core requirement, the program itself is comprised of three general
areas designed to provide students with the necessary theoretical and historical
foundation on the study of writing: history of writing, digital writing, and lin-
guistics and semiotics. As I will demonstrate, the WHiT program is an excellent
opportunity not only to prepare graduate students for the specialized classroom
of professional and technical writing but also to promote the examination of
engineering as a rhetorical practice and analyze the unique discourse of the en-
gineering discipline.

                                                                                                 231
Ballentine

         Most English departments, however, offer "standard" pedagogy courses,
designed to prepare graduate students to teach freshman composition. This prac-
tice can raise concerns from faculty invested strictly in literature or composition
studies about the need for a second, separate seminar for professional and techni-
cal writing. Indeed, whether in the WHiT program or the literature-based con-
centration, all graduate students at Case are required to enroll in the pedagogy
course titled "Rhetoric and the Teaching of Writing," designed to ready graduate
students for the composition classroom. Most standard pedagogy classes focus
on graduate students gaining an understanding of major themes in composition
theory in order to develop a set of coherent, historicized pedagogical practices.
Typically, the primary goals will include developing an understanding of the
major trends in composition scholarship and pedagogy, and to explore a variety
of pedagogical strategies for writing classes, including assignment sequencing,
assessment techniques, and student conferencing.

         At Case, this course challenges graduate students to develop a research
project proposal of their own that demonstrates engagement with current issues
in composition and rhetoric as well as constructing a syllabus and assignment
sequence to be used in a future writing course. Unquestionably, these goals are
so broad that an English department may raise legitimate concerns regarding
redundant curriculum in a second pedagogy course, especially when graduate
students are calling for a larger selection of course offerings. Consequently, a
professional and technical writing pedagogy course should be distinctive and
separate from standard pedagogy offerings as well as advance the WHiT agenda.

         English 506, Teaching Technical and Professional Communication, sets
itself up first as a WHiT seminar with a strong scholarly agenda and second as a
practical guide to instructing professional and technical writing. This graduate
course strives to align itself with the general mission of the WHiT program, pro-
moting topics that include studies in rhetoric of science and technology; history
of professional and technical writing; critical approaches to technology; ethics
and law (e.g. copyright and intellectual property); collaboration and manage-
ment of writing projects; document design theory (print and electronic); theo-
ries on digital reading and writing; engineering and science concentrations; and,
finally, practical matters of curriculum design, assignments, writing evaluation
and course management.

         In addition, a portion of each seminar is set aside to address practical
pedagogical issues. Among the requirements for the course, graduate students
must observe at least two professional and technical writing classes. Afterwards,
students reflect on those observations in the seminar and ask questions of the in-
structor for clarification on class proceedings. Graduate students are responsible

232
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

for reviewing a portfolio of engineering writing and evaluating the work with
their peers from the pedagogy course.

         General pedagogy courses such as Case's challenge graduate students
with scholarly activities such as researching and proposing new approaches to
composition theory or historicizing the growth of composition and rhetoric
courses. Similarly, the professional and technical writing pedagogy course must
demonstrate a unique scholarly agenda. The course taps into the rich field of
the rhetoric of science by expanding the term more broadly to the rhetoric of
science, technology, and engineering. In his introduction to Landmark Essays on
the Rhetoric of Science, Randy Allen Harris defines the rhetoric of science as "the
study of how scientists persuade and dissuade each other and the rest of us about
nature, - the study of how scientists argue in the making of knowledge."19

         As an established field, therefore, the rhetoric of science provides a start-
ing point for analyzing and discussing technical writing. Graduate students will
be given the opportunity to explore the similarities and differences between sci-
entific and engineering rhetoric and discourse. Discoveries and inventions, Har-
ris maintains, need to be analyzed and argued not only among the scientific (and
engineering) community but amongst the "rest of us" too.

         Besides such notables as Harris describes, numerous other works aug-
ment the exploration and development of the curriculum for Case's PTW peda-
gogy course. Prominent figures include Alan Gross, Jeanne Fahnestock, Dilip
Gaonkar, Carolyn Miller, and many others whose research provide avenues into
the study of what degree persuasion plays a part in science. Charles Bazerman's
The Languages of Edison's Light is an excellent means of examining the role rheto-
ric plays in engineering and invention. Bazerman artfully excerpts pages from
Thomas Edison's journals, patent applications, and personal letters which all "re-
veal the rhetorical activity of the discourse" surrounding Edison's discoveries.20

         Such texts are necessary. Our graduate students, who have the opportu-
nity to teach engineers, report struggling with convincing the class of the value
of this "rhetorical activity." English composition instructors as well as the stu-
dents in their classrooms are generally more comfortable with the notion that a
"right" answer is the answer which is best argued. The transition to a professional
and technical writing classroom comprised of engineering students can chal-
lenge this belief. Engineers are more likely to search for a concrete and proven
"right" answer or the equivalent of some "transcendent absolute truth" in the
spirit of Plato.21 In short, the "brute facts" are valued.22 In contrast, Edison's
patent applications took advantage of the patent review system in that Edison
argued "based on the novelty of a conception rather than on its proven viability,
usefulness, or market value."23

                                                                                                 233
Ballentine

         Regardless of these industry realities, engineering students often have
less patience for rhetorical practices that debate what is possible, probable, or
even most likely to be true. Consequently, while the study of rhetoric forms an
effective foundation for preparing graduate students to teach the course, overtly
promoting rhetoric to a classroom of engineering students can meet with a cold
reception. Graduate students learn that their studies of rhetorical theory, espe-
cially as it relates to scientific activity, provides valuable insight to a new com-
munity of engineering students but that explicit rhetorical terminology cannot
serve as the structure for the course. Indeed, most of their rhetorical strategies
focus on establishing ethos for themselves as authoritative instructors. My past
experience as a senior software engineer at Marconi Medical Systems, a medical
imaging company and a subsidiary of Philips Electronics, probably carries more
weight with my students than my PhD in English.

         PTW instructors can overcome student resistance and skepticism, how-
ever, by keeping their classes "user-friendly." English 398N's combination of
the project topic form and assignment sequence is a tested method for main-
taining a "project-centered" focus, one which increases intrinsic motivation for
the course. Indeed, it is the "open" curriculum of the course that assists PhD
students specializing in rhetoric with succeeding in their teaching.

         Despite significant progress over the last several decades, arguments
are still being made that "the technical communication course should be taken
out of the hands of English teachers."24 Given the persistence of this attitude,
instructors must be equipped to engage with engineering and their engineer-
ing students' projects. Consequently, pedagogy courses that specifically address
the needs of individuals preparing to teach professional and technical writing
courses are essential to graduate students.

         Such courses are also a welcome addition to rhetoric programs such as
WHiT so that the programs may succeed in their missions to prepare gradu-
ate students for the academic job market, which increasingly favors candidates
possessing the ability to teach in different areas including composition, linguis-
tics, and technical writing. Case University's two-part strategy of redesigning the
professional and technical writing course's curriculum (foreground engineering
situations, research, and interests in PTW courses and initiate a new pedagogy
course for English graduate students) is the best method for enhancing and sus-
taining the complex relationship between English departments and schools of
engineering.

         This improved collaboration would benefit not only the academy but
the nation. As Hurricane Katrina graphically showed, our country's infrastruc-
ture has become disgracefully derelict. More than ever, we need civic-minded
engineers who can make their case to government and industry, voters and con-

234
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

sumers. Effective professional and technical writing instruction, therefore, has
become a necessity, not a luxury. As Samuel C. Florman observed a decade ago:

   By creating the engineers of the future, educators can transform the world in
   meaningful ways. Yet engineering education cannot flourish in the absence of
   popular regard and government support. We have something like a Catch-22
   here. Appropriate education is needed to further a renaissance in engineering,
   but a renaissance in engineering is needed to inspire steps toward appropriate
   education. Someone must break this paralyzing cycle.25

         Public works require public words. As the ancient Romans realized, the
orator and the engineer are alike. Both deal with res publica--the orator by con-
structing arguments, the engineer by arguing for construction. To prevent our
own republic from crumbling, English departments must build bridges between
rhetoric and engineering. The best way, as outlined here, is to offer an open and
flexible professional and technical writing curriculum.

                                notes

1 English for Engineers. (1915, June 19). Engineering Record p. 763. quoted in
Connors, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruction
in America." Three Keys to the Past. Eds. Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G. Moran.
Samford, CT: Ablex Publishing, 1999. 175.
2 Here I am referring to the three best-selling textbooks frequently used for the
professional and technical writing classroom by Paul Anderson, John Lannon,
and Mike Markel. See:

         Anderson, Paul V. Technical Communication: A Reader Centered Ap-
proach. (5th Ed.) Boston: Heinle, 2003.

         Lannon, John M. Technical Communication. (9th Ed.) New York: Long-
man, 2003.

         Markel, Mike. Technical Communication. (7th Ed.) Boston: Bedford/St.
Martin's, 2003.
3 Computer science is an excellent example of an engineering field struggling
to keep pace with growing technology. Traditionally, C++ serves as the core
computer language taught in introductory courses and it is used or referenced
throughout the remainder of a student's education. Over the last five years,
schools have been abandoning C++ in favor of Java. However, even more recent-
ly schools are experimenting with Microsoft's newer language C# (pronounced
C sharp). All of these languages are object-oriented in nature but each possesses

                                                                                                 235
Ballentine

unique attributes. Regardless of which language a school selects, companies will
continue developing applications with all three and engineering schools will feel
the pressure to keep pace. Consequently, these demands cause reevaluations of a
school's course offerings and often force courses out of a system.
4 Connors, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruc-
tion in America." Three Keys to the Past. Eds. Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G.
Moran. Samford, CT: Ablex Publishing, 1999. 176-7.
5 Ibid. 178.
6 I can testify to this fact personally. For three years I worked as a senior soft-
ware engineer for a major medical company. Companies such as my employer
hired engineers from most of the major engineering disciplines. In order for our
software applications and other company initiatives to integrate with the rest of
our products and services, our software engineering team needed to collaborate
and communicate with other engineering disciplines including electrical and
biomedical engineering. Also, it should be noted that guideline "d" on page two
from The Accreditation Board of Engineering and Technology criteria states stu-
dents must attain: "an ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams."
7 In their article, "Genre, Rhetorical Interpretation, and the Open Case: Teach-
ing the Analytical Report," Sheehan and Flood assert that, "To situate their
students, technical writing teachers have typically turned to closed case assign-
ments" (21). Their research instead advocates "the use of open cases in which
students use the analytical report genre to interpret and study technical issues in
a workplace where they are already situated - the university campus." In, IEEE
Transactions on Professional Communication, Vol. 42, No. 1, 1999, 21.
8 Anderson, Virginia and Barbara Walvoord. Effective Grading: A Tool for Learn-
ing and Assessment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998.
9 Covington, M. V., and Wiedenhaupt, S. "Turning Work into Play: The Nature
and Nurturing of Intrinsic Task Engagement." R. Perry & J. C. Smart (Eds.), Ef-
fective Teaching in Higher Education: Research and Practices. New York: Agathon
Press, 1997.
10 Bain, Ken. "What Makes Great Teachers Great?" The Chronicle of Higher
Education. April 9, 2004. vol. 50, issue 31 pp. B7.
11 Connors, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruc-
tion in America." Three Keys to the Past. Eds. Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G.
Moran. Samford, CT: Ablex Publishing, 1999. 180.
12 Bazerman, Charles. Shaping Written Knowledge: The Genre and Activity of the
Experimental Article in Science. University of Wisconsin Press: Madison, Wis-
consin, 1988. 320.
13 All assignments are graded by the instructor and passing grades indicate to
students they are to proceed to the next assignment. Although student groups

236
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

are not required to formally submit their research to their identified audience,
some groups have decided to share their findings.
14 Sheehan, Richard J. and Andrew Flood. "Genre, Rhetorical Interpretation,
and the Open Case: Teaching the Analytical Report." IEEE Transactions on Pro-
fessional Communication, Vol. 42, No. 1, 1999, 23.
15 Spinuzzi, Clay. "Psuedotransactionality, Activity Theory, and Professional
Writing Instruction." Technical Communication Quarterly 5, no. 3 (1996): 295.

         The term "psuedotransactionality" was originally coined by Joseph Pe-
traglia. See: Petraglia, Joseph. "Spinning Like a Kite: A Closer Look at the Pseu-
dotransactional Function of Writing." Journal of Advanced Composition 15 (1995):
19-33.
16 Connors, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruc-
tion in America." Three Keys to the Past. Eds. Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G.
Moran. Samford, CT: Ablex Publishing, 1999. 189.
17 Connors explains that prior to the formation of a technical writing discipline,
"there was no glory and no real chance for professional advancement" if an Eng-
lish professor decided to pursue teaching communication to engineers. It was,
therefore, assumed that if a professor was teaching technical writing, he or she
was forced into the position and perceived as "second rate." Connors, Robert J.
"Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruction in America." Three
Keys to the Past. Eds. Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G. Moran. Samford, CT:
Ablex Publishing, 1999. 178.
18 Case Western Reserve University English Department "English Graduate
Concentration in Writing History and Theory" <http://www.case.edu/artsci/
engl/html/whit.html>
19 Harris, Randy Allen. Landmark Essays on the Rhetoric of Science. Mahwah,
N.J: Hermagoras Press. 1997. xii.
20 Bazerman, Charles. The Languages of Edison's Light. Cambridge: The MIT
Press, 1999. 4.
21 P. Bizzell & B. Herzberg (Eds.) The Rhetorical Tradition: Reading from Classical
Times to the Present. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2001. 81.
22 Alan Gross bluntly remarks, "the `brute facts' themselves mean nothing; only
statements have meaning, and of the truth of those statements we must be per-
suaded." Gross, Alan G. The Rhetoric of Science. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1996. 4.
23 Bazerman, Charles. The Languages of Edison's Light. Cambridge: The MIT
Press, 1999. 85.
24 Connors, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruc-
tion in America." Three Keys to the Past. Eds. Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G.
Moran. Samford, CT: Ablex Publishing, 1999. 192.

                                                                                                 237
Ballentine

25 Florman, Samel C. The Introspective Engineer. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1996. 183.

                           works cited

The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology web site: http://www.
   abet.org

Anderson, Paul V. Technical Communication: A Reader Centered Approach. Boston:
   Heinle, 1997.

Anderson, Virginia and Barbara Walvoord. Effective Grading: A Tool for Learning
   and Assessment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998.

Aristotle. On Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse. Trans. G. A. Kennedy.New
   York: Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.

Bain, Ken. "What Makes Great Teachers Great?" The Chronicle of Higher Educa-
   tion 50.31(9 April, 2004).

Bazerman, Charles. The Languages of Edison's Light. Cambridge: The MIT Press,
   1999.

Bazerman, Charles. Shaping Written Knowledge: The Genre and Activity of the Ex-
   perimental Article in Science. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988.

Beer, David and David McMurrey. A Guide to Writing As An Engineer. 2nd Ed.
   New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2004.

Connors, Robert J. "Landmark Essay: The Rise of Technical Writing Instruction
   in America." Three Keys to the Past: The History of Technical Communication. Ed.
   Teresa C. Kynell and Michael G. Moran. Stamford, CT: Ablex, 1999.

Covington, M. V., and Wiedenhaupt, S. "Turning Work into Play: The Nature
   and Nurturing of Intrinsic Task Engagement." Effective Teaching in Higher Edu-
   cation: Research and Practices. Ed. R. Perry and J.C. Smart. New York: Agathon
   Press, 1997.

Florman, Samuel C. The Introspective Engineer. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996.
Gross, Alan G. The Rhetoric of Science. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Halloran, S. Michael. "From Rhetoric to Composition: The Teaching of Writing

   in America to 1900." A Short History of Writing Instruction: From Ancient Greece
   to Twentieth-Century America. Ed. James J. MurphyDavis: Hermagoras Press,
   1990.
Harris, Randy Allen. Landmark Essays on the Rhetoric of Science. Mahwah, N.J:
   Hermagoras Press, 1997.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 3rd Ed. Chicago: Univ. of
   Chicago Press, 1996.
Lannon, John M. Technical Communication. 9th Ed. New York: Longman, 2003.

238
                                                            English and Engineering, Pedagogy and Politics

Markel, Mike. Technical Communication. 7th Ed. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's,
   2003.

Rhetoric: Concepts, Definitions, Bounderies. Ed. William A. Covino and David A.
   Jolliffe. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1995.

Sheehan, Richard J. and Andrew Flood. "Genre, Rhetorical Interpretation, and
   the Open Case: Teaching the Analytical Report." IEEE Transactions on Profes-
   sional Communication 42.1, (1999).

Spinuzzi, Clay. "Psuedotransactionality, Activity Theory, and Professional Writing
   Instruction." Technical Communication Quarterly 5.3 (1996)

Stevenson, Susan and Steve Whitmore. Strategies for Engineering Communication.
   New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2002.

Winsor, Dorothy W. Writing like an Engineer: A Rhetorical Education. Hillsdale:
   Laurence Erlbaum Associates, 1995.

                                                                                                 239
futures
13 The Third Way: PTW and the Liberal Arts in the
  New Knowledge Society

   Anthony Di Renzo

"The knowledge we now consider knowledge proves itself in action. What we now
mean by knowledge is information effective in action, information focused on results.
The results are seen outside the person--in society and economy, or in the advance-
ment of knowledge itself."

                                       -- Peter Drucker, Post-Capitalist Society (46)

    the third way and the global university

         Four centuries after Sir Francis Bacon first proposed his landmark edu-
cational reforms in The Advancement of Learning (1605), the liberal arts have
become practice-oriented, more fully conscious of their concrete application in
the marketplace and within public and private institutions. For teachers and
scholars of professional and technical writing (PTW), this development repre-
sents not only new opportunities for program development but a new model
for the humanities themselves. As Richard M. Freeland, the president of North-
eastern University, observes: "Slowly, but surely, higher education is evolving
a new paradigm for undergraduate study that erodes the long-standing divide
between liberal and professional education. Many liberal arts colleges now offer
courses and majors in professional fields: professional disciplines, meanwhile,
have become more serious about the arts and sciences. Moreover, universities are
encouraging students to include both liberal arts and professional coursework
in their programs of study, while internships and other kinds of off-campus
experience have gained widespread acceptance in both liberal and professional
disciplines" (141).

         Freeland calls this paradigm the Third Way, but its premises are hardly
new. PTW programs have advocated these cross-disciplinary ideas since Carolyn
R. Miller's 1979 essay "A Humanistic Rationale for Technical Writing." Main-
stream educators, however, largely ignored us, until the Association of American
Colleges and Universities (AAC&U) published its 2002 national panel report,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.13  243
Di Renzo

Greater Expectations: A New Vision for Learning as a Nation Goes to College. Over
the past four decades, the report documents, college attendance has grown so
much that seventy-five percent of high school graduates now get some postsec-
ondary education within two years of receiving their diplomas. This remarkable
trend, true not only in America but abroad, has resulted from the latest seismic
shifts produced by the Scientific and Industrial Revolutions Bacon foresaw in
the early seventeenth century. According to Adrian Woodridge, a Washington
D.C. correspondent for The Economist, four economic and technical develop-
ments have caused this international boom in higher education:

   · Democratization: Or "massification" in the jargon of the educational pro-
       fession (3). All over the world, more people than ever are attending col-
       lege.

   · Globalization: The "death of distance" is transforming education just as
       radically as it is transforming the economy (3).

   · Competition: Traditional universities are being forced to compete for stu-
       dents and research grants, and private companies are trying to break into
       a sector which they regard as "the new health care" (3).

   · The Rise of the Knowledge Economy: The world is in the grip of a "soft revo-
       lution" in which "knowledge is replacing physical resources as the main
       driver of economic growth" (3).

         This last factor, we believe, is most responsible for the emergence of
Freeland's Third Way, and for the growing importance of PTW programs at
liberal arts colleges. As the AAC&U observes, students are flocking to college
"because the world is complex, turbulent, and more reliant on knowledge than
ever before" (1). Ironically, however, educational practices invented when higher
education served only the few are increasingly disconnected from the needs of
these contemporary students. If the humanities are to remain viable, dynamic,
and relevant, the panel concludes, liberal arts colleges must redefine their mis-
sion:

   Liberal education for the new century should look beyond the campus to the
   issues of society and the workplace. It should aim to produce global think-
   ers. Quality liberal education should prepare students for active participation
   in the private and public sectors, in a diverse democracy, and an even more
   diverse global community. It will have the strongest impact when studies
   reach beyond the classroom to the larger community, asking students to ap-
   ply their developing analytical skills and ethical judgment to concrete prob-
   lems in the world around them, and to connect theory with insights gained

244
                                                                                                The Third Way

   from practice. This approach to liberal education--already visible on many
   campuses--erases the artificial distinction between studies deemed liberal
   (interpreted to mean they are not related to job training) and those called
   practical (which are assumed to be). A liberal education is a practical educa-
   tion because it develops just those capacities needed by every thinking adult:
   analytical skills, effective communication, practical intelligence, ethical judg-
   ment, and social responsibility (5).

         In the past, colleges grudgingly provided such skills by offering the most
basic professional and technical writing courses. But as more campuses practice
what William Butcher calls "the applied humanities," more educators have be-
come dissatisfied with these skills-based service courses (624). For the liberal
arts to prepare students for "responsible action," for business, communications,
health, law, and technologies to become a form of "liberal education," profes-
sional training itself must become an object of genuine intellectual inquiry and
a topic for serious writing (AAC&U 3). That means developing comprehensive
and interdisciplinary PTW programs, housed in and treated as a branch of the
humanities, but that serve the professions.

         This essay collection attempts to describe the mission, curriculum, and
administration of such programs at a dozen liberal arts colleges. Like the science
ministers in Bacon's New Atlantis (1625), the editors have gathered "books, ab-
stracts, and patterns of experiments" from across the country (MW 486), spot-
lighting the practical side of Bacon's visionary philosophy. Writing at a time
when exploration had opened new trade routes and invention and entrepreneur-
ship had created new technologies, Bacon considered knowledge precious capi-
tal in a global market. The parallels to our own time are obvious, but before we
discuss the larger implications of these grassroots programmatic developments,
let us outline the contents of this book.

       ptw program development at liberal
                         arts colleges

         We were surprised to find when surveying proposals and drafts of pa-
pers for this collection how many of the authors were new Assistant Professors,
inventing and designing programs that were often new to the college or depart-
ment, and new as well to the director. Of course, many programs have long
pedigrees and seasoned faculty, but Professional and Technical Writing programs
are proliferating, and it is not possible in a new program to pick up where others
left off. Thus the director and colleagues are compelled to make what are often,

                                                                                                 245
Di Renzo

for that site, decisions without precedent, such as how the program is to be
advertised and consequently what students one attracts, the kinds of assessment
materials to be solicited and preserved, the sort of relations the PTW program
is to have to other departments and faculty, and much more. All this is rather
challenging and rewarding, as anyone reading this is likely to agree, and the re-
wards and challenges come not so much from the enrollment numbers or class
assessment forms, but from a deep and fulfilling sense of having contributed to
something worthwhile, an institutional structure that elicits curiosity and rigor
in the students--and helps them move on with their lives.

               the division of knowledge
               and the applied humanities

         These developments are crucial to our field, but their implications go far
beyond it. They involve such larger issues as post-modernity, globalization, and
mass democracy, and their impact on the liberal arts. If traditional humanism
is to survive, it must come to terms with thinking and communicating within
a high-tech, commercial society. Over a decade ago, Gerald Graff in Beyond the
Culture Wars advocated "teaching the conflicts" as a way to "revitalize" higher
education, but when it comes to the new corporate university, most humanists
still indulge in "apocalyptic posturing" (5). We denounce the military-industri-
al-academic complex while conducting online research and applying for insti-
tutional grants. By denying our paid function within a post-capitalist economy,
we alienate our students, who attend college primarily to become knowledge
workers, and ignore a watershed cultural development: the changing nature and
role of disciplinary and professional knowledge in our time.

         As Nobel economist Friedrich Hayek noted seventy years ago, the di-
vision of labor, which made possible the Industrial Revolution, has become a
more subtle "division of knowledge," which now characterizes and sustains mod-
ern business, political, and academic institutions (50). Borrowing a term from
Adam Smith, Hayek called our knowledge-based civilization the Great Society:
social arrangement based on widespread and decentralized economic interde-
pendence, abstract legal codes, and impersonal information rather than local
and concentrated family ties, concrete tribal customs, and personal dialogue.
The division of knowledge, therefore, carries profound political, ethical, and
rhetorical significance. As Hayek declares in "The Use of Knowledge in Society:"
"We make constant use of formulas, symbols, and rules whose meaning we do
not understand and through the use of which we avail ourselves of the assistance
of knowledge which individually we do not possess" (88). Since no one pos-

246
                                                                                                The Third Way

sesses total knowledge, Hayek concludes, different disciplines and professions of
knowledge must learn to understand and dialogue with each other.

         In Post-Capitalist Society, Peter Drucker shows how Hayek's theory af-
fects both business and the academy. Underlying all three phases in the global
shift to a knowledge economy--the Industrial Revolution, the Productivity
Revolution, the Managerial Revolution-- has been a fundamental shift in the
meaning of knowledge itself: "We have moved from knowledge in the singular
to knowledges in the plural," Drucker explains (45). Traditional knowledge
was holistic and general; contemporary knowledge, in contrast, is partitioned
and highly specialized, focused on practice and concerned with results. "This
is as great a change in intellectual history as ever recorded," Drucker declares
(46). While the traditional university demoted specialized knowledges to the
level of "crafts," the modern university elevates them to "disciplines" and "pro-
fessions" (46). Such privileging is fitting, Drucker argues, for without this
necessary specialization of disciplines and professionals, mass society and the
global economy would collapse, and billions would perish.

   The shift from knowledge to knowledges has given knowledge the power
   to create a new society. But this society has to be structured on the basis of
   knowledge as something specialized, and of knowledge people as specialists.
   This is what gives them their power. But it also raises basic questions--of
   values, of vision, of beliefs, of all the things that hold society together and
   give meaning to our lives. . . . [I]t also raises a big--and new--question: what
   constitutes the educated person in the society of knowledges? (46-47)

         According to PTW scholar Bernadette Longo, this question originates
with Sir Francis Bacon, who "coined" the concept of a practice-oriented acad-
emy and "minted" the discipline of professional and technical rhetoric (21).
Surveying the progress made in the early seventeenth century, he compared the
New Learning to a galleon returning through the Straits of Gibraltar, loaded
with the bounty of invention and enterprise from foreign ports. Unfortunately,
Bacon complained, such cargo was warehoused on a rotting pier. Rather than
circulate knowledge, the academy of Bacon's day hoarded it in dry dock. Bas-
tions of power and privilege, Oxford and Cambridge had built moats to con-
tain new currents of thought and had become fortified worlds unto themselves.
Rather than face and ponder the implications of new markets and technologies,
England's best universities idolized the past, disdained the present, and feared
the future. In addition, traditional scholars and rhetoricians were obsessed with
words, not things, while skeptical philosophers and jaded historians promul-
gated "the doctrine of Acatalepsy," the radical belief that all human knowledge

                                                                                                 247
Di Renzo

ultimately is impossible (NO 75). In the name of Humanism, Bacon accused,
both practices betrayed humanity by traducing reason. "The first subdues the
understanding," he observed, "the second unnerves it" (76).

         For PTW programs, this stalemate depressingly resembles the vicious
culture wars within the current humanities between traditionalists and theorists,
which have done so much to discredit the liberal arts in the eyes of students and
the public. Echoing C.P. Snow, John Brockman, author of The Third Culture:
Beyond the Scientific Revolution, harshly criticizes this state of affairs:

   American intellectuals are, in a sense, increasingly reactionary, and quite of-
   ten proudly (and perversely) ignorant of many of the truly significant intel-
   lectual accomplishments of our time. Their culture, which dismisses science
   and industry, is often non-empirical. It uses its own jargon and washes its
   own laundry. It is chiefly characterized by comment on comments, the swell-
   ing spiral of commentary eventually reaching the point where the real world
   gets lost.

In contrast, the Third Culture, Brockman's term for the scientific and technical
culture of the professional knowledge society, can tolerate disagreements about
which ideas to take seriously precisely because its diverse specialization recog-
nizes no canon or accredited list of acceptable ideas. More to the point, it reaches
beyond the academy. Since its members communicate effectively not only to
each other but to legislators, business leaders, the media, and the public, its ideas
have greater currency. Unlike past intellectual pursuits, therefore, the Third Cul-
ture's achievements "are not the marginal disputes of a quarrelsome mandarin
class: they will affect the lives of everybody on the planet."

         Bacon's warning in The Great Instauration (1620), therefore, remains
relevant. Puffed by the winds of pride and rocked by the storms of controversy,
the traditional liberal arts veer close to shipwreck. To chart a better course, dis-
ciplines must abandon dead reckoning and rely on compass and quadrant, if
only to draw more accurate maps and to train more expert navigators. Likewise,
the humanities should emphasize the practical application of knowledge, should
confront science and economics and integrate technology within their curricula,
and should dedicate themselves, at least partially, to professional training and
institutional administration.

ptw, rhetors, and the future of the liberal arts

         For practical and theoretical reasons, however, college administrators
must honor and support composition and PTW programs if the applied hu-

248
                                                                                                The Third Way

manities are to succeed. Since the dawn of the Scientific and Industrial Revolu-
tions, writing has remained an essential skill in the marketplace, resulting in the
mass literacy of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but the dialogical nature
of writing itself also teaches how knowledge emerges and circulates within Adam
Smith and Friedrich Hayek's Great Society. Observing the great knowledge shift
in his own day, Francis Bacon remarked: "Up to now, thinking has played a
greater part than writing in the business of invention, and experience has yet to
become literate. But no adequate inquiry can be made without writing, and only
when that comes into use and experience learns to read and write can we hope
for improvement" (109).

         Accordingly, Bacon dedicated large sections of his revised edition of The
Advancement of Learning to composition and professional and technical writ-
ing. These subjects remain crucial to the academy's identity and survival in the
new Knowledge Society. Composition teaches students how to mediate between
the competing discourse communities of different academic disciplines, while
professional and technical writing teaches students to mediate between the com-
peting discourse communities of different professions. The first demonstrates
how disciplines profess knowledge, the second how knowledge disciplines the
professions. This dialectic, Peter Drucker insists, is crucial in a world defined and
determined by the division of knowledge:

   We neither need nor will get "polymaths" who are at home in many knowl-
   edges; in fact, we will become even more specialized. But what we do
   need--and what will define the educated person in the knowledge soci-
   ety--is the ability to understand the various knowledges. What is each one
   about? What is it trying to do? What are its central concerns and theories?
   What major new insights has it produced? What are its important areas of
   ignorance, its problems, its challenges? (217)

         Such interdisciplinary cross-pollination allows new ideas to flower, both
in the academy and the marketplace. Bacon addresses this issue in his famous
fable in the Novum Organon. Playing entomologist, Bacon divides knowledge
workers into three kinds of insects. Ants blindly collect and use facts; spiders
spin webs of sophistry from their butts; but bees gather material from the flow-
ers of the garden and field, then transforms and digests it by an internal process.
"And the true business of philosophy is much the same," Bacon concludes, "for
it does not rely chiefly on powers of the mind, nor does it store the material
supplied by natural history and practical experiments untouched by memory,
but lays it up in the understanding changed and refined (105). Distilled and
circulated, the nectar of knowledge creates the honeycomb of Adam Smith's

                                                                                                 249
Di Renzo

Great Society. In the resulting buzz of the marketplace, citizens "must practice
oratory" their entire lives, Smith maintained, trading words and expertise as well
as goods and services to promote their individual good, and the general welfare
of the hive (Fleischacker 92).

         Given this social reality, shouldn't the academy teach students to be-
come effective and ethical rhetors in an emerging knowledge economy, particu-
larly when globalization and technology have brought our planet to a historic
turning point? Until recently, the liberal arts have ducked this question as mat-
ter of principle, supposedly because techno-capitalism is inherently dehuman-
izing and because humanists should dissuade students from seeking professional
training. Matthew Arnold, the apostle of the Great Tradition, took a similar
position in his famous debate with Thomas Huxley, who called for a "practical"
liberal education at a time when science and industry had dramatically increased
access to public schooling in Victorian England (244). Nevertheless, Arnold
conceded a major point:

   [The traditional liberal arts] show the influence of a primitive and obsolete
   order of things, when the warrior caste and the priestly caste were alone in
   honor, and the humble work of the world was done by slaves. We have now
   changed all that; the modern majesty consists of work, as Emerson declares;
   and in work, we may add, principally of such plain and dusty kind as the
   work of cultivators of the ground, handicraftsmen, men of trade and busi-
   ness, men of the working professions. Above all is this true in a great industri-
   ous community such as that of the United States. (75)

Plato's Academy is not fit for our world, Arnold admitted, because Plato, who
scorned handicraft and the professions, never could have foreseen a capitalist
society. "Such a community must and will shape its education to suit its own
needs," Arnold said. "If the usual education handed down to it from the past
does not suit it, it will certainly before long drop this and try another" (76).

         Like Dr. Arnold, contemporary advocates of the liberal arts should be
gracious and perceptive enough to see consumer demand for professional train-
ing in higher education as an expression of mass democracy, and an equally valid
form of humanism. As Fr. Walter Ong pointed out in his 1978 MLA President's
Address, markets and technologies increasingly attract college students, "not be-
cause they are inhuman, but because they are eminently human, the creations
of human beings" (1916). Like language itself, they are media of exchange and
as such deserve scholarly respect and attention. As their very title implies, pro-
fessors are professionals, too, Ong reminded his fellow scholars, with "fiducial"
responsibilities to their institutions and clientele (1911).

250
                                                                                                The Third Way

         Richard Freeland agrees. "Claims for the moral superiority of liberal
education reflect a bias against--even a disdain for--the workaday earning ex-
periences of most adults," he states, "as if academic learning had a monopoly
on value and meaning and other forms of work were solely about material gain.
This perspective is an unfortunate relic from the tradition of classical--and class-
based--education in Britain, from which the contemporary liberal arts are de-
scended" (147). Following the counter-tradition of Bacon, Smith, and Huxley,
Freeland argues that professionalism and humanism, with the proper education
and under the right conditions, can and should be synonymous:

   Instead of deriding students' interest in their careers, we should help them see
   how the work they do can promote personal growth, intellectual adventure,
   social purpose, and moral development. We should show them how the val-
   ues of intellectual honesty, personal integrity, and tolerance can strengthen
   the institutions in which they will work. And we should help them build
   bridges between the intellectual concerns they encounter in philosophy, lit-
   erature, and history courses and the decisions they will have to make as busi-
   ness leaders, lawyers, and government officials. Properly conceived, practice-
   oriented education can provide at least as powerful a moral education as any
   purely academic study of ethics. (147)

         Committed to practice-oriented education, professional and technical writ-
ing programs are vanguards of the Third Way, helping colleges as well as students
grapple with current political and economic realities. For disaffected hardliners on
the left and right, this development represents the academy's surrender to corporate
values; but for the more open-minded and engaged, professional and technical writ-
ing programs provide a way to take advantage of the genuine benefits associated
with the emerging global university. "There are plenty of justifications for the revolu-
tion that is sweeping through higher education," Adrian Woodridge suggests:

   It is giving students more control over where they get educated. It is giving
   millions of youngsters a chance to study abroad. It is throwing up colleges
   that can teach managerial and technical skills. It is reconnecting academics
   with the wider knowledge economy. But the most important justification of
   all is that it is freeing resources for intellectual activity. It is filling libraries
   with books, stocking laboratories with equipment, and giving more research-
   ers than ever before a chance to produce order out of chaos. (22)

         Whether these benefits ultimately outweigh the drawbacks depends
on vision, wisdom, and action. As globalization drags the liberal arts, kicking

                                                                                                 251
Di Renzo

and screaming, from the cloister to the market, PTW programs can prepare the
academy to face its greatest contemporary challenge. With compelling urgency,
Peter Drucker describes the stakes:

   The knowledge society must have at its core the concept of the educated per-
   son. It will have to be a universal concept, precisely because the knowledge
   society is a society of knowledges and because it is global--in its money,
   its economics, its careers, its technology, its central issues, and above all, in
   its information. Post-capitalist society requires a unifying force. It requires a
   leadership group, which can focus local, particular, separate traditions into
   a common and shared commitment to values, a common concept of excel-
   lence, and on mutual respect. (212)

         The interminable debates between theorists and humanists, therefore,
are a dead end. Global society needs the very thing radical skeptics reject: a uni-
versally educated person. At the same time, the great Western tradition, which
humanists defend, is inadequate for a postcolonial world. Humanists can offer
only a bridge to the past, when students need to bring their knowledge to bear
on the present with the hope of shaping the future. Without that practical ap-
plication, as Peter Drucker observes, humanist values are "only fool's gold unless
they have relevance to the world" (213). Professional and technical writers have
known this truth since Agricola. Real gold must be mined, smelted, and coined,
and PTW programs can provide colleges with the rhetorical tools--the practical
and intellectual tools and techniques--to forge a new humanism suitable for the
perils and promises of a new century.

                           works cited

Association of American Colleges and Universities. "Executive Summary." Greater
   Expectations: A New Vision for Learning as a Nation Goes to College. National
   Panel Report, 2002: 1-5.

Arnold, Matthew. "Literature and Science." The Harper and Row Reader: Liberal
   Education Through Reading and Writing. 3rd Ed. Ed. Marshall Gregory and
   Wayne Booth. New York: Harper, 1992. 73-89.

Bacon, Sir Francis. The Major Works. Revised. Ed. and Intro. Brian Vickers. Ox-
   ford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Bacon, Sir Francis. Novum Organum. Ed. and Trans. Peter Urbach and John Gib-
   son. Chicago: Open Court Press, 1994.

252
                                                                                                The Third Way

Brockman, John. "The Third Culture." Edge Foundation., Inc. 2001. 20 March,
   2006 <http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/index.html>

Butcher, William F. "Applied Humanities: They Will Pay You for the Other Five
   Percent." Vital Speeches of the Day. (1 August, 1990): 623-625.

Drucker, Peter F. Post-Capitalist Society. New York: Harper Collins, 1994.
Fleischacker, Samuel. On Adam Smith's The Wealth of the Nations. Princeton:

   Princeton University Press, 2004.
Freeland, Richard M. "The Third Way." The Atlantic Monthly. (October 2004):

   141-147.
Graff, Gerald. Beyond the Culture Wars: How Teaching the Conflicts Can Revitalize

   American Education. New York. W. W. Norton, 1992.
Hayek, Friedrich A. Individualism and Economic Order. Chicago: University of

   Chicago Press, 1980.
Huxley, Thomas Henry. "Science and Culture." Classical Rhetoric for the Modern

   Student. 4th ed. Ed. Edward Corbett and Robert Connors. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press, 1999. 237-45.
Longo, Bernadette. Spurious Coin: A History of Science, Management, and Technical
   Writing. Albany: SUNY Press, 2000.
Ong, Walter. "MLA Presidential Address, 1978: The Human Nature of Profes-
   sionalism." PMLA: Special Millennium Edition. 115.7 (December 2000): 1906-
   1917.
Smith, Adam. "Of the Expense of the Institutions for the Education of Youth."
   The Essential Adam Smith. Ed. Robert Heilbroner. New York: Norton, 1986.
   303-307.
Woodridge, Adrian. "The Brains Business: A Survey of Higher Education." The
   Economist (10 September, 2005): 3-22.

                                                                                                 253
14 The Write Brain: Professional Writing in the Post-
  Knowledge Economy

   Alex Reid

         The inclusion of computer technology in writing degrees is hardly
new. Indeed it is the hallmark of technical writing degrees. While the history
of technical writing follows the rise of our industrial economy, technical writ-
ing is a prototypical career of the post-industrial, knowledge economy. Techni-
cal writers--like the engineers, computer programmers, lawyers, accountants,
and other experts whose knowledge they translate--have played an important
role in the professional world of the last thirty years. However, today, the jobs
of the knowledge economy, like industrial jobs before them, are moving over-
seas. While these jobs will not disappear overnight, in designing a professional
writing curriculum, it is important to anticipate the changing requirements of
our field as we move toward a "post-knowledge" economy. As I describe in this
chapter, this future is one that will require not only solid technical skills but also
strong creative and rhetorical abilities to empathize with, and design powerful
experiences for, a variety of audiences/users. In this context, we have built our
professional writing curriculum partly upon the traditions of technical writing,
while also drawing from creative writing and journalism and more generally
from the discipline of rhetoric and composition. We have also looked beyond
our discipline for the teaching of media production, multimedia design, and
information management.

         In doing so however, we find ourselves pressured from two ends. We
foresee a marketplace seeking a more sophisticated, creative, and technologi-
cally proficient writer, but we encounter incoming students with an increas-
ing need for instruction in what we have traditionally viewed as fundamental
skills in writing. In this situation, we cannot simply add new curriculum onto
our existing professional writing curriculum. To do so would establish an ex-
panding curriculum with escalating credit hours (something undesirable for
our students and increasingly unmanageable for a small faculty). Instead, we
find ourselves with the task of building a curriculum that blends the emerging
expectations of professional writing with more traditional models of technical
communication and advanced writing genres. Rather than thinking of creative

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.14     255
Reid

writing, technical writing, other genres, or general composition as discrete
subjects (or even majors), we have found it necessary to conceive professional
writing at the intersection of these and other writing traditions with emerg-
ing rhetorical concerns in design, information, and multimedia production.
In doing so, we find ourselves confronting some fundamental notions about
writing and writing instruction, a confrontation I suppose should not be un-
expected given the dramatic changes in media, information, and communica-
tion we are experiencing.

         In discussing these challenges, I have divided this chapter into three
main parts. In the first part, I address in greater detail this emerging post-knowl-
edge economy, which Daniel Pink terms the "Conceptual Age." Pink employs
the familiar shorthand of left- and right-brain functions to describe how we
are moving from a left-brain oriented knowledge economy to a new economy
that will place greater emphasis on the creativity and empathy associated with
the right hemisphere of the brain. My interest here is in identifying how such a
shift might inform the development of professional writing. In the second sec-
tion, I turn specifically to the role of Web 2.0 technologies in our curriculum.
Web 2.0 technologies, such as blogs, wikis, and social bookmarking sites, are an
important part of the economy Pink and others describe. Here I discuss how
industry concepts of Web 2.0 practices might apply to building a curriculum.
Of course, one of the primary challenges to such an adoption is keeping faculty
current with emerging technologies. I address this subject in the chapter's third
section where I consider the viability of bottom-up approaches for adopting
technologies in an academic context. While I am particularly focused here on
current technologies, I also want to emphasize that our disciplinary goal should
not solely be how to integrate these specific applications but also how to create
curricular structures and practices that will allow us to deal on an ongoing basis
with emerging technologies.

 writing, knowledge workers, and the right-
                                brain

         The metaphor of "left-brain" and "right-brain" functions, attitudes, and
proclivities has become fairly common in our culture. While cognitive science
does identify the different hemispheres of the brain as having different functions,
in general our daily activities involve both sides to one degree or another. That
said, the metaphor of left and right sheds light on how we view and value differ-
ent cognitive functions within our culture. As Daniel Pink notes in A Whole New
Mind, the post-industrial era has emphasized "left-brain" cognitive skills as the

256
                                                                                               The Write Brain

foundation of our knowledge economy. This left-brain orientation is character-
istically "sequential, literal, functional, textual, and analytic" (26). It typifies the
type of work traditionally done by engineers and computer programmers but
also by lawyers, accountants, radiologists, MBA's and many other professionals.
Certainly technical writers would fall into this category. Pink's characterization
of left-brain thinking would make a reasonable description of the values of tech-
nical communication. In comparison to other genres of writing, the emphasis of
technical writing has always been on clear, structured, logical, and rational com-
munication. In turn, technical writing courses and programs have emphasized
the development of writing skills along those lines. The result, in general, is that
graduates of technical writing programs develop a complex set of rational and
analytic cognitive abilities, much like their knowledge worker colleagues in law,
engineering, computer science, and so on.

         While skilled knowledge workers remain very much in demand, Pink
and many others have noted an increasing trend that will likely alter that de-
mand in significant ways. The phenomenon of "outshoring," the exporting of
knowledge worker jobs to Asia, has been extensively reported, if not over-hyped,
in recent years. However, in the long term (though certainly within our students'
professional lives), jobs in the knowledge economy will likely meet a fate similar
to that which jobs in the industrial economy met a few decades ago. In addition
to the exportation of jobs to Asia and elsewhere, the increasing sophistication
and power of computers allows them to undertake many of the fundamental
functions performed by knowledge workers. As Pink notes, "the Web is crack-
ing the information monopoly that has long been the source of many lawyers'
high income and professional mystique. Attorneys charge an average of $180
per hour. But many Web sites--for instance, Lawvantage.com and MyCounsel.
com--now offer basic legal forms and other documents for as little as $14.95"
(46). Obviously a web site isn't going to replace all lawyers, but clearly many,
many lawyers, especially junior lawyers, earn a living performing relatively sim-
ple legal tasks or conducting research, which either can be done by a computer
or more cheaply by a knowledge worker living in Asia. While I don't believe
computers will be writing their own documentation any time soon, our ability
to discover and share information over networks is altering the way technical
communication is done.

         Ultimately Pink's argument is not that left-brain thinking will not be
valued in the future. Instead, as his book's title suggests, he simply sees a ris-
ing appreciation for right-brain thinking to the point where future careers in
America will require a whole new mind, both left and right. In distinction from
left-brain thinking, Pink describes right-brain thinking as "simultaneous, meta-
phorical, aesthetic, contextual, and synthetic" (26). In other words, "right-brain"

                                                                                                 257
Reid

activities are those that allow us to "see the big picture," to incorporate intuitive
or empathic understanding, to make connections between ideas that are logically
unrelated, and to process the complexities of embodied experiences without re-
lying upon abstractions. In terms of writing instruction, if the left-brain reflects
the emphases of technical writing (and to a lesser degree, composition), then the
right-brain connects to some of the traditional values of creative writing. One
might be tempted to go so far as to suggest that rhetoric is left-brain and poetics
is right-brain. However, while there may be some validity to that suggestion, at
least in terms of how these issues have played out within disciplinary politics, I
contend, following Pink at least this far, that successful writing requires a whole
mind, particularly as we prepare students for the demands of careers in the post-
knowledge economy.

         Jon Udell, writing for the O'Reilly Network, picks up on this shift in
the values relating to professional preparation and goes so far as to suggest that
the future of first-year composition will be characterized by the production of
multimedia documents, which he terms screencasts.1 Udell sees screencasts as
being rhetorically different from traditional genres of professional writing re-
lated to software development, which might be divided into technical or support
documents and marketing or sales materials. The purpose of the screencast will
be to connect end-users with the designers of new technologies and applications.
Udell writes, "the rate-limiting factor for software adoption is increasingly not
purchase, or installation, or training, but simply `getting it'... We haven't always
seen the role of the writer and the role of the developer as deeply connected but,
as the context for understanding software shifts from computers and networks
to people and groups, I think we'll find that they are" (2005). In short, as infor-
mation technologies become increasingly about social uses (e.g. wikipedia, del.
icio.us, flickr), there is an increasing need for writers who can communicate the
social dynamics of a technology; that is, someone who will be able to work with
developers in helping to articulate and communicate their vision. As Udell con-
tinues, "The New York Times recently asked: `Is cinema studies the new MBA?'
I'll go further and suggest that these methods ought to be part of the new fresh-
man comp. Writing and editing will remain the foundation skills they always
were, but we'll increasingly combine them with speech and video. The tools and
techniques are new to many of us. But the underlying principles--consistency
of tone, clarity of structure, economy of expression, iterative refinement--will
be familiar to programmers and writers alike."

         Udell's vision may still sound very much, in principle, like the tradi-
tional values of technical composition, plus the addition of new media, in that
he makes reference to values like consistency, clarity, economy, and refinement.
However, there is a deeper transformation taking place in the coming together

258
                                                                                               The Write Brain

of media and the identification of a new purpose and new audience, specifi-
cally in Udell's suggestion that screencasts need to help their audience "get it,"
to see the social value of a new application. "Getting it" is not particularly a
matter of rationally communicating the various features of an application (as
technical documentation would) or even selling those features or some feeling
a company hopes to associate with an application (as marketing or advertising
media would). Instead, Udell describes an emerging genre that seeks to dem-
onstrate to potential users the ways in which a new application might fit into
lives and allow them to make better use of the increasing amount of media
available to them. For example, it is not enough for the developers of blogging
applications to provide technical documentation or to produce advertising
for their service; they need to communicate to potential users how a blog will
allow them to participate in a community of readers and writers. This par-
ticipation gets more specific as one thinks about particular types of bloggers:
educators using blogs in their classes, professional writers who want to make
money from their blogs, companies using blogs for internal communication
or to communicate with clients or to market products, and other individuals
who simply wish to keep a diary or share a personal interest or viewpoint. Of
course, the audiences become even more specific than that (e.g., addressing
the use of blogs in first-year composition courses). A screencast for blogging
in composition would include video, audio, and text that would demonstrate
how you might easily set up a blog to share information with students, to
have students comment on readings, or to distribute and comment on drafts
of more formal writing assignments; it might also discuss how giving students
the experience of producing their own blog creates an opportunity for inves-
tigating how discursive practices and a sense of audience develop in a new
medium. Whatever the particular content of the screencast, the basic point is
that it requires a new rhetorical, compositional approach in which writers and
developers strive to help their potential users see how a new application fits
into a larger picture of their information habits.

         This shift away from instrumental reason is echoed elsewhere in the
rethinking of professionalizing education. Richard Gabriel, a Distinguished
Engineer at Sun Microsystems, has argued that software engineering programs
should pattern themselves after MFA programs in creative writing. In particular,
Gabriel references the system of mentoring, the community of writers, and the
curriculum of ongoing practice, reflection, and revision in the context of work-
shops, conferences, and other coursework. He recognizes that "in software as in
writing, there are people whose work is `doing the thing'--writing and design-
ing programs--and such people do this work every day. They hope to be good
at it and to be able to improve over time. They have pride in what they do and

                                                                                                 259
Reid

are satisfied or not with each project they do. To them what they do feels more
than craft, includes engineering and science, but still feels like more." Gabriel is
articulating the need for software engineering programs to develop a reflective
and broader vision of the process of composition, one that does not focus solely
on the grammar of coding or other practical issues but, as Udell is suggesting,
aids software designers to develop an ability to "get it" and communicate their
understanding to others. In many ways this is much like an MFA program that
assists writers in developing a critical understanding of their own writing. That
is, it is one thing to have some native sense of when one's writing is or isn't work-
ing; it is another matter to develop the critical ability to explain why a piece of
writing does or doesn't "work."

         Pink articulates this shift in education in terms of a demand for profes-
sionals with an understanding and appreciation of design. As he observes, "Get-
ting admitted to Harvard Business School is a cinch. At least that's what several
hundred people must think each year after they apply to the graduate program
of the UCLA Department of Art--and don't get in...A master of fine arts, an
MFA, is now one of the hottest credentials in a world where even General Mo-
tors is in the art business...the MFA is the new MBA" (54). As Pink explains,
the growing interest in design comes in part from the incredible abundance
and range of choice consumers encounter. Increasingly the primary difference
between products is their design. While to a certain extent the process of design
relies upon left-brain thinking and scientific knowledge, it is also clearly a right-
brain activity dependent upon an appreciation for aesthetics and an intuitive un-
derstanding of user experience. In the world Pink, Gabriel, and Udell describe,
it will not be sufficient for a professional writer to produce clear and rational
prose. Instead, the demand will increasingly be for professional writers who can
also contribute to user experiences through aesthetics, empathy, narration, and
so on. In designing a product and the documentation that might accompany
it, a writer must not only clearly communicate the product's functionality but
also assist the user in imagining meaningful purposes and creating positive user
experiences. This would be the case whether the writer is producing text and
media that support or market a non-textual product or if the product is a piece
of media itself.

         There are many different ways to approach the issue of design. In em-
phasizing the MFA, Pink identifies the Art orientation, which would include
graphic design and other commercial art. There is also product design, designing
graphical user interfaces (GUIs), and architecture to name some obvious other
examples. The difference is that design in an artistic sense can often be quite
distanced from any functionality, particularly in comparison to the relation be-

260
                                                                                               The Write Brain

tween design and function in the other examples I provided. Certainly, a graphic
element may be called upon to communicate some information (for example a
sign) but often the communicational goals of design elements are more vague
(e.g., they might convey a mood). From the perspective of professional writing,
design is both an aesthetic and rhetorical concern. Indeed, in the past, rhetoric
has been characterized, often with pejorative intent, as "mere ornamentation."
With the rise of right-brain thinking, that notion of rhetoric as ornament, as
a design strategy, as the practice of shaping user/audience experience, comes
into its own. Again, I would reiterate that we would not want to view rhetoric
solely in these terms, but the perception of rhetoric as design clearly offers a
way to connect rhetoric with the emerging economy. It also offers a way to con-
nect rhetoric with more aesthetic and poetic writing practices and informs the
intersection of conventional, print, writing instruction with instruction in new
media composition.

         Of course the right-brain isn't simply about design. Pink lists five other
right-brain "senses:" story, symphony, empathy, play, and meaning. Without
going into depth about each one, an important underlying ability here is to take
information and experience and make connections that are not simply "logical"
but that resonate in more immediate and intuitive ways with others. Like design,
these all connect directly with rhetorical concerns. A technical document may
provide a reader with all the facts, but a story may convey the same purpose in
a more meaningful and memorable way. One can arrange information logically
into various categories, but it may be more powerful to bring these elements
together, to compose them symphonically. Likewise to connect empathically,
to provide an openness that invites a playful engagement with possibilities, and
to recognize the potential meaningfulness of a concept: these are all significant
elements of a rhetorical sense of audience. In short, the right-brain cannot sim-
ply be about design without also considering what that design allows us to do,
without imagining how a powerful user experience goes beyond the immediate
aesthetics and into a more lasting meaning. As such, incorporating these con-
cerns into a Professional Writing program has to be about more than issues of
usability or designing media that attracts attention or looks "cool." There has to
be a connection from design to communication practices that not only manages
to convey information logically and rationally but also connects with audiences
in deeper and more meaningful ways. Ideally, one moves from viewing writing
as the production of discrete, limited bodies of information to recognizing com-
position as linking into, shaping, and participating with larger flows of media
and experience. The abilities to see this space, to operate within it, and to bring
others to it ultimately characterize the right-brain.

                                                                                                 261
Reid

     web 2.0 in the professional writing curriculum

         Undoubtedly, these flows I am describing have become far more pal-
pable with the emergence of the web and networked, multimedia communica-
tion. Certainly computers have heightened our sense of design (e.g., thirty years
ago, few people had much sense of what font was). Much of the demand that
Pink foresees stems from the need to create meaningful experiences of media.
For some, this connection between computers and the right brain might be
jarring. Computers have long been associated with left-brain careers. Ideologi-
cally and culturally we tend to associate classic right-brain types with a degree
of Luddism: the poet, the painter, and so on. People who consider themselves
to be weak at math or not particularly interested in science or other traditional
left-brain areas also might express trepidation, antipathy, or at least disinterest in
computers. In large part this has been because, at least historically, engineers and
programmers have designed computers for other engineers and programmers,
with little thought for other types of users. However, the rise of the Internet
over the last ten years has produced two inter-related types of software that do
not fit into the tradition image of the solitary computer and computer user: So-
cial Software and, more recently, Web 2.0 applications. The integration of these
technologies into Professional Writing serves several key ends. Most obviously,
the students develop fluency with the contemporary operation of the Internet.
More importantly, students find themselves confronted with a richer rhetorical
environment. They must write to multiple audiences, organize continual flows
of data, and compose with layers of media. These challenges ask students to
combine left- and right-brain capabilities. They need to learn and use computer
applications, organize information, and often communicate complex concepts;
they also need to connect empathically with their audiences, integrate text with
other media, and operate with an understanding of the larger picture.

         While all these ends can be achieved without these technologies, So-
cial Software and Web 2.0 applications help users share information easily and
increase the value of the information they share by providing easy ways to or-
ganize and search that information.2 Social Software references technologies
that enable "many-to-many" communications, which therefore might include
MUDS, MOOS, Internet Relay Chat (IRC), and Instant Messaging, as well
as newer technologies, such as social bookmarking (e.g. del.icio.us), blogs, and
wikis. These latter technologies also fall into the category of Web 2.0, which also
includes applications that are less directly "social," such as Google Maps. The
definition of Web 2.0 is half technical (referencing the use of newer approaches
to the web such as APIs, AJAX, and RSS)3 and half marketing (as companies
scramble to associate themselves with the buzz). For Professional Writing, the

262
                                                                                               The Write Brain

most interesting applications are clearly those that deal directly with the produc-
tion of text and other media. However, others cannot simply be ignored. For
example, Google Maps points to the developing phenomena of the geo-tagged
web, an Internet mapped onto physical space through the use of GIS coordi-
nates. This geospatial web has obvious uses for cars and pedestrians equipped
with GIS devices, and certainly such a web will require text, a new kind of
topography that will help users in understanding the value of such information
and imagining how they will incorporate it into their lives. As Udell stresses,
increasingly the success of technology relies not simply on rational functional-
ity but the ability of consumers to "get it," to see the value of a product in their
lives. And as Pink continues, getting it is part of the larger task of designing user
experiences.

         Much of the discussion of Web 2.0 deals with commercial concerns,
essentially addressing how these emerging applications can be monetized or how
they alter business practices or corporate culture. However, with some thought,
many of these discussions apply to curriculum development. One of the key
points regarding Web 2.0 has been the emphasis on trusting users, both end-us-
ers/customers and employees working to adopt new technologies into the work-
place. An important part of this trust has been the value that users contribute
to the experience of the application over time. This can be seen in popular Web
2.0 sites like del.icio.us, flickr.com, and Wikipedia. The more material that users
contribute, the more ways they find to make use of application features, and the
more data they provide for organizing the media on the site, the more valuable
and useful the application becomes. This development of valuable information
helps to create a new market for products on what Chris Anderson has termed
"the long tail."4 While the long tail suggests the possibility of building a new
marketplace, it relies upon trusted users sharing information so that users can
not only find the products they desire but other products in which they might be
interested (Amazon attempts this when it shows users other products viewed or
purchased by others). These three qualities--trusting users, developing the value
of user contributions, and the long tail--provide some important insight into
the role Web 2.0 can play in developing Professional Writing curriculum for the
emerging economy.

         As one can imagine, it can be difficult to trust users. A manager might
have an impulse to control the way his or her employees make use of a new
technology: it should be used only for serious business...no personal emails,
for example. Similarly, a website might control how users make use of its fea-
tures or information: that book belongs in science fiction, not mysteries. Clearly,
faculty regularly struggle with controlling how students use technology in the
classroom (witness the long list of rules that might accompany a syllabus for a

                                                                                                 263
Reid

class in a computer lab). Other faculty might decry, "no internet sources" for
research papers. Public schools limit access to blogs, Facebook, MySpace, and so
on. Even faculty are warned against blogging by publications like the Chronicle
of Higher Education.5 Trusting faculty and students to use these technologies
may be the most difficult step that colleges need to make. Obviously there have
been and will be missteps along the way as users organically develop rhetorical
practices appropriate for these spaces. This necessity for trust falls not only on
institutions. Faculty must trust their colleagues and students, and students must
trust their peers and instructors. The real curricular value of these technologies
will only emerge as we use them to share information across courses rather than
restricting it within the boundaries of a single semester.

         For example, I am teaching a class on technical writing and my col-
league is teaching one on the history of rhetoric. Both of us want to address
the subject of ethos. Clearly we have different contexts and purposes for doing
so. However, if we share bookmarks, then we double our resources. We might
end up discussing the same web article for different purposes and from different
perspectives. It's quite likely that we may share students; these students will have
an opportunity to experience some of the key issues about audience and pur-
pose that we regularly discuss in all our courses. That is, they will witness how
the same article discussed with different groups of people, in different course
contexts, and with different professors leads to significantly different outcomes.
Perhaps we encourage and require our students to contribute as well. Over time
we develop a healthy and dynamic list of web resources on ethos. Taking this one
step further, perhaps we have a wiki for our program. All the courses contribute
to it to some degree, and our students rely upon it as a reference as they move
through the major. Naturally, my colleagues and I disagree with one another
from time to time, and we try to work out these disagreements and represent
them on the wiki. Our students also disagree with us and with one another.
The wiki becomes a map of our dissensus. However, in order to do it, we have
to trust one another and our students. Maybe our students start to use the wiki
as a place to publish their poetry or to talk about other aspects of their college
lives. The faculty could object because it was our intention to have the wiki be
academic. Or, we could trust our student-users and recognize the importance of
having our students see the wiki as a community space that they regularly use.

         I have already slid from my point about trusting users into recognizing
the value of the information they contribute. The real value to a Web 2.0-based
curriculum only appears over time. After a few semesters, the shared links, wiki
entries, and blog posts begin to accumulate. Material is revisited and revised as
courses are offered for a second or third time. The advantage of using a folk-
sonomic6 approach, where users tag media with context-relevant descriptors, is

264
                                                                                               The Write Brain

that one can chart shifts in interests and discourse over time in a program. For
example, students tag websites that provide information about careers that inter-
est them. This way one might track a growing interest in the publishing industry
or attending graduate school or technical writing or wherever student interests
might lead. This type of information can be invaluable in trying to understand
our program, and it is produced organically and dynamically by the students
rather than through some staid questionnaire. As valuable as this might be for
faculty, it is potentially more valuable for students. As a student, one no longer
needs to rely solely on individual memory and saved notebooks. The material
record of a course is available and searchable. It collects not only one's own
contributions but also those of other students and faculty. It also includes the
contributions of students and faculty from other semesters. Needless to say, the
material produced by students and faculty in one college then serves only as a
launchpoint for the far vaster database of resources across the web for which the
student has now developed a literacy for engaging.

         As this information accumulates, some areas become well traveled. They
are the foundational areas of the curriculum and the most popular topics among
students and faculty. However, there are also less traveled areas, subjects that are
only occasionally covered or reflect interests that are not widely shared among
the students. These areas form a mini long tail or more accurately a portal into
the long tail effect of the Internet. For example, I teach an upper-division course
on contemporary poetics once every two years or so. It's a small course to begin
with, and maybe one student in the course becomes especially interested in the
language poets. She posts about some of the poets involved, discusses her im-
pressions of their poems and manifestos, and provides links to various sites (e.g.
Ron Silliman has a blog). Her work in itself may not amount to much, but it
provides a starting point, a way into this world. While some of the links will de-
grade over time, the student's work retains value because of the long tail, because
the information remains accessible for the small number of students over time
who will take interest in it. Clearly these qualities scale very well. In fact, they
become more pronounced with an increase in users (witness Wikipedia). While
three tenured faculty, a few instructors, a couple dozen majors, and a hundred
other students each semester will certainly make something of value this way,
one imagines the value increases substantially as numbers increase. Certainly
one could imagine a "national" or even international disciplinary wiki, but there
is also something to be said for the value of local knowledge and practices, the
record of a particular community, especially when that record integrates seam-
lessly into the larger network.

         Throughout this integration of technology into the curriculum, it is
important that courses not only use the technology but also foster rhetorical

                                                                                                 265
Reid

awareness of its functionality and design. Some applications will work better
than others and certainly different students will have different reactions. As
the students shape their own user experiences and rely upon the larger network
of information produced through the curriculum, they will have an opportu-
nity to develop their design sensibilities and apply them to this environment
as well as other areas of their lives. The Web 2.0 environment I am describing
is not monolithic. It is not an all-in-one system like Blackboard or WebCT.
Instead it is a constellation of applications produced by different companies
and connected by common standards (e.g., RSS) and shared APIs. As a result,
students get to encounter a variety of design approaches and give thought
to the different ways these applications can be interconnected. For example,
students need to consider how to bring together various streams of informa-
tion on their blogs. Such sites are not only for their personal use but also are a
means for producing an online identity for themselves. On this level, students
need to consider the design and arrangement of information as a user experi-
ence.

         Overall, Web 2.0 technologies offer a powerful means to produce,
distribute, and organize the knowledge of a disciplinary community. For Pro-
fessional Writing, providing students with experience with new technologies
is valuable in itself, as those skills prove marketable in the workplace. More
importantly, however, this curricular shift leads to new classroom practices
and epistemologies that will prepare students for the professional tasks of the
emerging economy. In working with folksonomic tagging, students learn to
recognize that their education does not fall neatly into discrete categories but
rather is distributed across an open space where it is subject to post-hoc orga-
nization. Technical writing and fiction writing may represent different seg-
ments in the curriculum, but that does not mean that technical writers cannot
benefit from understanding narration or characterization or from learning to
create a sense of empathy. Likewise a fiction writer can come to see that his
storytelling skills are not only applicable to writing short stories or novels but
intersect a range of possible careers. By shifting the entire curriculum in this
direction, we move away from the curious genre of the classroom academic, re-
searched essay with its vague purpose and audience of one. Students continue
to do research and continue to make arguments. They simply do so now in a
shared communal space. Such a practice may not be appropriate for first-year
composition students, who may have serious struggles with writing and may
not want their work shared publicly, but for Professional Writing majors seek-
ing careers as writers, the Web 2.0 environment provides a context where they
can put their entire repertoire of skills to work.

266
                                                                                               The Write Brain

       the faculty development bottleneck

         Of course the caveat here is that one must have faculty with the neces-
sary skills and the commitment to keep up with emerging technologies. Doing
so means not only keeping abreast of new developments and learning how to
use them, it also requires thinking about their uses in the classroom and their in-
tegration into one's particular courses. In short, while faculty from a generation
ago speak about working to "perfect" their courses (so that they could then be
replicated year after year), here we face the prospect of regularly retooling. This
demand changes expectations regarding faculty training and curriculum devel-
opment. Even a few years ago we might have said that a professor could choose
whether or not to learn how to use a course-management system like WebCT.
A college might provide some incentive for faculty to learn the technology, but
the premise was that faculty who did not learn new technologies could continue
to teach their courses by traditional means as effectively as they had in the past.
Now, however, by not integrating technology into courses, faculty fall short of
addressing the ways in which emerging technologies are shifting the production
of knowledge across the culture and in every discipline (especially as those disci-
plines function at the level our students will employ them as professionals with
undergraduate degrees). In other words, the integration of technology is becom-
ing an increasingly necessary element of higher education, and few colleges are
likely prepared to face such a necessity.

         Fortunately on the scale of individual professional writing programs,
the problem is much more manageable, though certainly the characteristics of
the challenges are largely shaped by local conditions. However, since profes-
sional writing programs have commonly formed in response to the demands
of the workplace, most include at least one faculty member with a degree of
specialization in new media. In our situation, our program and faculty are
relatively small. As such it's possible for me to support my colleagues, to call
their attention to new developments, and to troubleshoot with them or their
students in our computer lab. We can easily meet and discuss ideas for our
courses, where infusing technology is only one of many issues we might raise.
Of course the college also provides technical support and training, but the
advantage of our working together is that I can discuss technology with them
from a shared disciplinary perspective and with a common understanding of
our students and our program's goals. While this works on a small scale, there
is no way I could perform this same function for the dozen other faculty who
teach literature or English education in my department, even if there was an
interest on their part in my doing so. That said, there are several qualities of

                                                                                                 267
Reid

our approach that reflect a more general strategy for professional development
and the infusion of technology into curriculum.

         Again, here it is useful to turn to the broader professional discussion
regarding the integration of emerging technologies into the workplace, academic
or otherwise. The strategies for doing so largely reflect the central tenets of Web
2.0 development, such as trusting users, which I mentioned earlier. Within an
institutional hierarchy there are essentially two modes for implementing any
kind of policy change: top-down and bottom-up. Top-down approaches are
common in corporate structures and occur in certain contexts within academia
(perhaps increasingly so). However, faculty are generally resistant to adminis-
trative decrees, especially in the area of curriculum. Nevertheless, the model is
not untypical in relation to implementing technologies on campus. In the past,
implementing new technologies has required significant capital investment to
purchase new software and hardware, to update existing networks and machines
to ensure compatibility, and to train and/or hire support staff. In this context,
colleges have sought to regulate the use of new technologies. In large part this
comes out of an underlying mistrust of faculty and students. In terms of faculty,
there is a (perhaps not inaccurate) perception that professors need to be trained
and constrained otherwise they might become frustrated with the learning curve
of new technologies or somehow "break" them, causing support nightmares.
The mistrust of students is even greater; students might use emerging technolo-
gies for any number of activities (Napster, for example). So when my college
implemented WebCT, it required faculty to go through a multi-day training
course (even those of us who had already used a CMS at other institutions).
Even then, faculty could not create their own courses or add student users to
their existing courses. Our ability to make use of the system was kept at the ab-
solute minimum necessary to run a course online. Naturally student users had
even less control.

         Of course the purpose of an application like WebCT is course manage-
ment: the management of individual courses by faculty, and the management
of the collective course offerings on an administrative level. It's a piece of soft-
ware that embodies the top-down thinking of a pre-Web 2.0 environment and
knowledge industry. On the other hand, Web 2.0 technologies are largely native
to a bottom-up approach. Unlike their predecessors, they are inexpensive. In
fact, many are free to users or at least offer a free level of membership. They are
designed to be "light" and compatible with standard, if up to date, web brows-
ers. As such they require little capital outlay from an institution in order to be
implemented. As I've already mentioned, the primary challenge and expense
here is faculty development. Fortunately, the bottom-up approach offers a dif-
ferent model of development that rests upon trusting users to develop powerful

268
                                                                                               The Write Brain

uses for new technologies. This approach works equally well for getting both
faculty and students involved.

         As Suw Charman, a social software consultant and author of the well-
regarded blog Strange Attractor, describes, a grassroots approach to technology
implementation begins with identifying key user groups and specific individuals
within those groups. Focusing on my primary concern, a professional writing
program, the key user groups, at least for us, would be faculty, instructors, and
students. I separate tenured faculty from instructors because the faculty have
a wider range of responsibilities in relation to the program. Beginning on the
group level, Charman lists a few important questions: "What needs do these
people share? What are their day-to-day aims? What projects are they working
on together? What information flows between them, and how?" Without go-
ing into specific responses here, clearly the traditional sharing of aims, projects,
and information takes place course-centrically between students and the course
instructor and perhaps among the students as well. Information flow among
instructors and faculty is more idiosyncratic, except in the case of formal, de-
partmental class observations and personnel review. As I have already suggested,
the idea here is to shift these relations and practices, but Charman's point is that
one must begin by responding to users' existing practices and needs.

         Once these questions have been answered, one needs to identify key
individuals among the groups who are well-connected and potentially interested
in the technology. Principally the idea is that one would take advantage of exist-
ing social networks (which are notably different from institutional, hierarchical
relationships). Convincing the right individual to adopt a technology will lead
to others following his or her lead, even among largely independent-minded
faculty. Again, Charman posts some questions that are relevant here: "What spe-
cific problems does social software solve? What are the benefits for this person?
How can the software be simply integrated into their existing working processes?
How does social software lower their work load, or the cognitive load associated
with doing specific tasks?" On the student level, one might identify a student
who is well-known and perhaps popular among her peers, someone with an
ability to motivate and convince others. In our case, that individual might be
the editor of our literary magazine or the president of our program's student
group, the Cortland Writers' Association. These students have problems com-
municating with other students in the program and organizing various activities
that social software might solve. Using social software allows them to separate
the business of these activities from their personal email or mobile phones and
reduces their responsibility for keeping contact information. For example, when
editing the literary magazine, one of the more onerous tasks is keeping track of
the submissions, which submissions have been rejected or accepted, which need

                                                                                                 269
Reid

to be evaluated, which need to be edited, and so on. A project management ap-
plication, like 37signal's Basecamp, would greatly reduce both work load and
cognitive load.

         Charman's idea is to turn these individuals into "evangelists" for the
application's use and eventually into trainers. This might work out a little dif-
ferently on the student level. However, to continue my example, if the student
editor of the literary magazine started using Basecamp and convinced other stu-
dents to use it as well, they would quickly discover whether or not the applica-
tion did make their lives easier. If so, they might start experimenting with using
it for other purposes. With this bottom-up approach, it is important at this
point that someone from the top does not come down and restrict these uses. If
the students use the application to plan a party, or for other non-academic so-
cial purposes, this should be encouraged or at least not discouraged. Simultane-
ously, one would seek to foster adoption among instructors and faculty, perhaps
pointing out how project management software might help with managing lon-
ger, multi-assignment, projects in the classroom. It might also benefit full-time
faculty with other service obligations like tracking curriculum development or
assessment. Thus, when Basecamp is introduced into a classroom a number of
the students might already know the application and have positive associations
with it. These students can help the instructor by supporting the other students.
Likewise, more experienced users among the instructors and faculty can serve as
an informal resource for their colleagues.

         Of course, such work can only go so far without some top-down sup-
port. Student use must be supported by instructors and faculty, both by in-
corporating the application into coursework and encouraging non-academic
uses the students discover. Likewise, instructors and faculty need support from
administrators. They need the work they do to learn new technologies and in-
corporate them into teaching to be recognized and rewarded in their person-
nel evaluations. They need the service they provide as trainers and as support
resources to be factored into their workload. As Charman point out, it's also
important that the adoption of a new technology be reflected in the institu-
tional hierarchy and its daily workings. It's difficult to encourage students to use
electronic communication if the teacher always responds on paper. Likewise,
faculty will find it difficult to value a new mode of information sharing, like a
wiki for example, if the department chair keeps sending out paper memos or
even emails. Furthermore, these initial users-turned-trainers will eventually need
assistance from the college's formal technical support personnel. As adoption of
an application grows, the college's support professionals will be more generally
available to answer questions from students in their dorm rooms and faculty at
home. In other words, at some point, a bottom-up approach will stall out unless

270
                                                                                               The Write Brain

it is affirmed by some clear signal coming down the institutional structure. Ross
Mayfield refers to this coming together of the bottom and top as the creation of
a "middlespace."

         While faculty development and the challenges of adopting new tech-
nologies may seem tangential to the curricular goals of Professional Writing,
these issues actually fit in quite well. Indeed, as Jon Udell's articulation of scre-
encasting describes, one of the growing needs in his industry is for writers who
can not only perform the "technical writer" task of describing an application's
various functions but also can succeed at the more creative challenge of reaching
potential users and helping them to envision how a new application might fit
into their social practices. This rhetorical goal, put more generally, is part of the
skill set Daniel Pink identifies for workers in the post-knowledge economy: the
ability to empathize with users and design powerful user experiences. The task
of fostering the adoption of emerging technologies within an undergraduate
program becomes one instance of the rhetorical work graduates will later find
themselves doing.

                        moving forward

         The Web 2.0 technologies I've been describing here are the current
emerging technologies. Indeed blogs and wikis have been around for several
years. EDUCAUSE and the New Media Consortium produce an annual "Hori-
zon Report," which identifies emerging technologies. In that report, they iden-
tify the technologies I have been discussing as those that are currently being
implemented or will be implemented in higher education in the next year or so.
Beyond that, they point to the growing functionality of mobile phones and the
influence of educational gaming in the next two to three years; and the imple-
mentation of what they term "augmented reality," "enhanced visualization," and
"context-aware environments and devices" in the next three to five years. Most
of these latter technologies are already seeing use in the sciences, medicine, and
engineering. The role they will play in Professional Writing curricula is obviously
uncertain. This does not mean that current technologies will fade away, though
it is likely they will change. It is not too difficult to imagine how a podcast or
wiki might evolve to work with a mobile phone or in a "context-aware" environ-
ment. And with a little imagination, one can see how these folksonomic infor-
mation structures might operate using a game-like interface or via three-dimen-
sional, virtual modeling. Regardless, inasmuch as these emerging technologies
compose, design, communicate, and organize information for user experiences,
they will have rhetorical elements that our discipline will be able to address. And

                                                                                                 271
Reid

insomuch as these technologies become part of the marketplace, there will be
careers for professional writers who can use these technologies, evaluate them for
others, and support their use.

         In short, while the current wave of technologies from blogs and wikis
to social bookmarks clearly has an intimate relationship to writers, we should
expect that evaluating and adopting new technologies into Professional Writing
will be a regular feature of our careers for the foreseeable future. As such, it is
imperative when designing a new curriculum that one attempt to incorporate
structures that will accommodate such a practice.

                                notes

1 A screencast is generally a video capture of a computer desktop complemented
by a voiceover. In a screencast a particular application is demonstrated on the
video capture of the desktop as the user explains the various steps he or she is
taking. A screencast might also be a Powerpoint or Flash-driven set of slides,
again accompanied by audio. Like audio and video podcasts, screencasts can be
published in a blog format or distributed via RSS.
2 For more on Web 2.0 read Tim O'Reilly's "What is Web 2.0?" O'Reilly pro-
vides an excellent analysis of the primary features of Web 2.0 technologies.
Christopher Allen provides a useful chronology of the concept of Social Soft-
ware, and Clay Shirky's "Social Software and the Politics of Groups" provides
further insight into the concept (Shirky is generally credited with conceptual-
izing contemporary Social Software). Both Web 2.0 and Social Software are ele-
ments in a lengthier objective that is termed the "Semantic Web." This concept
was coined by Tim Berners-Lee (who also developed the http protocol that es-
sentially created the web in the late eighties).
3 What are API, AJAX, and RSS?

         API stands for "application programming interface." It is the interface
that allows one program to request information from another. For example,
using the Wikipedia API, someone could develop a web-based application that
called up and displayed information from the encyclopedia. While some APIs
are closely-guarded and proprietary, many Web 2.0 applications openly share
their APIs with the belief that the more other sites make use of their service the
more valuable their service will become.

         AJAX stands for "Asynchronous Javascript And XML" and references
a programming strategy for the web. Without going into great technical detail,
AJAX allows for a more seamless experience of the web, where the browser needs
to make fewer requests of the web server. Google Maps (http://maps.google.

272
                                                                                               The Write Brain

com) is an example of AJAX at work. On a site like Google Maps, users can drag
across maps, zoom in and out, and switch map views from road maps to satellite
pictures without the page having to reload.

         RSS stands for "Really Simple Syndication" and is an XML file format
that allows for the distribution of the content of websites. When one subscribes
to a podcast or to a blog and receives that information through a blog aggregator
either online (like Bloglines) or on the desktop (like podcasts in iTunes), one is
connecting to an RSS file (also called a "feed") that is generated automatically by
blogs when bloggers publish their posts. RSS is not limited to blogging however.
Any dynamic or regularly updated website or database could generate an RSS
feed.Wikipedia provides more detail on each of these terms.
4 The principle of the long tail identifies the opening of new markets for prod-
ucts outside the mainstream. For example, a local department store can only
carry a limited variety of CDs. However beyond these most popular products
there exists a long tail of products that appeal to smaller groups of people. While
a brick-and-mortar store must cater to a local population, through the web,
companies can appeal to a smaller, vertical market.
5 One of the many examples of this warning against academics is the pseud-
onymous "Ivan Tribble," who has published several screeds against blogging,
including "Bloggers Need Not Apply." Oddly, there seems to be little awareness
on "Tribble's" part of how much his own anonymous column resembles the
negative characteristics "he" sees in others blogs.
6 Folksonomy (as opposed to taxonomy) is the practice of tagging websites (and
other media) with one's own keywords and then sharing keywords with others.
This makes use of a primary advantage of electronic over print information.
Books in a library can be organized in only one way (i.e. a book can be in only
one place), electronic data can be organized differently by each user. Library
systems are ad hoc; the system predates the books that become organized. Folk-
sonomic systems are post hoc; they describe media after its publication. For more
on folksonomy, read Clay Shirky's "Ontology is Overrated: Categories, Links,
and Tags."

                           works cited

Allen, Christopher. "Tracing the Evolution of Social Software." 2004: 11 March
   2006. http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2004/10/tracing_the_evo.html.

Anderson, Chris. "The Long Tail." Wired. 12.10 (December 2004): 5 March
   2006. http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.10/tail.html.

                                                                                                 273
Reid

Berners-Lee, Tim et al. "The Semantic Web." Scientific American (May 2001): 10
   March 2006. http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?articleID=00048144-10D2-
   1C70-84A9809EC588EF21.

Charman, Suw. "An Adoption Strategy for Social Software in Enterprise." Strange
   Attractor. 5 March 2006. http://strange.corante.com/archives/2006/03/05/
   an_adoption_strategy_for_social_software_in_enterprise.php.

EDUCAUSE and the New Media Consortium. The Horizon Report. 2006: 3
   March 2006. http://www.nmc.org/horizon/.

Gabriel, Richard. "Master of Fine Arts in Software." 2001: 12 March 2006. http://
   dreamsongs.com/MFASoftware.html.

Mayfield, Ross. "Middlespace." Many-to-Many 27 October 2004. 5 March 2006.
   http://many.corante.com/archives/2004/10/27/middlespace.php.

O'Reilly, Tim. "What is Web 2.0?" 30 September 2005. 5 March 2006. http://
   www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.
   html.

Pink, Daniel. "Revenge of the Right Brain." Wired 13.2 (February 2005): 5 March
   2006. http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/13.02/brain.html.

Pink, Daniel. A Whole New Mind: Moving from the Information Age to the Concep-
   tual Age. New York; Riverhead, 2005.

Shirky, Clay. "Ontology is Overrated: Categories, Links, and Tags." May 2005. 15
   March 2006. http://shirky.com/writings/ontology_overrated.html.

Shirky, Clay. "Social Software and the Politics of Groups." 2003. 7 March 2006.
   http://shirky.com/writings/group_politics.html.

Silliman, Ron. Silliman's Blog. 2006. 10 March 2006. (http://ronsilliman.blogspot.
   com/).

Tribble, Ivan. "Bloggers Need Not Apply." Chronicle of Higher Education. July
   2005. 9 March 2006. http://chronicle.com/jobs/2005/07/2005070801c.htm.

Udell, Jon. "The New Freshman Comp." O'Reilly Network 22 April 2005. 10
   March 2006. http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/network/ 2005/04/22/prime-
   time.html.

274
post-scripts by veteran program designers
15 A Techné for Citizens: Service-Learning,
  Conversation, and Community

   James Dubinsky

"It is a natural mistake to think that reverence belongs to religion. It belongs, rather,
to community."

                                                              -- Woodruff, Reverence, 5

         In The Year of Magical Thinking, Joan Didion attempts to understand
the grief she experienced and explain the emotional and practical tasks she faced
in a year that began with the sudden death of her husband. He suffered a massive
heart attack, hours after visiting their only daughter who was lying, near death,
in a nearby hospital. To situate us and begin the narrative, she describes these
events to illustrate how "Life changes fast. / Life changes in an instant" (3). And,
despite tremendous grief and bewilderment, after a year of reflection, she comes
to a conclusion that to survive "you ha[ve] to feel the swell change. You ha[ve]
to go with the change" (227).

         While I am not writing about grief, which was Didion's catalyst, I am
writing about change and the ability to think "magically" to deal with stressful,
difficult, and unexpected issues. As I look back on my ten years at Virginia Tech
as a program builder/administrator, I am convinced that such an ability is neces-
sary for almost all program builders in our field. In 1998, I arrived at Virginia
Tech, a newly "minted" PhD, who faced a difficult task on top of the standard
"research/publish, teach, and serve": I was asked to build a professional writing
program in a traditional department of English; revise two service courses in
business and technical writing, one of which was under tremendous pressure
due to some unusual (erratic) teaching; and lay the foundation for future gradu-
ate study. Much like me, most recent PhD graduates who take administrative
positions in our field come from programs that understand and value technical
and professional writing. And many, if not most, get hired by English depart-
ments that may not value and probably do not understand it. They, like Didion
and me, discover that life changes fast, and responding and adapting to that
change requires something akin to "magical thinking."

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.15  277
Dubinsky

         I wish I could promise that what follows is the formula for such magic.
However, I doubt it is. Rather, it is a story about my first year and the five that
followed as I attempted to adapt to these changes. And it is a story about what
Paul Woodruff, in his fascinating study of the virtue of reverence, calls "the
paradox of respect" (197). Woodruff explains that reverence is "the capacity for
certain feelings where they are due" and one of those is respect. However, know-
ing when they are due is not so easy because "respect comes in three degrees of
thickness: too thick, too thin, and just right." The respect that has the degree of
thickness that is "just right" is the type that "flows from reverence"; it involves
"a felt recognition of a connection growing out of common practices" (198).
Woodruff's work is relevant on several levels. First, if hired by a traditional de-
partment of English, more than likely you will experience such a paradox. Your
new colleagues, because they hired you from among many candidates, will re-
spect your credentials and potential. However, they will also not know enough
about your work to make a strong connection to you intellectually or even per-
haps emotionally. In addition, there will be, at least among some of your col-
leagues, a certain amount of trepidation and worry and perhaps lack of respect.
Will your work "fit in"? Will you add to or take away from their department's
reputation for scholarship? Will the applied focus you offer dilute their focus?
Thus, one of your tasks, implicitly or explicitly, is to create or at least encourage
a "felt recognition" based on "common practices." Those practices will encom-
pass not only your dedication to your epistemological position but also, and
perhaps more importantly, your dedication both to the art or techne of teaching
and to the techne of citizenship, both within the department and in the larger
cultures--of the university and beyond.

         My hope is that this "story" of our program at Virginia Tech will pro-
vide insight and some answers for those engaged in programmatic work. I see it
as part of a move in our field to treat curriculum as conversation, an important
shift toward ways of knowing that are more explicit, that work to articulate what
Polanyi and others call "knowledge-in-action" or "tacit knowledge" (Applebee
11). Such a focus creates a domain where engagement with new texts and is-
sues can lead to discovery and transformation. One such issue is a question that
is embedded in the debate between art and science framed by C. P. Snow and
manifested in many PTW programs as a fundamental tension between develop-
ing "insight or technique, liberal or vocational education, good citizens or good
workers" as discussed in the preface to this volume. Rather than resolve this
dilemma, my goal has been use this tension productively. As a program designer
and leader my critical question, a mission statement of sorts, is simply this: how
can I shape a PTW program that will graduate informed, critical citizens who
can use their technical expertise for public service?

278
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

         As I tell this story and address this curricular question, I hope that our
curriculum at Virginia Tech will become a text for conversation that has rele-
vance to our field. Our program's emphasis on rhetoric and experiential learning
and our focus on principles of reflective practice such as "open mindedness" and
"responsibility" (Dewey 177) have enabled us to create a curriculum that is both
epistemic and instrumental, one that balances theory and practice, phronesis
and praxis. This emphasis on key principles has helped us overcome some of the
problems discussed in this volume, such as the issues of naming and other issues
such as the politics of identity caused by the tension between liberal and practi-
cal arts.

         The professional writing curriculum at Virginia Tech is part of a larger
English curriculum that gives students more control and experience with tech-
nology, as well as opportunities to apply their knowledge and expertise for the
benefit of others. The curriculum, as a whole, seeks to define "common practic-
es" emerging from these principles of reflective practice, such as a belief in reflec-
tion and assessment, which are both essential components of effective teaching
and learning. Currently this belief informs the department's recent adoption of
ePortfolios as a strategy to improve teaching and learning. In addition, many
faculty in composition studies, creative writing, and in our program use service-
learning or client projects. All of us believe in teaching students the value of self-
reflection, critical reading and analysis, and a multicultural context, three of six
essential learning objectives our faculty have agreed are essential for all English
majors. Despite occasional difficulties, this agreement on common practices has
led to a form of reverence and respect among the faculty that "does not stop at
boundaries" and "overlooks differences of culture" (Woodruff 84). The result, we
believe, is a "techne for citizens" (de Romilly 30) in which students gain qualities
Cicero believed were essential to making human social life possible: practical ex-
perience, expert knowledge, and a sense of responsibility for private and public
life (6).

   professional writing: then (1998) and now

         To understand how our program and department have come to oper-
ate with what I believe is a form of reverence, I begin with some contextual/
historical information. I am in my tenth year of service to the English Depart-
ment at Virginia Tech, and during this entire time I have been responsible for
the professional writing program, even before a program existed. In 1998, the
year I was hired, Virginia Tech, a Carnegie-rated research level I university with
a traditional department of English, had no program in technical or profes-

                                                                                                 279
Dubinsky

sional writing, unlike many of its peers (e.g., Purdue or North Carolina State).
Our department had 101 personnel, but only one with a PhD in Rhetoric and
Composition or Professional Communication. The department's emphasis was
literature, although there were a number of prominent creative writers on the
faculty as well. English majors could add a Professional Writing Cluster, but this
"cluster" was hollow, consisting of the two service courses (English 3774--Busi-
ness Writing and English 3764--Technical Writing) and a course in Advanced
Composition, which had no defined, consistent content. Equally important to
note is a fact that I learned during my interview process that the reputation of
these service courses in other colleges, particularly in the College of Business,
had been diminishing.1 There were no graduate courses in professional or tech-
nical writing and only one in composition--the required course in pedagogy
for the graduate assistants, taught by Dr. Paul Heilker, who then directed the
program in Composition.

         Despite what I've just outlined, my position was highly vulnerable.
During my interview with the dean, I learned that I was "an experiment"--the
department's first tenure-track faculty with an advanced degree in Rhetoric and
Professional Communication. For the first three years, the dean's office would
pay sixty percent of my salary, and the dean told me quite directly that my con-
tract renewal would depend on my success in reviving the credibility of the two
"service" courses (Business and Technical Writing), expanding our emphasis in
outreach, integrating technology into the curricula more effectively, and creating
a program in Professional Writing, one that could be extended into a graduate
program.2 Despite the administrative duties involved, I would teach a full load
and would be expected to conduct and publish research. The challenge, needless
to say, was daunting.

         Ten years later our department has ninety personnel--fewer overall,
but a higher percentage of permanent faculty and virtually no adjunct or tem-
porary faculty. More to the point, now eleven of the ninety (or twelve percent
of total and over twenty-five percent of tenure track) have PhDs in Rhetoric,
Composition, and/or Professional Communication. Several of these eleven are
senior hires who have significant administrative roles in and out of the depart-
ment (e.g., Carolyn Rude is our department chair; Diana George directs our
Composition program and Writing Center; Kelly Belanger directs our Center
for the Study of Rhetoric in Society; and Shelli Fowler directs a major university
initiative for graduate education). Our Professional Writing Program not only
exists, but it is one of the three options for English majors. We counted, as of last
spring (2008), just over two hundred majors and minors, and our curriculum
consists of nine courses at the undergraduate (3000-4000) level in addition to
the two, previously mentioned, service courses. Equally significant is the fact

280
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

that enrollment in those two service courses has more than doubled (eleven sec-
tions of English 3774 and twenty-seven of English 3764), and we've quadrupled
the number of online sections. We regularly offer graduate courses at the MA
level, and we now have a PhD in Rhetoric and Writing.

                  starting from scratch

         As is evident with the brief overview, much has changed in the years
since I arrived. But, like a relative always told me when I faced a very large
project: one eats an elephant one bite at a time. So to help understand what has
happened, it helps to understand my approach, which was to treat this task like
a qualitative research project. In essence, I began with a needs assessment.

         Before I could consider making any changes, I had to understand what
was present. I needed first-hand knowledge of our current service courses and
their impact on our majors and on the university at large, because so many
departments required their students to take them. To address that lack of knowl-
edge, I began by teaching both courses. In addition, I surveyed the faculty who
were and had been teaching them and examined their syllabi. Finally, to under-
stand why people, particularly those in other departments, were dissatisfied with
these courses, I visited our "client" departments and colleges, talking with their
curriculum committees and surveying their faculty.

         What I learned, particularly from the School of Business faculty, who
six years before had "delisted" English 3774 as a required course, was useful. I
learned that many departments would prefer that their students take a course
dedicated to writing taught by qualified faculty, but they had been unsatisfied
with the instruction previously. Our department's credibility was damaged, and
my interviews with current English faculty confirmed that they were aware of
the problem.

         Most important, I gathered perceptions that other departments had
of our department's writing programs, to include first-year composition, on
whose curriculum committee I sat. I learned, in detail, what other departments
hoped we would teach their students. I learned where our writing courses fit
into their curricula. I also learned a lot about the ways in which faculty across
the university saw writing in general, whether or not they felt competent to
integrate it into their own curricula, and why they believed students needed
to learn to communicate. I learned, in effect, what they envisioned or knew
about writing and writing instruction. Bringing this information back to the
department proved helpful in many ways, not the least of which was commu-
nity building, which was perhaps the first step toward "common practices."

                                                                                                 281
Dubinsky

         During conversations with the directors of our Center for Excellence
in Undergraduate Teaching, the Office of Educational Technologies, and sev-
eral associate provosts, I learned about the directions the university was moving
as it revisioned its strategic plan and about several major curricular initiatives
concerning undergraduate education. I learned, for instance, that the university
intended to focus more intently on enhancing its status as a research institution
while reviving its land-grant mission and outreach/engagement. One of the foci
to achieving both goals would be to use technology to increase access and build
bridges to communities. The Center for Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
was already involved in a number of such projects with local schools, and I be-
came an affiliated faculty member.

  building bridges & finding common ground:
                   long-term strategies

         My data gathering and subsequent reflection led to my taking some
immediate steps, with an eye toward developing long-term goals. My immedi-
ate steps focused on my own pedagogy to see if I might develop a model for
others to follow. To that end, I enlisted the assistance of the Service-Learning
Center to introduce me to nonprofit agencies and to help me learn more about
our community's needs. I believed that service-learning pedagogy was a route to
create engaged citizens, a topic I subsequently wrote about ("Service-learning").
This strategy fit in well with the university's long-term goal of revitalizing its
land-grant and outreach missions. And it enabled me to give students hands-on,
experiential learning opportunities, ones that, if successful, would also build
both their resumes and excitement, which I hoped would help to enhance our
department's credibility.

         Longer term strategies were equally, if not more important. I was in a
department that was both welcoming and a bit wary of my presence. Histori-
cally a literature department, the faculty recognized that the number of majors
had dropped considerably (about three hundred when I arrived). Still, there
were strong opinions about service, service courses, and being considered a
service department that I had to overcome. As I've written about elsewhere,
my strategy was to build bridges and demonstrate that, while professional and
technical writing were applied disciplines, they were not vocational ("Status
of Service"). In addition, our discipline produced knowledge and often relied
on some of the same research methods used by those in literature. One of my
essential tactics in that strategy involved a capstone course, rooted in rhetorical
analysis, that would help students recognize the impact that texts have on pub-

282
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

lic policy. Thus, at the end of their program, after working on project-based,
experiential learning courses, professional writing students would step back
and analyze the impact that the kinds of texts they had been creating could
have in a variety of contexts. Rhetoric and its historical connection to teach-
ing and to the roots of all literature departments became my bridge (Thelin,
Beale, Rudolph, Murphy).

         The capstone course, ultimately entitled Issues in Professional and Pub-
lic Discourse, became the senior seminar for professional writing students. To
have this course qualify for the seminar status, which did not occur for several
years,3 I had to demonstrate to my colleagues on the undergraduate curriculum
committee how it met the pre-defined criteria for senior seminars designed for
literature majors. These criteria centered around two key issues: research and
analysis of central texts. In such a capstone course, students would have to de-
velop "the ability to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the discur-
sive, social, historical, biographical, or cultural contexts out of which or against
which literature is written" (Rubric). The challenge was to create an argument
that substituted nonfiction policy texts for literature. Doing so did not prove to
be nearly as difficult as one might expect with the more recent interests of some
faculty in popular culture, in historiography, and in social theory.

         While I was gathering data, teaching, and rethinking the service
courses, I was also meeting and becoming familiar with the strong core of fac-
ulty who were dedicated to teaching writing - both composition and technical
writing. I recruited a few interested instructors, two with PhDs, to be on what
started out as a brownbag discussion group on professional writing (PW). This
group met once every three weeks. I also received an outreach grant from our
college, which enabled me to hold a one-day colloquy (Bringing Business to
Business Writing) and put together an initial website that we used as a basis
for our current program home. At the colloquy, I met some people who were
then working in industry as tech writers, and encouraged them to come back
to teach, outlining the potential of the new program. One, Marie Paretti, did,
and, with her exceptional background, was hired. Thus at the end of year one,
a core group of faculty were gathered, and the roots were growing.

year 2: writing proposals and funding change

         In the fall of my second year, the department appointed me head of a
PW Task Force and for the next two years, our core group of faculty studied key
programs and curricula across the country, and I networked with other program
developers, using CPTSC and ATTW as forums. With some curricular data

                                                                                                 283
Dubinsky

to use for support, we then asked for money to find out whether or not the
university truly was behind this "experiment." We submitted grant proposals
for course development, using most of the money to buy down instructor loads
(from 4/4 to 3/3), which would give them time to assist me with course develop-
ment (to include creating materials for an online course).4

         In those proposals, our arguments, at first, were quite pragmatic. We
began by examining the university's own documents, such as the College of
Arts and Sciences' Annual Report. In that document, we discovered that the
college asked the departments to meet Objective 5.2, which had as a goal "to
assure ourselves and our publics that we prepare students appropriately to
become professionals" (1). We argued that the ad hoc group become more
substantive and embedded in the fabric of the department and college. Doing
so would give us credibility and visibility.

         We also looked at institutional research, where a wealth of survey data
resides. By examining alumni surveys, we learned that fifty-eight percent of re-
cent graduates indicated that writing is of "great" or "critical" importance, and
eighty-three percent indicated that writing is of at least "some" importance in
nearly every profession surveyed. In these surveys, graduates also focused on the
need to develop problem-solving and oral communication skills.

         We then connected the dots, making linkages between these skills and
the university's increasing emphasis on information technology, which was so
evident in all of its recent communications, particularly its two magazines fo-
cusing on research and alumni relations. Using data such as job lists in Money
magazine in which technical writing was listed as one of the ten hottest profes-
sions,5 we explained that technical/professional writers work in fields as diverse
as computer software documentation, engineering, science, and medicine. They
also work as WWW designers, information and media specialists for multimedia
companies, and in business corporations.

         We argued that courses in the proposed professional writing track
would address several of the university's strategic concerns. The skill sets that
students would develop and the practical experience they would obtain would
help them better achieve their career goals and prepare them to be life-long
learners. Equally, if not more important, we argued that these same skill sets,
when applied using service-learning or client project pedagogy would help
them mature into professional citizens of the world. They would become, in
Cicero's terms, ideal orators.

         As I said, our initial focus was on pragmatic concerns: teaching students
to write clear, coherent prose; adapting their skills to meet the demands of chang-
ing technologies; gathering and interpreting data; and planning and managing
projects. We wanted to assist them to develop transferable skills by providing

284
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

hands-on opportunities with many of the leading software packages (word pro-
cessing, spreadsheet, graphic arts, WWW design, telecommunication, etc.).

         We also drew from the alumni surveys to argue that a program in
professional writing was long overdue. Several alumni had commented that a
"concentration or degree [in professional writing] would be a good addition,"
and a recent outside evaluator, surprised at our current configuration, had said
that "Virginia Tech would seem to be an ideal place for . . . valuable training in
technical matters and clear prose." We buttressed this claim with an argument
from example, explaining that many of our peer institutions (e.g., Purdue) had
recognized the need for such programs long ago and had thriving programs
that were continuing to grow.

         Finally, we tackled one of the most difficult arguments--that of pro-
fessional and technical writing being seen as too applied or worse, too vo-
cational. We reasoned that if the goals were to insure that students have the
skills necessary for success and to prepare students to be competitive for the
jobs described above, the university needed to support courses that develop
professional competencies. Recognizing that for many years, such courses
have met with resistance,6 we argued that our potential program provided an
opportunity to reverse that trend.

         But pragmatism and logic only go so far. We also wanted to appeal to
the hearts of many of the university leaders, who were starting to resurrect key
initiatives tied to Virginia Tech's historic, land-grant mission. Because I had
already experienced success with the service-learning projects I'd tried ("Ser-
vice-Learning"), we chose to highlight the opportunities to work with clients
in the nonprofit sector as part of a coordinated service-learning strand that we
intended to thread through the program. I began using this pedagogical strat-
egy in the service courses (Business and Technical Writing), then I integrated it
into every pilot course I taught, as did my colleagues. I began to work closely
with the Service-Learning Center, and I was fortunate to win two university
awards, which elevated the work's value in the eyes of my colleagues and led to
further pedagogical discussions, both formal and informal. Several new hires,
such as my current assistant director who is also a director of a non-profit or-
ganization, applied because of the emphasis on service-learning that we had.
Students were receiving additional internship and co-op opportunities, and we
received positive affirmation from the college. The service-learning component
provided students with valuable experience as they applied concepts learned
in academic contexts to real-world need. More to the point of program build-
ing, it offered needed credibility and visibility. As a result, our appeals using
student and community partner testimony were very effective. These appeals,
I learned later, sealed the deal. And we were funded.

                                                                                                 285
Dubinsky

         The funding enabled us to develop and pilot several courses such as
the Rhetoric of Disaster and Discovery (a predecessor of the current capstone
course mentioned earlier). We also created an outline for a curriculum (see
Figure 1), which led to five course proposals being submitted for approval at
the university level in the spring of 2000.

       year 3: credibility and faculty hires

         In the third year, given we had a curriculum designed and approved
and had already submitted six courses to the university, my department chair
appointed me director of a "program." However, we still had a long road
ahead, as only I could teach the 4000-level courses, and the entire under-
graduate curriculum was being revised to adjust to/accommodate this shift of
resources toward writing. With my colleagues, we:

   · Continued developing & piloting courses
   · Submitted course proposals for university approval
   · Changed the department's governance and administrative structure to cre-

       ate a Professional Writing Committee
   · Requested that one of the instructors with a PhD be appointed assistant

       director with a one-course relief (down to 4/3)
   · Requested English 3764 (Technical Writing) be designated as a Writing

       Intensive course
   · Developed our program website
   · Argued for the hire of another assistant professor

All these goals were achieved, and the dean, who had been skeptical three years
prior, approved two hires: Eva Brumberger and Jim Collier. What made this
decision so important, in terms of the longer-term strategy, was that I was not
the one to actually ask for two hires; a senior literature faculty member with an
endowed chair did the asking. As a key faculty member on the personnel com-
mittee and an active participant in curricular issues, Dr. Ernie Sullivan made
the case for these hires after I had presented a status report along with the
proposed curriculum to the dean. Having the support of the literature faculty,
who had lost a number of positions recently due to retirement, had a power-
ful impact on the dean. It spoke to culture change in the department and a
growing sense that Professional Writing might actually be a valuable addition.

         We chose Eva and Jim on the basis of their fields of expertise (Eva's
background in rhetoric, technical communication, and composition; and Jim's

286
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

PhD in Science and Technology studies). Part of our vision included creating a
team who could talk with and serve the various departments/colleges and meet
their and their students' needs (looking to attract a variety of students to the
minor and hoping to work with the Institutes/Centers springing up across cam-
pus in Biotechnology & Leadership for instance): I would handle business /

Courses in the Professional Writing Option
Courses listed with asterisks are required

                                                  English 3104
                                     Introduction to Professional Writing*

                                                  English 3804
                                           Technical Editing & Style*

         English 3814                                        English 3824
Creating User Documentation                        Designing Documents for Print

        English 4804                                  English 4814
Grant Proposals and Reports                        Writing for the Web

                English 4874
Issues in Professional & Public Discourse*

                             Additional Electives

  English 3764                                      English 4824
Technical Writing*                                 Science Writing

                              English 3774
                             Business Writing

                                            Special Topics Courses

figure 1: draft of curriculum ca. 2000
                                                                                                 287
Dubinsky

educational leadership / outreach; Marie would be excellent for engineering;
Jim would handle the natural sciences and philosophy; and Eva would focus on
graphic arts and computer science and be a general support for all.

         years 4-6: achieving sustainability

         As year four began, with Jim and Eva arriving, we had a foundation and
enough of a core group of faculty to start thinking ahead further (the success
convinced the chair to give me a one-course release--the department recognized
that my administrative duties had been heavy and consuming, and I needed to
spend more time on research--it was clear that the admin load wasn't lessening).
During this year (2001-02), with Jim and Eva's assistance, we:

   · Submitted the final three course proposals for university approval
   · Began preliminary work on a potential thread in International/Intercul-

       tural communication (we just had a new course in Intercultural Issues in
       Professional Writing approved)
   · Argued for and were able to hire instructors with backgrounds in techni-
       cal/professional writing.

         In 2002, with the core of the program in place, Jim and Eva taking
root and starting to establish their reputations--at VT and nationally, and
students coming (forty-three English majors interested in the PW option and
over forty minors), the department and new dean listened favorably to our
argument about further growth--this time in the graduate realm (e.g., a PhD
program since it would help the university achieve its strategic goals). Hiring
Carolyn Rude (Texas Tech--past president of ATTW) was the result, with
our argument being that we could never even hope for a PhD program unless
we had a senior scholar / administrator to help guide us, as well as to attract
students and other faculty.

         Sustainability requires what Carolyn has called a "critical mass" of
faculty. While we had hired successfully, maintaining a program means having
the junior faculty achieve institutional acceptance, through the tenure and
promotion process. Because Paul had been tenured in Composition, we had
some hope that the university would value those of us with backgrounds in
Rhetoric and accept the kinds of work we did. And, in that critical sixth year,
I was fortunate enough to be tenured. Since then, Jim and Eva have been as
well, and we've hired additional faculty, enough to grow the program and sus-
tain it.

288
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

      service-learning and the scholarship
                         of engagement

         I am a firm believer in the work of Ernest Boyer and his argument that
there are different kinds of scholarship worth considering. My argument for
tenure was predicated, in part, on Boyer's work, and, as such, was not much
different than the arguments we had made years before for grant money. I ar-
gued, using my dissertation as a starting place, that research, teaching, service,
and administrative work are all of a piece, a kind of möbius strip of theory and
practice. I focused on reinvigorating the rhetorical concept of technê in the field
of professional communication, a concept that includes both art and craft and
represents a practical wisdom directed toward some end, a field in which one of
the central issues is the study of language use in the public forum in order to
prepare students to succeed in that forum as practitioners and citizens. In par-
ticular, my emphasis was on technê's social, ethical, and rational richness, and its
importance to the teaching of writing at the undergraduate and graduate levels
due to its connection to civic engagement. Along with my interests in critical
thinking and collaborative learning, this focus on technê was significant in my
scholarly work and my efforts to build a professional writing program at Virginia
Tech.

         My goal was to place professional communication within the discipline
of English Studies, by focusing on its humanistic elements, while distinguishing it
from other fields in the discipline--such as literature--by raising up its connec-
tion to service and the practical applications involved that often require research
in workplace settings. I argued for process, for a broad understanding not only of
writing, but also of the contexts of writing and its impact on people, explaining
that much of the research is conducted either in the classroom (the site of learn-
ing) or in the workplace (the site of practice). Thus, my argument was that our
field requires an interdisciplinary perspective; we work to understand issues of
problem solving and critical thinking, usability, document design, cognition, as
well as standard issues of grammar and style. We have to be conversant with the
latest developments in technology because we teach students to use a variety of
media through which meaning is made. And our research methods range from
historical and rhetorical to quantitative and qualitative. Like many of our literary
colleagues, we study texts, but we also study the use and production of those texts;
thus, we are often ethnographers. Finally, because the work is focused on process
and because one of the sites of research is also the classroom, we are reflective prac-
titioners who understand the art or technê of teaching.

         I advocated a user-centered, reflective stance ("Reflective Practitioners"),
linking classical rhetorical theory to teacher preparation and the concept of ex-

                                                                                                 289
Dubinsky

periential learning. I argued for the importance of both a particular stance--that
of a reflective practitioner--and a method of teacher preparation at the graduate
level. My emphasis on the concept of civic engagement emerged from a com-
bination of my historical research into the Aristotelian notion of technê and
the emphasis the field places on practical wisdom. My argument about technê
came, in part, from making a case for service-learning as a pedagogical strategy
that helps students become more reflective, enables them to make both practical
and ethical judgments while acting for the public good, and gives them op-
portunities to apply the key concepts, strategies, and skills they learn ("Service-
learning"). Service-learning and client projects served to bridge the gap between
practical courses in the curriculum, which are linked to a market-economy, and
the ideal of public service, an ideal central to Virginia Tech's culture.

         In our program, we have striven to remediate the negative connotation
of what "service" can be. As we see it, the two service courses and the minor we
offer serve the needs of our department and the many departments who under-
stand the practical value of communicating effectively. These courses also serve
our university by furthering the primary mission described within my univer-
sity's motto of "Ut Prosim" or "That I May Serve." Finally, we serve our depart-
ment by demonstrating that the production of knowledge is not separate from
the rhetorical acts involved in such production. Thus, even though we serve, the
service we do can be and is often seen as essential, which is in opposition to those
who argue that service is menial.

         By embracing service as a pedagogical goal, by focusing on the schol-
arship of engagement, by linking theory and practice to teach students and
achieve a key strategic goal of the university, we built our status and achieved
recognition. Students learned to solve problems and think critically, which are
not narrow, utilitarian goals; they began to realize that what they were learning
had vocational, academic, and moral/social components (Boyte). One student
in one of my grant writing classes said:

   English 4804 was more than just a class; it was an experience. It was more
   than academic; it was humanistic. This course taught me much more than
   how to effectively complete all the steps in the grant writing process. Each
   class, I learned something more about "taking life personally, letting the lives
   that touch [mine] touch [me]" (Remen). This course also forced me to do
   a little self-assessing, to look at myself and ask "how good a person am I"
   (Mills).

   While working with my service-learning partner, Craig County Public
   Schools (CCPS), I developed a relationship with Mr. Stephen Janoschka, the

290
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

   agricultural education teacher in the high school, and Mr. Jimmy Hender-
   son, the agricultural education teacher in the middle school. This partnership
   really was a "relationship between equals" (Remen).

Another said,

   If there's anything I learned the most about, it is about service and giving
   back to the community. I have never really volunteered much in the past,
   nor have I involved myself in any community before; however, when I heard
   those speakers and how they devote their lives to serve others within the
   community, I began to wonder "why?" I never really had a good answer
   in my head until just now. In Rachel Remen's essay (2002), she describes
   how lonely people begin to feel as they become older and how this quest for
   independence has left many unable to ask for assistance; asking for help is a
   sign of weakness. But she says something that I never considered: "A helping
   relationship may incur a sense of debt, but service, like healing, is mutual."
   Humans are social beings; they need each other. When you do something for
   someone else, you're helping yourself as well as the community. When you
   sacrifice, you are actually getting more back than you are giving.

         Service-learning has been one very effective way our program puts
its "money where its mouth is" by providing a pragmatic, rhetorical, and hu-
manistic education. In our courses we begin with the concrete skill of editing,
and the more abstract skill of recognizing that what matters about forms and
genres is not "substance or the form of discourse but ... the action it is used
to accomplish" (Miller 151). Following the two required courses, we offer cli-
ent or service-learning projects in nearly every elective. By doing so, students
develop skills and insights by focusing on complex problems that often have
social and/or cultural elements.

         We believe that all students need to become familiar with technolo-
gies associated with information design to authentically contribute to the com-
munity. To this end, we design assignments with pragmatic and social goals
(e.g., writing grants or designing promotional materials), and we help students
develop their skills as professional writers while cultivating a sense of civic ideal-
ism. Service-learning projects enable students to join with others and put their
knowledge to work in the communities in which they live. Through techno-
logically mediated writing, students gain opportunities to move back and forth
between the campus and the community. Rather than making their "clients"
more abstract, students are more deeply connected to them when they are able
to fulfill their needs by making documents have strong visual appeal and public

                                                                                                 291
Dubinsky

currency. Service-learning projects enhance students' curiosity about the people
they meet and the problems they encounter.

         In another sense, our current capstone course in the Professional Writ-
ing Option--Issues in Professional and Public Discourse--is also a service-
learning course. It enables students to apply the analytic skills they learned
while studying literature to documents in the public forum (e.g., Presidential
Report on the Space Shuttle Challenger and A Silent Spring). This course gives
students the opportunity to see workplace applications of their critical think-
ing skills and give them insight into the functions that documents (and thus
writers) play in the shaping of policy.

         Our curriculum is where our theories are enacted. By offering a range
of courses and concluding with one that has, as its core, the goal of teaching
analysis, we were able to bridge a gap between literature and professional writ-
ing; by focusing on the genre of nonfiction and its characteristics, we bridged
a gap between creative and professional writing. We help English majors, our
students, see the breadth of the discipline while applying what they know and
learning to see from different perspectives.

         As I have stated elsewhere ("Status"), our program takes a tacit tradi-
tion linked to the pejorative term of "service" and brings it into the open for
examination and discussion. We teach problem-solving through service-learn-
ing, client projects, and rhetorical analysis of social and public policy. We offer
a rhetorical education that has larger purposes, demonstrating that the pro-
duction of knowledge is not separate from the rhetorical acts involved in that
production. We value service and demonstrate its value to the university. We
do not hide our relationship with service nor do we deny the value of teaching
students to become reflective practitioners not only by understanding how to
do essential tasks associated with writing/designing but also by understanding
how the work they do and the situations contributing to that work contribute
to the effectiveness of the organizations they're part of and the larger social
system (28-29).

                           conclusion

         I began this essay by referring to two very different concepts: "magi-
cal thinking" and "reverence." In reality, "magical thinking" was closer to a
rhetorical process involving imagination, collaboration, and deliberation. The
work that emerged from that process led to a form of reverence among the
many pedagogical and theoretical positions represented in our department
insofar as very different positions about what English Studies is were bridged

292
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

by finding common ground about "common practices." We built our program
the old-fashioned way: we made arguments, relying on logic by extracting data
from the university's own documents, on ethos by forging links with other
departments, and on pathos by developing an inclusive philosophy and cur-
riculum that integrated the technical and humanistic. An essential component
to this work and its success was the notion that professional writing has, as
all humanistic disciplines do, a larger purpose that focuses on power, people,
and values or what others frame as "political, economic, and ideological ten-
sions" (Longo 8). We discovered service-learning was a rhetorical strategy for
gaining the university's heart, which became central to our understanding of
the structure for our program. It provided a means of building relationships
through teaching and learning, which inculcated respect. As Woodruff says,
"to understand respect in a given culture, you need to look closely at how
groups work together" (200). Through service-learning, teachers and students
and their partners recognize that "they belong together in a common effort--
to understand something that is important to understand" (202), and this
"something," like Frost's "something that doesn't love a wall," has everything
to do with community, with bridging the gap between theory and practice.

         For our students, the theoretical becomes practical because it is related
to living and working. But implementing this pedagogy isn't easy; finding
the balance between service and learning is as difficult as finding the balance
between theory and practice or workplace and academe. Our hope, at least
my hope, is that this story will provide a text for teachers in our field, who
will, after reading it, contribute to the conversation about the roles we have to
teach with both pragmatic and social outcomes in mind. Service will, as I've
said elsewhere ("Status"), become a concept that we can talk about, define,
develop, and defend to argue effectively for our place in the academy. Such a
discussion may help us see teaching as a technê , as a kind of activity in the
Aristotelian sense, which has an outcome and an end or purpose (telos). With
this conversation, we may more clearly have a conception not only of how to
teach but also of why. Knowing why and helping our students understand that
rationale "turns out to be a form of influence; it lies not so much in one's own
operation as in the cooperation of others" (Dunne 359). A powerful result of
this conversation, while perhaps not magical and surely not concluded in a
year's time, will be that prospective teachers will see that reflexivity is not in-
dividual, but collaborative and that what may occur in one course, while not
necessarily reproducible, will potentially lead to ideas/changes in pedagogy
in other courses and in curricula as a whole. Knowing this and being able to
discuss it may lead to "open-mindedness," as well as an appreciation of and
reverence for what we and our colleagues do.

                                                                                                 293
Dubinsky

                                notes

1 In 1998, the department offered, on average, only two sections of English
3774 per semester and fourteen of English 3764. Nearly all of these sections
(over eighty-five percent) were taught by instructors, most with MA degrees in
literature.
2 The actual tasks, as outlined in a Request for Targeted Allocation submitted by
the English department, were to

   · develop and offer graduate courses in Professional and Technical Writing
       and Communication and in the pedagogy of these areas

   · develop the writing and communication abilities of Virginia Tech under-
       graduates by developing and offering undergraduate courses in Profes-
       sional and Technical Writing and Communication

   · develop the faculty capability to offer significant Outreach activities
       and services in Professional and Technical Writing and Communication
       (1997).

3 In year two, I proposed a special topics course (entitled The Rhetoric and
Disaster and Discovery), which I taught in year three. In years four and five, we
negotiated the revised and expanded English curriculum at the undergraduate
curriculum committee then the department level. In year five the department
approved the revised curriculum, and in year six, it was officially part of the
university catalog.
4 See http://wiz.cath.vt.edu/tw/
5 The Atlanta Constitution recently ran an article listing Technical Communica-
tion in the top five fields.
6 "the university has been slow to recognize the legitimacy of courses that empha-
size the professional preparation of students" (Myra Gordon 7).

                           works cited

Applebee, Arthur N. Curriculum as Conversation. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996.
Beale, Walter. A Pragmatic Theory of Rhetoric. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois

   UP, 1987.
Bellah, Robert, et al. Habits of the Heart. Berkeley, CA: U of California P, 1985.
Boyer, Ernest. "The Scholarship of Engagement." Journal of Public Service and

   Outreach 1 (1996): 11-20.
Boyer, Ernest. Scholarship Reconsidered. Princeton, NJ: Carnegie Foundation for

   the Advancement of Teaching, 1990.

294
                                                                                        A Techné for Citizens

Boyer, Ernest. Higher Learning in the Nation's Service. Washington, DC: Carnegie
   Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1981.

Boyte, Harry. "What is citizenship education?" Rethinking Tradition: Integrating
   Service with Academic Study on College Campuses. Denver: Education Commis-
   sion of the States, 1993. 63-73.

Brubacher, John S., and Willis Rudy. Higher Education in Transition: A History of
   American Colleges and Universities. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers,
   1997.

Cicero: On the Ideal Orator. Trans. James M. May and Jakob Wisse. New York:
   Oxford UP, 2001.

de Romilly, Jacqueline. Magic and Rhetoric in Ancient Greece. Cambridge, MA:
   Harvard UP, 1975.

Dewey, John. "Education and the Social Order." John Dewey: The Later Works.
   Vol. 9. Ed. J. A. Boydston. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois UP, 1934a/1986.
   175-185.

Dewey, John. "The Supreme Intellectual Obligation." John Dewey: The Later Works.
   Vol. 9. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1934b/1986. 96-101.

Dubinsky, James M. "Becoming User-Centered, Reflectives Practitioners." Teach-
   ing Technical Communication: Critical Issues for the Classroom. Boston: Bedford/
   St. Martin's, 2004. 1-14.

Dubinsky, James M. "The Status of Service in Learning." Innovative Approaches to
   the Teaching of Technical Communication. Ed. Tracy Bridgeford, Karla Kitalong,
   and Dickie Selfe. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press, 2004: 15-30.

Dubinsky, James M. "Service-Learning as a Path to Virtue: The Ideal Orator in
   Professional Communication." Michigan Journal of Community Service Learn-
   ing 8, no. 2 (2002): 61-74.

Dubinsky, James M., and Tracy Bridgeford. "The Place of Communication in
   Technical Writing Programs." CPTSC 2001 Proceedings. Council for Pro-
   grams in Technical and Scientific Communication, Pittsburgh, 2001: 72-73.

Dunne, Joseph. Back to the Rough Ground: Phronesis and Techne in Modern Philoso-
   phy and in Aristotle. Notre Dame: U of Notre Dame P, 1993.

Gordon, Myra. "Annual Report of the College of Arts and Sciences." Virginia
   Tech, Blacksburg, 2000.

Longo, Bernadette. Spurious Coin: History of Science, Management, and Technical
   Writing. Albany, NY: SUNY P, 2000.

Miller, Carolyn R. "Genre as Social Action." Quarterly Journal of Speech 70 (May
   1984): 151-167.

Murphy, James J. "Rhetorical History as a Guide to the Salvation of American
   Reading and Writing: A Plea for Curricular Courage." The Rhetorical Tradition
   and Modern Writing. Ed. James J. Murphy. New York: MLA, 1982. 3-12.

                                                                                                 295
Dubinsky

Norstedt, Johann, and Joyce Smoot. Request for Targeted Allocation. Report for the
   Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Virginia Tech, 1997.

Remen, Rachel. "Belonging." My Grandfather's Blessing. New York: Riverhead
   Books, 2002. 197-201.

Rudolph, Frederick. Curriculum: A History of the American Undergraduate Course
   of Study since 1636. Prepared for the Carnegie Council on Policy Studies in
   Higher Education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992.

Thelin, John R. A History of American Higher Education. Baltimore: Johns Hop-
   kins UP, 2004.

Woodruff, Paul. Reverence: Renewing a Forgotten Virtue. New York: Oxford UP,
   2001.

296
16 Models of Professional Writing / Technical Writing
  Administration: Reflections of a Serial Administrator at
  Syracuse University

   Carol Lipson

         Over a thirty-year career at Syracuse University, I have been involved
in setting up programs in Professional and Technical Writing (PTW) more
than once, and I have also had some involvement in helping lay the ground-
work for two other programs. The contexts for these various experiences dif-
fered greatly, and in all cases local circumstances and negotiation of immedi-
ate local and surrounding campus cultures had a lot to do with the outcome
of such efforts. My reflections in the pages that follow attempt to explain
through example the complex ways that programs are based on human net-
works, not on theory and scholarship alone. I try to provide a sense of the
decisions I made as I determined how best to function within the different
institutional settings.

         The programs I've helped develop and worked within illustrate two
major frameworks. The first involves developing a PTW program within an
institutional culture whose leadership structure encourages the separation
and independence of program/course leaders. The individual responsibilities
of such leaders are segregated (in my case, separate program leaders in tech-
nical writing, composition, and English as a Second Language). The intel-
lectual, pedagogical and curricular agendas are developed independently, and
they affect one another only tangentially. The second major framework is one
in which the various strands of writing--composition/rhetoric and techni-
cal writing, for instance--are intertwined. The responsibility for leadership
of each program is more distributed, less hierarchal. While neither of these
approaches is inherent in a particular department structure, the first is more
common in English departments, where no strong tradition exists of collabo-
ration in scholarship, teaching, or administration. And though the second
framework is more common to independent writing programs, my experience
makes clear that writing program leaders can assume power in multiple ways,
involving totally different degrees of collaboration with and involvement of
others. Both frameworks provide opportunities and both involve difficulties.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2010.2348.2.16  297
Lipson

My goal here is not to recommend one over the other, since such advice would
be superfluous (faculty do not generally get to choose the history and context
of their workplace). Instead, I wish to describe the experiences and concerns
that arose in each situation. At the cusp of retirement, I hope this analysis is
useful for those who are interested either in the recent history of our disci-
pline's development, or for those who are facing the challenges of constructing
or managing programs in similar institutional situations.

               model #1: separate domains,
                   and retooling for ptw

         I began my academic work in technical writing as a three-quarter-time
assistant professor in English, soon to be hired on to the tenure track in 1979. A
new Dean had become concerned that large undergraduate writing courses were
being led by part-time faculty. In the case of PTW, he saw that these courses
were becoming popular with different constituencies on campus, and the de-
mand was growing beyond my ability to teach them all. Rather than ask a part-
time faculty member, even one with a PhD, to train and mentor other PTW
teachers and to teach graduate courses, he approved a national search for a single
tenure-track faculty position.

         My hiring for this position was not automatic. I had no scholarly record
in technical writing, nor did I have a degree in the field.1 That was a quite com-
mon situation for technical-writing faculty in those days, since there were few
opportunities to get academic training. I don't think I was the search commit-
tee's first choice; the main competition was someone with a little more relevant
scholarly preparation than I had. But to my pleasure, I did get the position.
As the hiring committee requested, I soon developed an introductory graduate
course required for those graduate-student and part-time teachers we were as-
signing to teach the 400-level technical-writing course. Because the 400-level
course kept growing especially quickly, not all of the potential teachers could
take the graduate-level training course in time; for these individuals, I recom-
mended summer institutes for teachers offered on campuses such as nearby RPI,
and obtained funding to support their attendance.

         Quite soon, I was supervising and mentoring twelve PTW teachers,
a small sub-community in an English department that was otherwise devoted
mostly to the study of literature, to the teaching and practice of creative writing,
and increasingly to the study of continental theory. The content of that early
technical-writing course was quite common to the field, introducing students to
various types of technical documents: instructions, reports, proposals, memos,

298
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

etc. Teachers-- mostly part-time faculty but also graduate students--had free-
dom to develop their own syllabi, course activities, and assignments as long as
they addressed the required formal elements. From this kernel, the technical-
writing teachers began to grow into a community. I soon took advantage of
our successes to benefit these teachers. Since the Engineering and Management
colleges were willing to pay much more than did Arts and Sciences to hire our
teachers for their summer and subsidiary programs, I was able to successfully
negotiate salary increases for the part-time technical-writing instructors. As a
result, the technical-writing course was able to attract very strong, flexible teach-
ers. I held a small number of group meetings, but since my own teaching load
involved three courses one semester, and two the next, in a department with
heavy research expectations, and since I needed to retool for technical-writing
scholarship, I had to step back and concentrate on my own publication output,
leaving the talented teachers to do what they did best. Because I had been on
fellowship for all but two quarters of my graduate study, I was in fact more of
a neophyte teacher than the high-quality part-timers I was supervising. Their
expertise in teaching technical writing developed organically, as they shared syl-
labi and assignments. We continued to see steadily increasing demand for the
400-level PTW course, as well as increased stature on campus.

         Soon I was able to establish a technical-writing advanced workshop at
the undergraduate level and a related one at the graduate level; these work-
shops were designed for English majors, MA students, and doctoral students
who might want to consider technical writing as a career. Before long, graduate
students from other disciplines--all facing grim academic job markets--discov-
ered the value of the advanced workshops. I made contacts with local industries
and nonprofits to solicit projects and set up co-op positions, and a fair number
of technical writers and editors began to emerge from Syracuse's English Depart-
ment. Though we had no undergraduate major, graduate certificate, or graduate
degree, by 1985 the PTW program at Syracuse was making a significant impact
in producing technical writers.

         Much of this discussion has been dominated by the first person singu-
lar. As a new faculty member, I was committed to developing my own scholar-
ship as well as to sustaining the quality of our growing program. There was
little time for collaboration. Although a composition faculty member was hired
simultaneously with me to lead an advanced-composition undergraduate course
and to teach graduate courses in composition, the administrative structure in the
English Department tended to favor segregation of the writing programs. We
crossed paths infrequently. He too was busy, arriving with three years of tenure
credit - non-negotiable then. Our responsibilities were separate, and while we
socialized in the first two years, he quickly faced a tenure crunch. With no senior

                                                                                                 299
Lipson

faculty having scholarly interest or expertise in either of our fields, we received
no feedback on scholarship or program leadership, no mentorship, and no ad-
vice. There was no publication such as Design Discourse to help us at the time. It
was clear that our colleagues were attempting to determine what kinds of entities
we really were, and if we were suitable as members of an elite English Depart-
ment. The first department feedback we received occurred after the third-year
review in my case, and at the end of the second year in my colleague's case.

         In fact, an English as a Second Language (ESL) junior faculty member
was hired in the same year as were my composition colleague and I. She did
have two senior ESL faculty in the department, though by this period, neither
of these were active in scholarly publication. She was not hired to lead the ESL
program, though I presume there were expectations that she would invigorate
it. Given that the ESL program leadership predated the new hires in technical-
writing and composition, it's hardly surprising that the ESL program remained
entirely independent from the two others, with no interaction among those in
charge.

         The Syracuse University English Department by the late seventies was
already heavily invested in continental theory, having been influenced by the
1966 Dartmouth conference and its aftermath.2 All new "literature" faculty
positions were offered to scholars with interests and expertise in theory, even if
their areas of research were located within traditional literary periods. And there
were many such hires, to replace the dependence on part-time faculty for upper-
division teaching in literature courses. The Dean who authorized such hiring
could not have anticipated how deeply these new positions would change the
face of the department. As new theoretical and philosophical orientations were
articulated, traditionalist literature faculty were marginalized. It was a period of
deep discord and difficulty. Yet both groups--the traditional literary scholars
and the now-dominant theoretical scholars--seemed only to have a faint curios-
ity about what the composition and technical-writing hires were doing, with not
enough investment or information to either support or confront us directly at
first.

         As graduate students and part-time faculty signed on to take gradu-
ate courses in composition or technical writing, discovering new approaches to
teaching writing, they became extremely dissatisfied with the Freshman English
curriculum they were teaching; it had been designed in the sixties and was led
by a faculty member in romantic literature.3 The two-semester course had been
designed according to the best educational principles of the sixties, but was quite
out of date, reductive, and ossified by the late sixties. The administrator of fresh-
man composition did not follow the scholarship in writing studies and had no
interest in changing the first-year courses to incorporate new theories and prac-

300
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

tices. But change was in the air. Other faculty in the English Department began
to hear that graduate students were excited and stimulated by our graduate-level
course offerings and by the curricula we developed for advanced composition
and technical writing. Discourse in the English department was permeated by
sophisticated new literary and cultural theories; a serious desire grew among the
most powerful people in the department to change the way writing was taught
at our college and to challenge the simplistic freshman English curriculum.

         It is a bitter irony that as departmental attention turned to the devel-
opment of undergraduate writing, my well-informed peer in composition was
denied tenure. Some six months before his tenure decision he learned that his
publications were not appropriate--not sufficiently scholarly, rigorous, or theo-
retically informed. No one had reviewed his scholarship or other work at the end
of his first year (or mine), despite the fact that he had such tenure-clock time
pressure. Once receiving the information, he quite understandably immediately
began to immerse himself in developing two strong historical articles. As you
might imagine, he was unwilling to rock any boats regarding the deplorable
Freshman English situation. Many of the strong English faculty were deeply
unhappy with the first-year courses and in turn disappointed in my colleague's
unwillingness to challenge the issue. Institutional forces for change ultimately
contributed to forcing him out of the department altogether.

         On the other hand, I did not have the immediate tenure pressure,
though I did have to completely retool for my new scholarly area and for my
graduate and undergraduate teaching. As the child of life-long activists, I have
never been good at keeping my mouth shut when I see a serious problem. Being
willing to speak up, to attend meetings and participate in the push for change
at the first-year level, I soon found myself elected to the department's Executive
Committee, appointed to chair the Curriculum Committee, and then asked
to become Director of Undergraduate Studies. In all roles, I had to take some
tough positions and confront some problematic senior faculty--including the
Director of Freshman English. These risks seemed to help establish my role in
the department, boosting a somewhat shaky scholarly record to gain recommen-
dations for tenure. Subsequently, as part of the department's Executive Commit-
tee, I helped develop materials for a proposal to the Dean to conduct an outside
review of the Freshman English program. It took some uncomfortable years
until the Dean initiated such a review, largely influenced by graduate students
going public to local and campus media with their dissatisfaction. By then, I had
chaired a search committee--still as a junior faculty member--to hire a strong,
courageous new faculty member in composition who gave every signal of being
able to hold her own in this contentious environment, and even more so of tak-
ing a leadership role to bring change. She fulfilled these expectations beautifully.

                                                                                                 301
Lipson

         It is important to note, however, that even with the new hire, techni-
cal writing and the advanced composition courses/programs remained entirely
separate, independent operations. Though both the new advanced-composition
director and I, in different venues, actively addressed and explained develop-
ments in pedagogy and curriculum in our fields and made clear the deficiencies
of the first-year writing courses, our efforts were separate. There was no collabo-
ration; the model wherein faculty members operated independently held firm.

         When the Dean finally approved an outside review, it included both of
our programs as well as the first-year program--largely for political reasons. The
review was conducted through the Writing Program Administration organiza-
tion. The technical-writing program received praise, as did the advanced-com-
position course. A separate regular review of the English Department curriculum
offered similar praise of the advanced-composition and technical-writing pro-
grams. We each had to prepare packages of materials for the reviewers, which we
did independently. This isolated model of program development and leadership
did lead to innovative and lively programs in technical writing and advanced
composition, but at a price. The SU colleagues that I could discuss technical-
writing pedagogy and curricular ideas with were part-time faculty teaching the
courses, as well as graduate students. As a technical-writing faculty leader and
particularly as a scholar, I remained isolated.

         The outside review supported the need for change in the first-year com-
position program, and heavily criticized the English Department for the scant
financial and other support it had made available for the teaching of writing.
In response, an interdisciplinary committee, under the intellectual leadership
of my composition colleague, recommended that a four-year developmentally
staged set of writing courses be established, with the hiring of additional faculty
in writing studies and the development of an accompanying graduate program.
The English Department and college faculty supported the idea. Soon a search
was established for a director of this newly envisioned Writing Program, and a
director was hired to begin in fall 1986. Though the original plans involved the
new Writing Program staying in the English Department, with a separate bud-
get, in fact the new Writing Program began as an independent curricular entity
with its own budget. Faculty lines were still in English, but within a few years,
60% of each faculty line was moved from English to Writing, setting up a wholly
new set of tensions and opportunities for those of us associated with the Writing
Program.

         The ESL program did not leave English with the Writing Program. The
ESL faculty member hired with me did not receive tenure, and it would have
been tricky and difficult for the Writing Program to bring over the senior faculty
in ESL whose curriculum was considered out of date. The English Department

302
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

itself was not eager to keep this program, which was not a good fit with the now
theoretically inclined English curriculum. Not long after the Writing Program
became curricularly and budgetarily separate from English, ESL moved into the
Department of Languages and Literatures, where it remains.

      model #2: setting up a more communal
     program in a separate writing unit, and

                  retooling for rhetoric

         In 1986, after having successfully established a thriving service pro-
gram in technical writing, with graduate courses and undergraduate/graduate
advanced technical-writing workshops, I was once again participating in getting
a new program started--not a technical-writing program, though the technical-
writing service course was understood to be an upper-division 400-level com-
ponent within the developmental series of four writing courses. The advanced
composition course, at the 300-level, constituted the other upper-division
course in the sequence. Three faculty members--the new director, my com-
position colleague, and I--wound up as the sole faculty in this new program,
still at first technically having to teach under the old first-year course descrip-
tions and structures, but trying out new demonstration versions of a freshman
and sophomore course, designed and implemented under the leadership of the
composition colleague. In the planned four-year sequence, the two three-credit
parts of the first-year writing program would become a new first-year course and
a newly developed sophomore course. Since virtually every student at SU had
been required to take six credits of writing at the first-year level, development
of the new approach to the first-year course had to be given primary attention
by the three faculty members at first, while the successful advanced composition
course and technical-writing course were left alone for a while. Technical writing
was once again--or still--on the margins, but invigorated by the close associa-
tion with the lower-division courses.

         This was somewhat of a collaborative experience, with limits. The new
director had been hired to develop the new courses and to create the curriculum.
While she did build a sequence of courses, as the review committee suggested, she
moved independently, consulting her colleagues individually but not including
them in the final synthesis yielding the resulting course proposals.4 Higher-level
campus officials supported this process, though it proved somewhat frustrat-
ing to faculty, including new faculty, a few of whom were hired in the first few
years before the new courses were institutionalized. The new course descriptions
were very general, and groups of part-time faculty met in retreats with selected

                                                                                                 303
Lipson

tenure-track faculty to create a variety of full versions of the first and second year
courses, in order to provide a range of concrete examples and models. Besides
the retreats, a prominent practice of this new Writing Program involved creating
small discussion groups of part-time and graduate-student teachers, led by expe-
rienced instructors, who would meet weekly to talk over pedagogy and theory,
as well as actual teaching experiences. The first and second year courses began
to take fuller shape through these experiences. In addition, during some years
a discussion group involving technical-writing teachers formed organically. As
one of the four courses now designated as a writing studio, the technical-writing
course remained popular.

         In the new Writing Program environment, however, no single faculty
member was attached to any one course; the courses belonged to the program,
and anyone who succeeded at teaching the lower-division level could be assigned
to teach the upper-division courses. People could teach technical writing with
no background in technical writing or without any required graduate course as
preparation. This had some obvious risks, of course. At the same time, it served
to keep things fresh, as new groups of technical-writing teachers--often part-
time faculty--would be assigned each semester. There would be little chance of
courses ossifying in such a model, as had happened with the old first-year writ-
ing courses in English.

         The demands of the new model were heavy, however. I found myself
part of a small faculty that for many years carried the responsibility to admin-
ister and lead the program (I was one of two tenured faculty for the first year
of the Writing Program). The amount of committee and administrative work
was astounding. Notably, I was deeply involved in developing a composition
curriculum and pedagogy though I was not a compositionist; this was not my
area of strength or my interest. However, that's where I was required to devote
enormous amounts of time and energy.5 Inevitable conflicts developed among
faculty about approaches to pedagogy and curriculum for some of the courses,
often surrounding the issue of culture critique in relation to the teaching of writ-
ing, and more generally surrounding allegiances in power issues. For a number
of years, the "collaborative" model was in many ways less collaborative than I
and many faculty wished regarding curricular and program design decisions;
and while the responsibilities were distributed, they were also much more con-
centrated on the shoulders of a few tenured faculty than was comfortable for a
number of the faculty, and than was healthy for the scholarly careers of those
with the heavy leadership-support responsibilities. I was among the latter group.

         Several changes affected PTW in this collaborative model in the first
few years. With so few faculty to carry out the immense needs of the program,
regrettably at some point the elective technical-writing courses could no longer

304
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

be sustained. At one end of the spectrum, the first two undergraduate courses
were developing their identities, which took a great deal of time and energy. Si-
multaneously, the mission to develop a doctoral program gained force. Both of
these initiatives were exciting developments and both were demanding. It soon
became clear to me that at both undergraduate and graduate levels, knowledge
of rhetoric would be central to my contributions as a responsible member of
the faculty community. The small size of the planned doctoral program simply
could not maintain a track or even a required course in technical writing, and
in fact no doctoral course in technical writing has been offered since the doc-
toral program began in 1997. I would need to get involved in a second major
scholarly retooling experience. Thus I slowly abandoned my plans to continue
publishing actively in technical writing and took up rhetoric as a pedagogical
and scholarly subject.6 Technical writing was no longer as valuable to me or to
the unit in this new collaborative setting, though I still kept up as much as pos-
sible with the technical-communication scholarship and published a co-edited
book in the field as recently as 2005.7 I have led and continue to lead qualifying
examinations in technical communication, with two doctoral students at dif-
ferent stages specializing in technical communication. Despite the interest of
a small group of PhD students, the field of technical communication has been
viewed with disdain by many colleagues here--mostly activists for social justice
who regarded the teaching of technical communication as preparing students to
succeed and conform to the flawed corporate world. To say the least, technical
communication was not highly valued, though this is now changing. In any
case, my second retooling placed me in closer alignment with the interests of the
doctoral program, as well as the needs of the undergraduate program, since the
second studio until recent years was an introduction to rhetorical concepts.

         The technical-writing service course was renamed Professional Writing,
and its student population is now dominated by management students, focused
on writing for the workplace. The engineering students are now in a minority,
though we have an additional follow-up course for engineers that connects to a
senior electrical and computer engineering design lab. We have also been asked
to create special linked courses for Bioengineering and Chemical Engineering.
And we have recently been approached to create a Business Writing course at the
master's level for the School of Management. With my upcoming two years of
research leave and then retirement, we would have no full-time faculty to take
charge of these new developments. Thus I am most pleased that at the depart-
ment's request, the current Dean has authorized a search for a faculty member
with expertise in technical communication, to take place in 2008-09.

         Without doubt, the design and functioning of the Writing Program at
SU has from the start depended on leadership abilities of the part-time faculty,

                                                                                                 305
Lipson

and in more recent years of advanced doctoral students assigned to administra-
tive internships or other leadership roles. Full-time faculty are in the minority.
We had three at the beginning of the Writing Program and now number eleven
(two are half time with another department). The success of the Writing Pro-
gram from the start depended on including the part-time faculty as partners in
inventing and fleshing out courses from the deliberately brief and nonspecific
course descriptions. The part-time faculty were involved in teaching the techni-
cal-writing course, whether they had technical-writing background or not; they
were involved in teaching the other three studio courses, and in helping mentor
other teachers. They functioned like advanced graduate students of the Writing
Program in early years, and as a group they were quite concerned about loss of
stature and access to faculty when the PhD program came on board.

         As a result, a number of the early technical-writing courses followed
textbooks to teach standard forms. Yet these same teachers would never have ac-
cepted such a formulaic approach in their composition courses. I had to swallow
this, and hope that native pedagogical talent would come to the fore once the
unfamiliarity of technical writing passed for these teachers. As an administra-
tor since the mid-eighties--a period of twenty years--with just a few scattered
years as a regular faculty member, facing faculty conflicts involving power and
influence on curricular directions, facing serious medical issues with children,
parents, and other elderly relatives for whom I was responsible, and in one pe-
riod facing my own serious illness, I made a deliberate choice to just do my own
teaching and not do battle on the curricular control of the technical-writing
course, after one attempt at such leadership early on raised some ugly conflict-
based behaviors. So technical writing--now professional writing--at SU has
pretty well grown organically and collaboratively, with no particular leadership.
Assignments and units that I developed were taken up by some of the part-time
faculty and graduate students, but my focus involved intensive use of technology
for writing early on, and this was not portable to many of the teachers. There is
great variability among sections.

         In 2000, a new director decided that the lower-division writing courses
needed strong faculty leadership in the development of curriculum and peda-
gogy. As a result, there has been since 2000 a position entitled Director of Un-
dergraduate Studies; though the title implies leadership of the upper-division
technical-writing courses, the position has mainly focused on the lower division.
The first director had no background in technical or professional writing, and no
interest in teaching this course, nor does the recently appointed second faculty
director. Only three other current faculty besides me have taught the course--
one does so frequently, one will not do so voluntarily again, and one does so
rarely but willingly. Some doctoral students have developed brilliant versions of

306
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

the course, using it to show their abilities at course design and implementation
at the upper-division level.

         Yet there is not much in-house discussion about the PTW curriculum.
Discussions of professional-writing pedagogy tend to be diluted amid the pro-
gram-wide intensive ongoing reflection on the teaching of writing at the lower
levels. This reflective discussion does feed back into a wide variety of upper-level
courses such as Civic Writing, Studies in Creative Nonfiction, Style, Advanced
Editing, Research and Writing, and Digital Writing, as well as Professional Writ-
ing. The strong activist bent in the department faculty has led to a small but
strong strand of the Professional Writing course focused on service-learning,
particularly involving community agencies. The intellectual energy of the de-
partment spent to make the lower-division writing courses more relevant, edgy,
and theoretical also has helped create content-oriented courses on clusters of
issues such as writing, rhetoric, and identity; writing, rhetoric, and information
technology; composition, rhetoric, and literacy; as well as a course on the poli-
tics of language and writing. The future in writing is bright at this institution:
a minor has been in place for three years, now involving about 45-50 students
from across the campus. A proposal for a major in Writing and Rhetoric has
been approved to begin in the fall of 2008, with over fifty majors signed up as of
the early summer of 2009. The major includes a number of courses in PTW, as
seen below, but only the large upper-division service course (Professional Writ-
ing) is offered regularly.

         Since the advent of the doctoral program in Composition and Cul-
tural Rhetoric, the tenure-track faculty have been able to, and have by now
all chosen to, locate their faculty lines 100% in the Writing Program. Most of
these faculty hires have been at the junior level, though a small number were
brought in as tenured associate professors. As of the summer of 2008, only the
original Director has full professor status, though plans are afoot for that to
change in 2008-09. Yet it's clear that the heavy leadership responsibilities car-
ried by the senior tenure-track faculty have substantially slowed their progress
toward the second promotion. Especially since the faculty has grown some,
we have taken considerable care not to load the junior faculty with leader-
ship responsibilities that could impede their chances of being tenured. As the
unit has evolved, we have in fact become more of a traditional department in
relation to the participation of faculty. We now have a rotation of the Direc-
tor of Undergraduate Studies, with leadership responsibilities for the required
lower-division courses. We are fortunate to have a contingent of three former
part-time faculty who serve in full-time Assistant Director or Coordinator
positions. One works directly with new teaching assistants, supported by a
group of `master' teachers - chosen from the part-time and advanced doc-

                                                                                                 307
Lipson

toral-student cadres. One has primary responsibility for teacher-development
programs that serve the part-time faculty and the teaching assistants, in col-
laboration with the Director of Undergraduate Studies. A third has primary
responsibility for supporting the teachers and the program more generally in
initiatives involving technology. The Writing Program Director and the Direc-
tor of Undergraduate Studies meet regularly with these individuals, along with
the Writing Center Coordinator, to discuss ideas and projects. Any changes in
curriculum are brought before the full-time faculty, though they may originate
with and be first vetted through the Directors, the Assistant Director, and the
Coordinators. Committees including representation of full-time faculty, part-
time faculty, relevant professional staff, and relevant doctoral students meet to
develop proposals, which are brought to the full-time faculty at various stages.
Except for the inclusion of part-time faculty--who have been paid to serve on
committees--and professional staff, the current formulation does not differ
considerably from that in many English departments. In some ways, the situ-
ation involves more collaborative participation than in the early days of the
Writing Program; in other ways, collaborative activity has decreased.

model #3: building a collaborative ptw certifi-
   cate program and cross-curricular efforts

         What follows is probably best described as a cautionary tale. My third
experience in program building for technical communication at Syracuse Uni-
versity resulted in an interesting curriculum, but in the end, no audience or
funding for the courses and thus no implementation. This initiative began five
years ago with our university's extension division, which came to us proposing
that we together create a curriculum, to be delivered by the Writing Program,
for an online Certificate in Technical Writing. It was meant for engineers or
technical folks in industry who were assigned to handle the writing of techni-
cal documentation, as companies downsized their technical writing staffs. The
faculty and administrative staff agreed to participate, and a set of four courses
was developed. Four people in the Writing Program were paid to each flesh
out a course to be taught at least twice each by these individuals. Funds were
transferred to the department that would help us prepare part-time faculty to
teach the courses. The set of courses is both attractive and suitable for the situ-
ation identified: Advanced Technical Documentation; Writing in Design and
Development Environments; Information Architecture and Technical Docu-
mentation; and Technical Writing for a Global Audience. All four courses sailed
through the relevant curriculum committees; they're all on the books, but have

308
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

never been taught. All four were proposed collaboratively and approved for
online teaching in the extension division as well as for implementation as
face-to-face on-campus courses. However, the individual from the extension
division who initiated the project went on medical leave, and then upon his
return, the extension unit faced severe budgetary constraints--a familiar, if
discouraging, story. The extension division never got to the point of proposing
a certificate upon completion of the four courses. And they haven't been able
to pay for offering the courses online to extension students.

         Other problems affect our ability to offer the courses to campus stu-
dents. As a program, we are short of willing and qualified teachers for these
certificate courses, especially since at the same time, faculty across campus would
like to see increasing numbers of PTW courses "linked" to their departments.
We are being asked more and more to become involved in cross-curricular work
in PTW. We have done so thus far using part-time faculty, but the current size
and backgrounds of the part-time faculty cadre cannot sustain significant growth
in the area of PTW. Teaching linked courses in PTW tends to be a politically
and pedagogically challenging position, and we are confronted with the dif-
ficulty of finding part-time faculty with the myriad qualifications to make this
work. [See also essays in this volume by both Anne Parker and Brian Ballentine
on writing and engineering programs--editor]. We were well aware from the
earliest discussions of the certificate program and of the cross-curricular requests
that we would likely have to hire both tenure-track faculty and carefully selected
part-time faculty to participate in teaching these courses. My experience as an
administrator at Syracuse University has shown that it's best here to proceed
entrepreneurially in situations such as these, which involves getting something
started with little funding, showing success by attracting student interest or re-
quests from faculty in other departments, and gaining new funds or faculty
positions as a result. These certificate technical-writing courses and the requested
cross-curricular linked courses may indeed take on some new life, especially with
the projected hire of a new faculty member in technical communication next
year. Yet as much as the Writing Program officially wants to work more closely
with units across the campus in expanding and enhancing writing offerings and
attention to writing, reality mediates in the availability of both personnel and
funds. The difficulty arises all the more when the initiatives arise from outside
the Writing Program, rather than from within.

           discussion of models 1, 2, and 3

         So far, I've discussed three different program-building initiatives, situ-
ated in or across very different department cultures, and handled in different

                                                                                                 309
Lipson

ways. In the first instance, I eventually designed a curriculum that I was propos-
ing to focus on cultural issues, seeing technical communication as embedded in
professional cultures, with their associated values and practices, and in work-
place cultures and subcultures--at times clashing. I proposed that the course
would help students develop their ability to understand cultures and conduct
rhetorical analysis as a way to become rhetorically flexible. Some of my sug-
gestions were woven into the fabric of the PTW course description in the early
days of the Writing Program, and into the curriculum of individual sections of
the course. Some others were discarded as the Writing Program priorities and
contexts changed.

         The one unsuccessful model (#3) illustrates the difficulty of undertak-
ing a collaboration with outside entities, when there is no strong stakeholder
among the faculty with leadership responsibilities for the effort. Since 1991,
the Writing Program has not been able to secure funding or faculty positions to
initiate and sustain cross-curricular efforts. Before 1991, we had a faculty line
but no significant funding. The availability of funding and a faculty position
would not have saved the certificate project in itself, but it would have put it on
stronger footing. As Director and Chair of the department during that period, I
had too much on my plate already, as did the rest of the faculty. The certificate
project was no one's priority among the faculty, though one part-time faculty
member took great initiative in making it happen to the extent that it did.

         Of the two successful experiences in program development, the collab-
orative program model offered the greatest learning opportunities and growth
for me (and others), though it was the riskier of the two approaches, the most
vulnerable, and at times the most troubled. The standard English department
model, with individuals taking responsibility, perhaps in turn, and shaping
curriculum and mentoring teachers, is the easiest model to implement, the
most coherent and the most conducive for course consistency, but also the
least rich and varied. However, it's especially difficult to sustain a growing,
thriving curriculum over the long term if one person is in charge for a long pe-
riod--say as the sole technical-writing faculty member. In order to create the
stimulating environment that alternating faculty leadership can provide for
large multi-section service technical-writing and professional-writing courses,
there would need to be more than one faculty member with technical-writing
expertise or interest in the department. In small departments, that is often not
possible. Even if such leadership exists, the department chair or program direc-
tor must be willing to turn the course over to different leadership, and doing
so is not always desirable or easy.

         At Syracuse, we have also seen that the diffuse model of collaborative
responsibility for curriculum--under administrative supervision, of course--

310
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

can lead to some stagnation overall. This has occurred at times in the large
lower-division courses as well as in the professional-writing course, though
certainly not with every teacher. In the last seven years, there has been strong
and clear faculty leadership of the two lower-division required writing courses,
driven by the creation of a position entitled Director of Undergraduate Stud-
ies, which carries responsibility for the lower-division curriculum and for the
work involved in supervising and training the new TA's who teach the lower-
division courses. Appointing a highly talented scholar/teacher to this position
led to changes in both the lower-division learning goals and the structures
created to implement the new goals. The new curriculum developed for the
inexperienced TA's--including assignments, readings, and day-to-day activi-
ties--was even taken up by very experienced part-time faculty across the pro-
gram, making the course overall more uniform, more rigorous, more chal-
lenging, and more engaging for students. But no structure has been created, or
will be created in any near future, for leadership of the professional-writing service
course, which is well regarded across campus and well subscribed. As mentioned,
the few faculty with interests in teaching this course have been involved in admin-
istrative roles with little time available for additional responsibilities. In each case,
the curriculum they developed for their own teaching was not readily transferable,
being grounded in special interests, expertise, and skills. Though the department
has in the past shown little interest in hiring in technical communication or in
Professional Writing, areas outside of the doctoral program's focus, that has now
changed with my announced retirement. However, since the new faculty hire will
be at the assistant-professor level, it's likely that the professional-writing courses
will continue under the collaborative responsibility model, with all its benefits and
faults, for some time.

           model #4: developing a technical
    writing program in a science environment

         My career in PTW did not all take place "in-house." I have also been
peripherally involved in the development of a technical-writing program next
door to the Syracuse University campus, at the State University of New York
campus of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF). A long-standing financial
agreement between the two campuses allows ESF students to take courses at Syr-
acuse University, with costs escalating as usage increases beyond a certain point.
Beginning in the late 1970's, our technical-writing course was both immediately
popular and increasingly required by different departments at ESF. By the late
1980's, ESF found it could no longer support such an expense, determining

                                                                                                 311
Lipson

that it would be less expensive to hire a technical-writing specialist to their own
faculty and create their own program.

         Yet they were cautious, for before sending students to Syracuse Univer-
sity, they had tried such a hire. That attempt was not a success. They discovered
how difficult it was to choose, evaluate, mentor, or support a faculty member in
writing, given that their faculty are primarily scientists or landscape architects.
So in the late eighties, I was consulted by the ESF Vice President to help them
lay the groundwork for hiring and mentoring such a faculty member. Soon, a
talented part-time faculty member from Syracuse University's Writing Program,
one who had already taught technical writing to ESF students, was hired into
a tenure-track position at ESF. I was asked to serve on his annual mentorship/
assessment committees while he was untenured, and then on his tenure com-
mittee. He was authorized to hire part-time faculty to help him, since one indi-
vidual couldn't handle all the teaching. Many of those hired also taught writing
at SU, and at least one has since been hired full-time at SUNY ESF. Four still
keep a hand in teaching at SU. A Writing Center has been developed at ESF for
its students, and a range of courses have been developed beyond the initial intro-
ductory course in technical writing. Though my work at ESF has been behind
the scenes, I have been able to watch the PTW program there become a unique
teaching community, with its own traditions and practices.

         The new ESF faculty member began with a very different model than
that implemented at Syracuse University. He had developed an innovative, chal-
lenging technical-writing curriculum for his own teaching, focused on ethical
and social issues involved in scientific and technical fields, especially those re-
lated to environmental studies. In this ESF model, other teachers hired to teach
technical writing were asked to follow his basic curricular structure, with his
help and mentorship, though with some degree of freedom. Some of the teach-
ers who taught at both campuses, but were left to develop their own curricular
designs at SU to fulfill Writing Program learning goals, commented on the dif-
ference, noting the excitement of the experience at ESF and on the amount they
learned from a brilliant curricular thinker and implementer about teaching tech-
nical communication. Two senior Writing Program part-time teachers clearly
favored that model over being left to their own devices at Syracuse University
for teaching professional and technical writing. And the ESF faculty--all in sci-
ence or landscape architecture fields--expected a higher degree of consistency in
course content than is normally the case in English departments or writing pro-
grams. The local setting here helped lead to some of the particular approaches in
the development of this highly successful and growing program, though others
depended on the leadership proclivities of the faculty member hired. The first
faculty member hired in technical writing has remained the Director since the

312
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

early 1990's, and his curricular vision and practices govern the offerings involv-
ing seven separate courses, three or four of which focus on literature related to
nature and the environment.

         Interestingly, the tenure-track faculty in technical writing at ESF are
not expected to publish in technical writing or composition, though they are
expected to attend and contribute to relevant conferences. They are rewarded for
publishing poetry, children's literature, and creative writing more generally.

                           conclusion

         Each of the models I've experienced and observed in the development
of Technical/Professional Writing at Syracuse University and ESF has been high-
ly adapted to its environment, arising from particular circumstances, values, and
approaches in its local culture. All have involved service courses rather than
PTW degree programs. As the SU Writing Program begins its major, it also
anticipates expansion of the demand for technical and professional communica-
tion offerings. In addition, the proposed major requires an internship. When
I had been teaching technical writing at Syracuse University, before I became
graduate director and then chair, I made the effort to line up and supervise in-
ternships and co-op positions in technical writing. This was always done on top
of my load, as is frequently the case for faculty in technical writing. Now as the
Writing Program envisions the expanded number of students required to do in-
ternships in writing--perhaps in community settings or in technical or business
settings--the faculty are beginning to consider ways to handle the internship
load that doesn't add to the already heavy demands on faculty.

         My experience in a separate Writing Program with a wide range of
administrative and leadership roles outside of technical writing suggests to me
that being embedded in a larger writing unit can bring collaborative advan-
tages, while also adding numerous responsibilities out of one's own scholarly
or teaching areas. In my second scholarly retooling, I am now happily engaged
in scholarship on ancient Egyptian rhetoric, an extension of my early work on
ancient technical and medical texts. This has taken me somewhat away from my
focus on technical writing publication, but has also made me a better fit with
the cultural-rhetoric focus of our PhD program and department generally. The
periodic scholarly retoolings I have undergone have been simultaneously unset-
tling and labor-intensive, but also energizing and exciting. They have without
doubt slowed my progress in promotion to full professor. I would expect that
most new faculty in PTW, especially those in a collaborative environment such
as I found myself, would have to remain open to the possibility of retooling from

                                                                                                 313
Lipson

time to time. My sense is that a collaborative model provides less independence
and focus, yet offers broader experiences and multiple rewards for those who are
willing to engage with it. At times, I envied colleagues elsewhere who had the
luxury of focusing solely on publication and teaching in professional and techni-
cal writing. All told, however, I feel gratified for the risky, changing, collabora-
tive environment here and all that it has entailed.

         I would be remiss, though, if I did not emphasize finally that collabora-
tive program leadership, especially involving fields of composition and PTW,
can occur within English Departments and can be absent in independent Writ-
ing Programs, depending on the leaders themselves, on the particular faculty
within the units, and on the department and campus cultures. There is no in-
herent one-to-one correspondence with the type of location. And a collaborative
environment does not mean that collaboration occurs across the board. Here at
Syracuse, collaboration occurred in certain aspects and areas, and not in others,
and the specifics all changed with differing circumstances and different leaders.
Collaboration in administering a writing program is of necessity a nuanced ac-
tivity, affected by an array of constituent factors.

                                notes

1 The PhD was in twentieth century British Literature; I came to SU with
three years of experience as a technical writer at Caltech, as well as experience
in science writing for a non-specialist audience and in writing for industry as a
consultant.
2 See Joseph Harris, "After Dartmouth: Growth and Conflict in English," Col-
lege English, October 1991, 631-646.
3 This individual claimed to have a letter from a prior Chancellor of SU making
him Director of Freshman English for life. While no one could locate a copy of
such a letter in any university files, the college was understandably unwilling to
remove this individual from his position, fearing legal action.
4 There were of course reasons for this approach. For instance, during the same
period, a new Chair was hired in the English Department, having made very
clear his curricular vision for the department, which sought to develop a more
theoretically based curriculum. He wanted to work collaboratively with faculty
to develop a concrete curricular proposal, hopefully enacting his vision. He met
for two years with theorists in the department, who would not agree to imple-
ment the ideas of the individual they had hired to lead the department. The
proposal that resulted from the years of meetings was not one that any one of the
individuals would have favored as the most desirable approach, but it was all the

314
                                                             Models of Professional Writing Administration

group could agree to. The process was quite ugly and nasty, and the Director of
the Writing Program was determined to avoid such difficulties. Yet the approach
taken brought substantial anger and resentment among faculty, having a quite
negative effect on the life of the Writing Program.
5 The administrative responsibilities in the new Writing Program did bring
some course release, but unfortunately the time involved in building a col-
laborative new program in a highly contentious environment at SU did not
come anywhere near compensating for the time and energy required. Many
key groups on campus attacked the premises of the Writing Program, prefer-
ring the old Freshman English focus on grammar, on the Baker-essay five-
paragraph-theme model, and on new-critical approaches to reading literature
as the basis for teaching writing. The Writing Program's situation was precari-
ous for many years. Though the technical-writing courses were never under
attack, my administrative responsibilities involved the entire Writing Program
venture.
6 For instance, my work in cultural rhetoric gave rise to a collection entitled
Rhetoric Before and Beyond the Greeks, co-edited with Roberta Binkley, SUNY
Press, 2004.
7 Technical Communication and the World Wide Web, co-edited with Michael
Day, Erlbaum Pub., 2005.

                                                                                                 315
    Biographical Notes

Diana L. Ashe is an Associate Professor of English at the University of North
Carolina Wilmington. She serves as Coordinator of Professional Writing at
UNCW while pursuing research interests in professional writing and composi-
tion theory and pedagogy, rhetorical theory, environmental and activist rhetoric,
and issues in the profession. She has published articles on environmental and
activist writing, academic honesty, mentoring, and professional relations.

Brian D. Ballentine is an assistant professor and the Professional Writing and
Editing Coordinator for the English Department at West Virginia University.
He holds degrees from John Carroll University, the University of Rochester, and
Case Western Reserve University. Before joining the English department, he was
a senior software engineer for Philips Medical Systems designing user-interfaces
for web-based radiology applications and specializing in human computer inter-
action. His research interests include professional and technical communication,
digital literacy and hypertext theory, intellectual property and authorship, and
open source development communities. Among other projects he is currently
researching and writing a textbook, Technical Communication for Engineers.

Kelly Belanger, Associate Professor of English and Director of the Center for
Research on Writing, Rhetoric, and Public Discourse at Virginia Tech, has been
a writing program administrator at Youngstown State University and the Uni-
versity of Wyoming. Her publications include Second Shift: Teaching Writing to
Working Adults, coauthored with Linda Strom, and essays on critical pedagogy,
writing program development, basic writing, and professional communication.
Her current research focuses on public discourse about women and sports.

Julianne Couch has been an Academic Professional Lecturer at UW since 1998.
She teaches courses in the Composition and Professional Writing programs, and
tutors in the campus Writing Center. Currently, Julianne is the department's
composition coordinator, and works with graduate teaching assistants and fac-
ulty mentors. Her recent publications include a book review of Scenes of Vision-
ary Enchantment by Dayton Duncan for Great Plains Journal, (2005); an essay in
Ahead of Their Time: Wyoming Voices for Wilderness edited by Broughton Coburn
and Leila Bruno (2004); and the essay "My Lewis and Clark: Discovery is at the
Core" for Heritage of the Great Plains (2004).

Anthony Di Renzo teaches classical rhetoric and professional and technical writ-
ing at Ithaca College in New York State. A former copywriter, medical writer, and

                                                                                                 317
Biographical Notes

corporate consultant, he created the Professional Writing concentration for his
department's BA in Writing and lead first-year writing initiatives in the School of
Business and the Center for Natural Sciences. He also contributes to the Journal
of Technical Writing and Communication. His scholarship explores the historical
relationship between creative writing and professional and technical writing. His
anthology If I Were Boss: The Early Business Stories of Sinclair Lewis (SIUP) was a
Choice Outstanding Academic Book for 1997. Future plans include piloting a
web writing course and developing a Professional Writing minor.

James M. Dubinsky is an Associate Professor of English at Virginia Tech; for
the past ten years, he has directed the Professional Writing Program, a program
he was hired to build. A recent winner of a college award for outreach and the
university's teacher scholar award, Jim's research focuses on community-univer-
sity partnerships, assessment, and pedagogy. He is the author/editor of Teaching
Technical Communication, has contributed to journals such as the Michigan Jour-
nal of Community Service Learning, and he edited an issue of TCQ on civic en-
gagement. Jim is also vice-chair of the board for the YMCA at VT, vice-president
of the Association for Business Communication, and he hosts a radio show ev-
ery Friday morning between seven and nine a.m. on WUVT-FM (http://www.
wuvt.vt.edu) featuring folk, folk-rock, bluegrass, and blues.

Jude Edminster, an Associate Professor at Bowling Green State University, re-
ceived her BA in English from the University of South Florida in 1977 and
her MA in English from USF in 1995. She received her PhD in English with a
specialization in Rhetoric and Composition from USF in 2002 for which she
wrote her dissertation on ETDs titled The Diffusion Of New Media Scholarship:
Power, Innovation, and Resistance in Academe. She serves as the faculty advisor for
BGSU's STC chapter. She is currently developing an online graduate certificate
program in international technical communication through BGSU's Continu-
ing Education department.

David Franke is an Associate Professor of English and teaches in the Professional
Writing Program at the State University system of New York at Cortland (SUNY
Cortland). He earned his PhD in Composition and Rhetoric from Syracuse
University (wrt.syr.edu) in 1999. He has worked as Director of the Cortland
PWR program and now directs the Seven Valleys Writing Project (www.7VWP.
com), a branch site of the National Writing Project (www.NWP.com).

Gary Griswold (PhD, Claremont Graduate University, 2003) is an Associate
Professor of English at California State University, Long Beach, where since

318
                                                                                            Biographical Notes

1989 he has taught all levels of writing courses, including proposal writing,
manual writing, and professional editing. In 1992, he founded the Writer's
Resource Lab, CSULB's writing center program, which he has directed for
eighteen years. His research interests include the history of composition stud-
ies, writing centers, innovative approaches to writing instruction, and techni-
cal and professional writing. He currently serves as both Assistant Department
Chair and the director of the English Department's Technical and Professional
Writing Program.

Dev Hathaway was a professor at Shippensburg University, teaching English
and creative writing. He was department chair for the English Department for
three years, directing the student magazine The Reflector, while also directing the
professional/technical communications minor program. In 1998, he received
the Black Warrior Review's Literary Award for Fiction. Dev was the author of
numerous essays and collections of short stories. He passed away in 2005.

Brent Henze is Associate Professor of English at East Carolina University,
where he serves as lead faculty in the technical and professional communica-
tion program. His research on the rhetoric of science, reporting genres in eth-
nological science, scientific institutions, and the scientific treatment of racial
difference has appeared in Technical Communication, Technical Communica-
tion Quarterly, Rhetoric Review, and elsewhere. He is co-author (with Wendy
B. Sharer and Jack Selzer) of 1977: A Cultural Moment in Composition (Parlor
Press 2008).

Colin K. Keeney has taught in the UW English department's composition and
rhetoric program since 1988. Before returning to Laramie he worked as a writer/
editor for Hallmark Communications and TIME/LIFE Books in Austin and
Minneapolis, and as a freelance consultant for Ursus Ink in Albuquerque.

Michael Knievel is an assistant professor of English at the University of Wyo-
ming, where he teaches courses in composition and professional writing. His
research interests include the intersections between technology and the humani-
ties and the position of technical and professional communication programs
in the larger curricular geography of English departments and English Studies.

Carla Kungl is an Associate Professor of English at Shippensburg University,
where she teaches technical writing, developmental writing, and British lit-
erature and culture. Her research interests include gender and cultural stud-
ies, the Victorian era, and popular culture and fiction. She is the editor of an

                                                                                                 319
Biographical Notes

e-book entitled Vampires: Myths and Metaphors of Enduring Evil (Oxford: The
Inter-Disciplinary Press, 2004) and the author of Creating the Fictional Female
Detective: The Sleuth Heroines of British Women Writers 1890-1940 (Jefferson,
NC: McFarland, 2006). Recent publications include two chapters in books:
one on Starbuck in the new version of Battlestar Galactica and one on the
fiction of Mary Elizabeth Braddon for a collection on illness and disability
in gothic literature. She has served as Director of the Technical/Professional
Communications Minor since 2003.

Carol Lipson is Associate Professor and immediate past chair of the Writing
Program at Syracuse University. She directed the technical-writing courses at
Syracuse University from 1979 until 1986, when the overarching Syracuse Uni-
versity Writing Program began. In 2002, she was elected as a fellow of the As-
sociation of Teachers of Technical Writing. She has published on the history and
theory of technical communication, on ancient medical writing, and on ancient
rhetoric more generally. With Michael Day, she co-edited a 2005 collection of
essays entitled Technical Communication and the World Wide Web (Elbaum).
With Roberta Binkley, she edited a collection entitled Rhetoric Before and Be-
yond the Greeks (SUNY Press, 2004), and a collection entitled Ancient Non-Greek
Rhetorics (Parlor Press, 2009).

Andrew Mara is an Assistant Professor at North Dakota State University in the
English department. He began teaching and researching at NDSU in 2006. Dr.
Mara earned an M.A. in Literature from the Pennsylvania State University in
1996 and a PhD in Rhetoric and Writing with emphases on Professional and
Technical Writing in 2003. He combined this academic experience with on-the-
job expertise as a professional communicator at Sandia National Laboratories.
Research interests include posthumanism, rhetoric of technology and scientific
progress, university innovation, and corporate and organizational use of new
media. Dr. Mara regularly teaches the Introduction to Writing Studies and Busi-
ness Writing classes. In addition he also teaches courses in Invention and Inno-
vation, Rhetorics and Poetics of New Media, and Electronic Communication.

Jim Nugent is Assistant Professor of Writing and Rhetoric at Oakland Univer-
sity. He holds a PhD from Michigan Tech and an MA degree in English stud-
ies and technical writing from Illinois State University. His research interests
include neosophistic rhetorical theory, the teaching of technical writing, and
certificate programs in technical communication. With Lori Ostergaard and Jeff
Ludwig, he coedited Transforming English Studies: New Voices in an Emerging
Genre (Parlor Press, 2009).

320
                                                                                            Biographical Notes

Anne Parker, PhD, is the Technical Communication Coordinator in the Fac-
ulty of Engineering at the University of Manitoba, Canada, and is currently an
Associate Professor. She has reviewed numerous technical communication texts
for various publishers, including Wiley and Oxford Press, and has also served
as a reviewer for numerous journals, including IEEE Transactions on Education.
She has been involved for many years with the Canadian Association of Teach-
ers of Technical Writing (an affiliate of ATTW) and has served as an editor of
their journal. An active researcher in technical communication, particularly as
it relates to engineering education, her current research interests include col-
laborative projects within the context of engineering education and integrating
information literacy into the classroom. In 2004, she became a Senior Member
of the IEEE, a status that recognizes professional standing.

Jonathan Pitts is Associate Professor of English at Ohio Northern University,
where he coordinates the Professional Writing program and teaches creative
writing, cultural studies, rhetoric, and literature. He is a 2010-2011 Fulbright
lecturer in Turkey.

Alex Reid is an associate professor of English at the University of Buffalo. His
scholarship focuses on the relationship between writing, pedagogy, and emerg-
ing technologies. His book, The Two Virtuals: New Media and Composition, re-
ceived honorable mention for the W. Ross Winterowd Award for best book in
composition theory for 2007, and his articles can be found in journals such as
Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy and Computers and Com-
position. His award-winning blog, Digital Digs (www.alex-reid.net), addresses
issues of new media, writing, and higher education.

Colleen A. Reilly is an associate professor at the University of North Caroli-
na Wilmington. Her teaching and research focus on professional and technical
writing theory and pedagogy; electronic composition and citation; and gender,
sexuality, and technology. Her publications include several chapters in edited col-
lections and in the journals Computers and Composition and Innovate related to
citation analysis, writing and technology, gender and technology, and digital re-
search and teaching practices

Wendy B. Sharer is an Associate Professor of English at East Carolina Uni-
versity, where she also serves as Director of Composition. She is co-editor of
Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composi-
tion (Southern Illinois 2009), author of Vote & Voice: Women's Organizations
and Political Literacy, 1915-1930 (Southern Illinois 2004), and co-editor of

                                                                                                 321
Biographical Notes

Rhetorical Education in America (Alabama 2004). Her work on the rhetorical
practices of post-suffrage women's organizations has also appeared in Rhetoric
Society Quarterly and Rhetoric Review.
Christine Stebbins has been a technical writing instructor at UW since 1993
and has helped design and teach the two required courses for UW's profes-
sional writing minor. Since 1991 she has also worked extensively with UW's
international graduate student population. She is a contributing author in
Learning Styles in the ESL/EFL Classroom, published by Heinle and Heinle
(1995). Recently, she has designed and piloted a technical writing course spe-
cifically for international students.
Janice Tovey is an Associate Professor at East Carolina University, where she
has served as Director of Graduate Studies in English, Director of Composi-
tion, and Chair of the Faculty. She holds a PhD from Purdue University. She
teaches in the Technical and Professional Communication area and has pub-
lished articles on visual rhetoric, and document design, both print and online.
Tovey served as a coordinator for the ECU Outreach Network, training and
supervising graduate students to provide community organizations with grant
writing assistance. Her research interests have expanded to include ethical is-
sues in technical communication, online teaching, and graduate programs in
Technical and Professional Communication. She has served as President of the
Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication.

322
DESIGN DISCOURSE

Design Discourse: Composing and Revising Programs in Professional and Techni-
cal Writing addresses the complexities of developing professional and technical
writing programs. The essays in the collection offer reflections on efforts to
bridge two cultures - what the editors characterize as the "art and science of
writing" - often by addressing explicitly the tensions between them. Design
Discourse offers insights into the high-stakes decisions made by program de-
signers as they seek to "function at the intersection of the practical and the
abstract, the human and the technical."

David Franke teaches at SUNY Cortland, where he served as director of the
professional writing program. He founded and directs the Seven Valleys Writ-
ing Project at SUNY Cortland, a site of the National Writing Project.

Alex Reid teaches at the University at Buffalo. His book, The Two Virtuals:
New Media and Composition, received honorable mention for the W. Ross
Winterowd Award for Best Book in Composition Theory (2007), and his blog,
Digital Digs (alex-reid.net), received the John Lovas Memorial Academic We-
blog award for contributions to the field of rhetoric and composition (2008).

Anthony Di Renzo teaches business and technical writing at Ithaca College,
where he developed a Professional Writing concentration for its B.A. in Writ-
ing. His scholarship concentrates on the historical relationship between pro-
fessional writing and literature.

Perspectives on Writing           W
Series Editor, Michael Palmquist

The WAC Clearinghouse

Fort Collins, CO 80523
wac.colostate.edu

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 296216
w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-0-97270-234-8
