Early Childhood Literacy: Engaging and
  Empowering Emergent Readers and
              Writers, Birth - Age 5
  Early Childhood Literacy: Engaging
 and Empowering Emergent Readers

         and Writers, Birth - Age 5

Authors:

Christine Pegorraro Schull, PhD, Northern Virginia Community
College

   Leslie La Croix, PhD, George Mason University
   Sara E. Miller, EdD, Longwood University
   Kimberly Sanders Austin, PhD, Southwest Virginia
Community College
   Julie K. Kidd, EdD, George Mason University

Contributors:

Christopher K. Kidd, MEd, George Mason University
   Sehyun Yun, MEd, George Mason University

Editor:

Melanie Medina, NOVA Libraries, Northern Virginia Community
College

Project Manager:

Dale Dulaney, Brown Library, Virginia Western Community
College
Graphic Designers:

Kalyca Schultz, Brown Library, Virginia Western Community
College

   Lucy La Croix

Peer Reviewers:

Margaret L. Charlton, Early Childhood Development, Tidewater
Community College

   Sherry Chevalley, Early Childhood Development, Northern
Virginia Community College

   Bernice Mayfield, Early Childhood Development, Northern
Virginia Community College

   Bweikia Foster Steen, Early Childhood Education, George
Mason University

   Stephanie D. Zodun, Early Childhood Development, Eastern
Shore Community College

Publisher:

The Virtual Library of Virginia (VIVA)

Acknowledgements:

Joan L. Ehrlich, Disability Support Services, Northern Virginia
Community College

   Anna S. Martin, Disability Support Services, Northern Virginia
Community College
Funded By:

This textbook was developed with grant funding provided
through the Virtual Libraries of Virginia (VIVA) Course Resign
Grant.
Early Childhood Literacy: Engaging and Empowering Emergent Readers and
Writers, Birth - Age 5 by Christine Pegorraro Schull; Leslie La Croix; Sara E.
Miller; Kimberly Sanders Austin; and Julie K. Kidd is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

The overall license reflects the most licensed item used in this book.
Each chapter and item used have varying Creative Commons licenses.
Contents

1. Building Connections that Support Emergent        1

Literacy

2. Recognizing the Power of the Early Years          17

3. Examining Theories that Support Literacy          39

Development

4. Understanding and Valuing Children's Home         69

Literacy Environments

5. Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning  106

6. Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment        162

Practices

7. Language Development: Promoting Speaking,         225

Listening & Communicating

8. Reading Development: Engaging Emergent            295

Readers

9. Writing Development: Nurturing Emergent           338

Writers

10. Planning for What's Next as Emergent Readers     387

and Writers Progress
1. Building Connections
that Support
Emergent Literacy

    "Children are born with wings. Teachers help them to fly."
                                                                       -Shelby Stollery

   1.1 Introduction
   1.2 Empowering Approaches to Literacy Development
   1.3 What is Emergent Literacy?
   1.4 Emergent Literacy Areas
   1.5 Nested Literacy
   1.6 Textbook Organization

     Opening Vignette: Climbing Together

        Marvin and Maria, both three-years-old, played with
     four-year-old John in the backyard outdoor area in a
     multi-age family home child care. There were five tree
     stumps of varying heights and a very large piece of a
     tree trunk lying sideways on the ground. The children
     scrambled on top of the stumps and the trunk,
     laughing and occasionally saying, "Watch me!" Maria
     and Marvin both made several attempts to climb on
     the large sideways log by bringing up a knee, but John
     was able to climb atop it more easily. Marvin
     frustratedly exclaimed, "I can't do it!" Maria pointed to

                                                     Building Connections that Support
                                                                         Emergent Literacy | 1
     John, replying, "He is big!" And John said, "Get your leg
     up," while demonstrating a maneuver holding the top
     of the trunk while extending a straight leg. When
     Marvin made his next attempt, he bent his knee as he
     had done before. John coached, "No. Like this!" and
     demonstrated. After trying once or twice, Marvin was
     able to climb atop the trunk. Maria then made several
     attempts. Though she used the straightened leg
     approach that had worked for John and Marvin, she
     could not climb onto it alone. Marvin walked over as
     she struggled and nudged her further forward, and she
     was finally able to sit on top of the trunk.

1.1 Introduction

            Young children such as Marvin, Maria, and John have
diverse abilities and experiences with language. They are each
at different places in terms of their physical stage of
development, previous experiences, and expectations of what
they think they can do. They use language in different ways.
At times, they speak, beckon, or make other gestures. They
laugh and smile to signal pleasure and cry out in pain, anger or
frustration. They use language for enjoyment and for resolution
of problems. They are listening and speaking, communicating
non-verbally, and developing concepts that support their
comprehension and vocabulary. They can share meaning by
expressing themselves and understanding language. Young
children are beginning to demonstrate that they can
communicate a message through writing.

            This textbook, Early Childhood Literacy: Engaging and
Empowering Emergent Readers and Writers Birth-Age 5,
outlines the connection between different areas of language

2 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
and literacy and describes strategies for supporting
development and promoting instruction. Early literacy includes
reading, writing, and language development. Writing includes
any early writing attempts and pre-writing behaviors just as
reading includes any early reading attempts and recognition
of symbols and sounds. Language also includes listening and
speaking (oral language) and the use of gestures and signs to
communicate. The term oral language is commonly used to
describe early language development separately from reading
and writing. This text assumes oral language is a component
of language and embraces the broader term to underscore the
communication practices outside of listening and speaking.
For example, some children use sign language or a picture
board. For these reasons, the textbook will focus on language
development in its totality, including oral language. This
textbook is focused on birth to age 5 because early literacy
development is crucial for future learning and development.
This introductory chapter will explore the following questions:

   Why do we use a strengths-based approach when we
      consider what literacy development is?

   What is emergent literacy?
   What is the nested model of literacy?
   What definitions and terms of common literacy are

      important to know?

1.2 Empowering Approaches to Literacy
Development

            Each child has unique strengths and uses strategies
they learn are successful to foster literacy development. It is
crucial to start with an approach that emphasizes what
children can do instead of what they cannot yet achieve. An
approach that begins with examining deficits often over-

                   Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 3
emphasizes what children lack instead of their capacities.
Children's literacy experiences are housed within relationships
and opportunities. An integrated approach acknowledges that
reading, writing, and language development are connected
and contextualized by children's experiences. Language
development, and later reading and writing, are vehicles for
comprehension, even as our increasing comprehension helps
us to form each of these three areas. The components of
literacy develop incrementally and they all foster the
development of the other components. Literacy development
requires a holistic approach, focusing on understanding the
whole child across contexts and time with a strengths-based
focus.

            This textbook acknowledges the importance of
collaboration in a strengths-based focus as it fosters cultural
responsiveness and an integrated approach to learning. By
starting with the expectation that there are multiple
perspectives to be heard and valued, educators are better
equipped to embrace and respond to the needs of children
and families. Strong communication among all of the adults
that make up the context of the child's life promotes the
opportunities for children and families to have input and
influence in the environment. This, in turn, fosters positive
outcomes for children's literacy development.

4 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
Children work with stencils and sticks to explore letter formation.

1.3 What is Emergent Literacy?

            Emergent literacy is based on the notion that children
acquire knowledge about reading, writing, and language
before they have begun any formal education (Clay, 1966, 2001;
Sulzby & Teale, 1982; Whitehurst & Lonigan, 1998, 2001). This
conceptualization of literacy as a developmental process that
begins at birth counters previous early literacy theories that
believed readiness for learning to read began with formal
schooling (Whitehurst & Lonigan, 1998). Many researchers have
contributed to our understanding of literacy development in
the earliest years. According to Marie Clay (1966), literacy
development begins early in life and is ongoing. Teale (1987)
explained that children not only have particular experiences
before they start school, but they also have developed interests.
Emergent literacy is the result of children's involvement in
reading activities facilitated by literate adults (Teale, 1982).

                   Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 5
Sulzby and Teale (1991) define emergent literacy as the reading
and writing behaviors that precede and develop into
conventional literacy. These early literacy behaviors indicate a
child's stage of reading and are particularly revealing in
determining the approaches a child will use as they engage
in the task of reading. Similarly, Whitehurst and Lonigan (1998)
define emergent literacy as a "developmental continuum
between prereading and reading involving skills, knowledge
and attitudes that are the developmental precursors to reading
and writing" (1998, p. 484). This underscores that we expect
children to acquire skills over time. Additionally, Whitehurst
and Lonigan (2001) have clarified that emergent reading
develops in an interactive process of skills and context, rather
than individual components developing in a linear fashion.

            All of these definitions of emergent reading help us
understand that long before children are reading books word
for word, they are acquiring important literacy knowledge and
skills. For example, many young children can point out
commonly visited store logos with no prompting. Any adult
who has ever heard a toddler in the backseat point to the
fast food restaurant and scream, "fry-fries!" has witnessed
emergent reading. It is not simply about the quantity of skills
a child develops before appearing to be a fluent reader. Rather
a child's literacy develops over a long period of time, with early
skills supporting the growth or emergence of new skills.

            Emergent literacy and early literacy are often used
interchangeably, but this textbook will use the term emergent
literacy, encompassing everything a child knows about reading
and writing before they become proficient. Emergent literacy
can be thought of as the totality of the language capacities,
knowledge, and skills a child possesses even before developing
the ability to turn that knowledge into reading in ways that
are measured as conventional skills. Children are developing
reading, writing, and language concurrently during their

6 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
earliest years. All of the key concepts in emergent literacy occur
on a developmental continuum and involve stages of learning.

1.4 Emergent Literacy Areas

            The National Literacy Panel (2010) defined literacy by
identifying and defining skills, both in the earliest stages as
precursor skills and later stages as conventional skills. We can
examine behaviors evident in emergent literacy, including
three broad areas of literacy skills: language development,
reading, and writing, which can be further broken down into
specific indicators.

     Vignette: What's on the Menu?

        Marvin and Maria are playing in the dramatic play
     area. Marvin and Maria are both cooking, and Marvin
     brings a plate of food to the stuffed bear seated at the
     table. Marvin looks at the bear and says, "Do you want
     ketchup?" Maria shakes her head and says, "We don't
     have ketchup." Marvin speaks for the bear and says,
     "But, ketchup is on the menu." Marvin walks over to the
     stack of menus that are part of the play area and
     mimics reading the menu. He then says, "Ketchup is
     not on the menu." He then scribbles on a small strip of
     paper and gives it to the stuffed bear saying, "Here is
     your bill." Maria responds, "K-ketchup! K-ketchup! K-
     ketchup!" in a sing-song voice as they continue to play.

            This interaction displays many of the characteristics of
emergent literacy behaviors. Marvin and Maria are engaging

                   Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 7
in conversation and connecting stories to their experiences.
They pretend to read and pretend to write as well as use oral
language to communicate their ideas. These types of social
exchanges provide an opportunity to practice the behaviors
that will help prepare children to proficiently read and write.

1.4a Language Development

            Language development tends to be conceptualized as
receptive language, expressive language, and the interaction
between communicators. Receptive language involves
receiving, interpreting, comprehending and decoding.
Expressive language is the production or encoding of
information. Speaking, listening, and non-verbal
communication allow children the opportunity to use words
and gestures to express ideas and feelings. Language requires
an understanding of vocabulary (choice of words), context
(how and when words are used), and language conventions
(rules for using words in meaningful ways). For example, a child
may use different vocabulary or tone of voice with a sibling
than they might with a stranger or a grandparent. Language
may also be non-verbal through the use of sign language,
gestures, and non-verbal cues (facial expressions and body
language). Language development is pivotal to the growth of a
child's reading and writing development. In the vignette above,
we see that Marvin and Maria are using language to express
and receive information as they debate whether or not ketchup
is on the menu.

     Pause and Consider: Attunement

8 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
        As you interact with young children, how attuned are
     you to their facial expressions? Do you notice their
     gestures such as pointing? Do you review their non-
     verbal reactions such as squeals and eye gaze?
     Children "speak" in many different ways even beyond
     the use of words. What strategies can we use to make
     sure we are listening to what they need us to know?

1.4b Reading

            Reading is a complex process. It requires readers to
continually decode and comprehend a written message.
Decoding requires the reader to connect letter symbols and
sounds, while comprehension involves understanding the
meaning of written text. The report of the National Reading
Panel (NICHD, 2000) identified five key components of reading.
These five areas are (a) phonemic awareness, (b) phonics, (c)
fluency, (d) vocabulary, and (e) comprehension. While these
five components are important, the original report did not
address emergent reading practices in birth to five-year-old
children. A more expansive definition of reading would include
a variety of observable behaviors and skills exhibited before a
child is able to connect sound-symbol relationships or become
fluent readers. Children are engaging in many prereading tasks
and preparing for conventional reading in their earliest years.
The report of the National Early Literacy Panel indicated that
preconventional reading skills include print concepts, alphabet
knowledge, print knowledge, phonological awareness,
vocabulary, and oral language (National Institute for Literacy,
2008). When Marvin picks up the menu to "read it," he is
engaging in emergent reading behaviors.

                  Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 9
1.4c Writing

            Writing progresses in stages and in a bidirectional
fashion with reading. While reading is a manner of receiving
communication, writing offers a way to visually represent and
produce communication. Sulzby and Teale (1991) indicate that
scribbling as intentional writing can be observed in children
as young as 18 months. They go on to say that scribbling
represents the beginnings of writing for most children.
Eventually children will move from scribbling to increasingly
sophisticated markings in order to communicate meaning to
themselves or others. In the example with Marvin and Maria
above, Marvin acts out this expectation of shared meaning
when he hands the teddy bear a bill. These emergent writing
behaviors help prepare children for conventional writing later.

1.5 Nested Literacy

            Literacy includes language, reading, and writing, which
are interrelated concepts that reflect and support a child's
overall thinking. Within these concepts are discrete areas that
support the development of the broader concepts listed above.
Literacy development is contextual, occurring within the
supportive environments of the home and school, where family
members and teachers support the development of the child
through interactions, location specific opportunities, and
relationships. We have developed a model to illustrate how this
learning occurs, and we have chosen to organize the book
around these central concepts (see Figure 1.1).

                         Figure 1.1 Nested Literacy Model

10 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
1.5a The Nest

            The overarching literacy concepts frame the nest and
surround the bird. The three concepts, language development,
writing, and reading are interconnected and collectively
support the child's literacy development. A child's capacity for
developing their reading, writing, and language skills is
continuous. In other words, as the child continues to engage
in meaningful interactions with others, reading, and writing,
they will expand and enhance their proficiencies within each
literacy concept. While the overarching literacy concepts are
continuous, children bolster their literacy knowledge when
they acquire discrete literacy skills as well. Discrete skills (e.g.,
directionality of text, phonemic awareness, alphabet and word
awareness,) support children's literacy progression. In contrast
to continuous literacy concept development, once a child
acquires a discrete skill, that knowledge is then used by the
child to engage in subsequent literacy experiences.

                  Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 11
1.5b The Bird

            In the nested literacy model, the child is in the center,
represented in our model by the bird. Children bring with them
into their learning environments prior knowledge, language
experiences, and print knowledge. Their experiences bring
opportunities for the child to strengthen the literacy concepts
(i.e., language development, reading, and writing) and acquire
new knowledge. As the child interacts with their environment
and is provided with literacy-rich opportunities, the child's
emergent literacy abilities develop and grow. The child uses
these abilities to engage family members, classmates, and
others, establishing a continuous and iterative cycle of literacy
learning.

1.5c The Branch

            The home/family, community, and school
environments are the wider contexts in which the child is quite
literally nested. As a child interacts with the environment, they
develop expressive and receptive language, reading, and
writing skills. The tree branch supports the nest and the child
as they continue to grow and construct meaning while
engaging in social interactions. The tree branch literally
provides a scaffold for the child and highlights the importance
of a supportive environment. Rich literacy interactions and
cognitive growth are enhanced when the environmental
factors and contexts (e.g., school, community, family, health,
economic) provide a positive and healthy space for children
to explore, interact, and engage. All of these elements will be
explored in detail in subsequent chapters and continue to
demonstrate the interactions among the child, the emergent
literacy components, and the broader environmental factors
that enhance children's emerging literacies.

12 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
1.6 Textbook Organization

            We hope that this text will help you understand the
wider picture of how emergent literacy develops and provide
concrete strategies for incorporating literacy rich opportunities
for young children into your classroom. Part I (Chapters 1-3)
illustrates development in the early years and the theories that
inform best practices for literacy. Part II (Chapters 4-6)
addresses contexts for learning, environmental supports, and
assessment. Part III (Chapters 7-10) addresses language
development, reading, and writing, and presents the
progression of literacy development.

            To enhance readers' engagement with the book, we
include a number of features to promote educators'
visualizations of a variety of literacy concepts and practices.
Each chapter uses vignettes to illustrate children's literacy
experiences. The vignettes are drawn from our collective
experiences working with young children and families over the
years. Throughout the chapters, we also integrate Pause and
Consider boxes to provide places for readers to stop and reflect
on essential concepts as they are presented. At the end of
each chapter, we provide a Key Take-Aways box followed by
a Resource box with links to complementary materials for
educators to consider. Embedded within each chapter, icons
representing the bird, nest, or branch are also included to
support the reader's attention back to the Nested Literacy
Model. Finally, to provide readers with windows into early
childhood classrooms, the book also includes photographs of
young children immersed in literacy experiences. Readers will
notice that many photos include children and educators
wearing masks. Rather than remove these images, we
intentionally retain the photos to serve as historical reminders
of the essential role early educators played in supporting our
youngest children and their families throughout the global
pandemic. We value the work early educators do to nurture

                  Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 13
every child, and we hope this text extends the literature
available to early educators in meaningful and personally
relevant ways. We hope you enjoy the journey.

     Pause and Consider

        Language, reading, and writing develop
     simultaneously from birth. What evidence of early
     reading, writing or language do you see with infants
     and toddlers? What do you see with preschoolers?

     Key Take-Aways

        This textbook is organized around the central
     concepts of language, reading, and writing. As a child
     develops, these components of emergent literacy are
     concurrently supported by the other. The textbook also
     explores theoretical frameworks, pedagogical
     approaches, and assessment in reading, writing, and
     language. The early years are profoundly impactful as
     children grow and develop, nested in their
     environment and supported by the family and the early
     learning setting.

     Additional Resources

14 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
        National Association for Education of Young Children:
     https://www.naeyc.org/

        Virginia's Early Learning & Development Standards
     (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines.
     https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
     curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

        Zero to Three: https://www.zerotothree.org/

                            References

Bloom, L., & Lahey, M. (1978). Language development and
   language disorders. Wiley.

Clay, M. M. (2001). Change over time in children's literacy
   development. Heinemann.

Clay, M. M. (1966). Emergent reading behaviour. Unpublished
   doctoral dissertation. University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
   Human Development, NIH, DHHS. (2010). Developing early
   literacy: Report of the National Early Literacy Panel (NA). U.S.
   Government Printing Office.

National Reading Panel (U.S.), & National Institute of Child
   Health and Human Development (U.S.). (2000). Report of the
   National Reading Panel: Teaching children to read: An
   evidence-based assessment of the scientific research
   literature on reading and its implications for reading
   instruction: Reports of the subgroups. National Institute of
   Child Health and Human Development.

Saracho, O. N. (2002). Young children's literacy development. In
   O. N. Saracho & B. Spodek (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives

                  Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy | 15
   on early childhood curriculum (Vol. 1, pp. 111-130). Information
   Age Publishing.
Sulzby, E., & Teale, W. (1985). Writing development in early
   childhood. Education Horizons, 64, 8-12.
Sulzby, E., & Teale, W. H. (1991). Emergent literacy. In R. Barr, M.
   L. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of
   reading research (Vol. 2, pp. 727-757). Longman.
Teale, W. H. (1982). Toward a theory of how children learn to read
   and write naturally. Language Arts, 59, 555-570.
Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (1998). Child development and
   emergent literacy. Child Development, 69, 848-872.
Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (2001). Emergent literacy:
   Development of prereaders to readers. In S. B. Neuman & D.
   K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (Vol.1,
   pp.11-29). Guilford.

                          Image Credits

Figure 1.1: Kalyca Schultz and Christine Schull. "Nested Literacy
   Model." CC-BY 2.0.
   Additional Images

Image, Section 1.2: Longwood University. [Children Working] CC
   BY-NC-SA 2.0.

16 | Building Connections that Support Emergent Literacy
2. Recognizing the
Power of the Early
Years

"There's been a revolution in our scientific understanding of
babies and young children. We used to think that babies and
young children were irrational, egocentric, and amoral. Their
thinking and experiences were concrete, immediate, and
limited. In fact, psychologists and neuroscientists have
discovered that babies not only learn more, but imagine more,
care more, and experience more than we would ever have
thought possible. In some ways, young children are actually
smarter, more imaginative, more caring, and even more
conscious than adults are."

                                                                   -Gopnik, 2009, p. 5
   2.1 Introduction
   2.2 What We Know About the Brain
   2.3 The Role of Adults in Children's Brain Development

     Opening Vignette: Harrison's Glove

        One winter morning, Ms. Juanita sees that Harrison is
     quickly teetering back to his cubby during free
     play. She watches him search in his coat pocket and
     realizes that he is looking for his new gloves that he
     wore to school. She walks over to the cubbies and says,

                                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early
                                                                                            Years | 17
     "Harrison, are you looking for your gloves?" He nods,
     "yes," and continues to reach into the pocket of his coat
     and then says, "Here!" Ms. Juanita, responds saying,
     "Look! You found one glove. Where could the other
     glove be?" Harrison responds by immediately looking
     in his other pocket. He pulls his hand out empty and
     then makes an upset face. Ms. Juanita says, "Oh
     no. Your other glove isn't in your pocket?" Harrison
     replies, "Missing? No! Missing." As she can see that
     finding the glove feels important to the child at this
     moment, she proceeds to ask Harrison questions about
     where the glove could be and the last place he had
     it. She turns the search into a game and supports
     Harrison until he finds the glove at the bottom of his
     cubby under his boots. Once he has both gloves,
     together they count each finger as he pulls the gloves
     onto his small hands. Harrison says, "Need gloves
     now. Have to go to store." Ms. Juanita replies and says,
     "Ohhh...you are going out to the store now? Are we out
     of food in home living?" Harrison nods his head, "yes,"
     and smiles as he walks over to get a paper bag to
     collect the groceries. Ms. Juanita jots down a few
     observations in her notebook as she notices some skills
     in communication, counting, and self-regulation that
     are new for Harrison.

2.1 Introduction

We know a great deal about what happens during the first five
years of life and how critical development during this window
is to future success (Center on the Developing Child, 2007;
National Research Council & Institute of Medicine, 2000). This

18 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
knowledge also has key implications for literacy development
and early childhood educators' practices. For these reasons,
we are opening this textbook with a broader discussion about
some of the key scientific discoveries about the brain. We hope
this information and the subsequent resources help frame the
discussion about literacy learning and give early childhood
educators the tools to advocate for young children. This
chapter will answer the following questions:

                          What do we know about brain development
and how it impacts children's vision, hearing, language,
cognition, motor skills, and social/emotional competence?

                          How do the adults in children's lives play key
roles in fostering brain architecture?

                          Why are early childhood educators, in
specific, such a dynamic factor in overall brain development
and laying the foundation for literacy learning?

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 19
2.2 What We Know About the Brain

Children enjoy looking at books in an early learning space.

            There is little argument that brain science has elevated
the discussion about the importance of development from
birth to age five (National Scientific Council on the Developing
Child, 2007; IOM & NRC, 2015). These years are fundamental in
brain growth in a way that is unique from other time periods.
What we do in these years matters-the risks are more
pronounced and the opportunities for enrichment more
impactful. Babies' brains are roughly one quarter the size of an
adult brain; however, at birth a baby has 100 billion neurons
20 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
(UNICEF ECARO & ISSA, 2016). Neurons are cells designed to
carry messages from one part of the brain to another part. All
of these billions of neurons are present in the brain at birth,
but most are not connected. The brain continues to develop
throughout the lifespan; however, more than a million neural
connections, or synapses, are made each second in the first few
years of life (Center on the Developing Child, 2007). Graham &
Forstadt (2011) explain,

               Each individual neuron may be connected to as
            many as 15,000 other neurons, forming a network of
            neural pathways that is immensely complex. This
            elaborate network is sometimes referred to as the
            brain's `wiring' or `circuitry.' As the neurons mature,
            more and more synapses are made. At birth, the
            number of synapses per neuron is 2,500, but by age
            two or three, it's about 15,000 synapses per neuron. This
            is like going from 100 to 600 friends on Facebook, and
            each of those friends in turn, is connected to 600 more
            people! The neural network expands exponentially.
            Because of the extensive neural connections during
early childhood (see Figure 2.1 below), this age range is
considered one of the "sensitive periods" when the brain is
naturally geared toward learning. Brain researchers tell us that
the brain is more malleable or has more "plasticity" in early
childhood. This means that during the first few years of
childhood the brain is more susceptible, and this susceptibility
can have two inverse impacts. Ideally, early experiences
prepare young children for the future by establishing
capabilities when development is most responsive to
stimulation. However, it is also possible that in a less than ideal
setting, the young child is more vulnerable to the absence of
these essential experiences resulting in the risk of future brain
dysfunction (National Research Council & Institute of Medicine,
2000).
            Essentially, the simple circuits that are built during

                                      Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 21
early childhood enable complex circuits to more easily build
onto the initial pathways (Center on the Developing Child,
2007). A literacy example of how these pathways work is how
verbally labeling an object depends upon the earlier ability to
differentiate and create the sounds required for that word in
the child's language. Additionally, the ability to verbally label an
object then leads to the skill of grouping words into phrases
and using this language to read or write words and phrases. If
these circuits are used over and over again, they become more
efficient, but those that are not used fade away or are "pruned."

                Figure 2.1 Neural Connections in Early Childhood

Image is based on Conel, J. L. The postnatal development of the
human cerebral cortex. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1975.

            There are a number of ways that brain architecture is
impacted during the birth-to-five window. The development
and strengthening of circuits forms the foundation of, among
other things, emotional regulation, motor control, cognition,
language development, and more. Figure 2.2 shows three

22 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
different brain functions that develop sequentially. You will
notice that all three functions expand significantly in the first
five years and are directly connected to children's literacy
development. The first, sensory pathways, are important for
initial communication and support the development of
language. We will spend an entire chapter in this textbook (see
Chapter 7) on language, the second function. Language plays
a critical role in building foundational literacy competencies
and develops in distinct but overlapping stages; however, the
quality of language that children hear impacts
development. The last function displayed in Figure 2.2 is
cognition. This includes memory, sustained attention, mental
flexibility, the ability to make a plan, among other
skills. Researchers also know that gross motor skills, such as
crawling, walking, and balance, are predictive of cognitive
function and impacted by brain development. It is clear from
the brain research that these functions are critical for overall
development and impact children's literacy foundation.

              Figure 2.2 Human Brain Development by Age

Image is based on Nelson, C. A. (2000). Credit: Center on the
Developing Child

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 23
            Another function of the brain not shown in the figure is
social competence. Research has shown that children's ability
to identify and express emotions, cope with strong feelings,
engage in self-regulation, and develop empathy in early
childhood are all key markers to forming successful
relationships later in life and becoming a productive member
of society (Levitt & Eagleson, 2018; National Scientific Council
on the Developing Child, 2004). A number of studies have
shown that children who have acquired these skills by
kindergarten have an increased rate of graduating from high
school, attending and completing college, and finding and
maintaining employment in adulthood (Jones, Greenberg, &
Crowley, 2015).

Children develop social skills as they interact with teachers in the
classroom setting.

            This research also showed an inverse relationship
between low levels of social skills and increased predictability
of substance abuse behavior, involvement in the justice system
(e.g. being arrested), and needing public assistance. It is clear
24 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
that supporting children's emotional foundation by the end
of preschool is vitally important. An emotional foundation is
important for social competence and also impacts children's
success in school.

            Brain development is impacted by many factors
including genes, relationships, environments, and
experiences. The quality of the environment and experiences
impact how genes are expressed and how the brain
architecture is structured. These elements are also often tied to
the type of relationships that children establish with adults and
collectively build the foundation of the brain's structure. The
figure below (McCain, M., Mustard, J.F. & McCuaig, K., 2011, p. 39)
shows how these factors interact with brain development.

               Figure 2.3 Factors Influencing Brain Development

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 25
Image adapted from McCain, M., Mustard, J.F. & McCuaig, K., 2011, p.
39.

26 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
            The brain changes in many amazing ways during the
early childhood window, but precisely for this reason, there are
also factors that can have a negative impact on development. It
is important for early childhood educators to understand the
impact that trauma and adversity can have on the developing
brain. The vast promise of early brain development is a
tremendous opportunity to impact children's entire school
experience as well as future life trajectory. But with this
opportunity also comes significant challenges if children are
experiencing trauma. Stress creates a physiological response
in the body, which is healthy in small doses, but toxic stress
from traumatic events negatively impacts brain
development. Continually elevated cortisol levels can be toxic
for the developing brain and have serious implications for
learning and behavior (Center on the Developing Child,
2007). As important as these implications are, it is also critical
to know that this is not necessarily the end of the story. The
impact of toxic stress can be mitigated by developing resilience
through relationships.

                             2.3 The Role of Adults in
Children's Brain Development

The rapid growth of the brain during birth to age five puts
an increased emphasis on the importance of the adults in the
child's life during this timeframe. As we discussed in the
previous section, brain development is impacted by various
factors and adults influence the vast majority of these
factors. For instance, adults determine what types and the

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 27
variety of environments and experiences children are exposed
to, including in the home, community, and school. Adults also
play a vital role in the quality of interactions and relationships
that are developed with the child. These interactions and
relationships play a key role in children's brain development.

2.3a Promoting Interactions with Children

Interactions between educators and children can take place in
various ways, such as playing together in the block center.

            There has been a great deal of research done on the
importance of interactions between adults and children. Brain
researchers refer to this interaction as the "serve and return"
response (Center on the Developing Child, 2007). If you watch
a young child carefully, they are regularly reaching out for
interaction with adults. Think of this as the "serve" in a tennis
match. The adult then has the opportunity to "return" the ball
by responding to the child in some way. These serve and return

28 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
interactions are vital for brain development and are one key
way that adults support young children's development.
Filming Interactions to Nurture Development (FIND)
delineates five steps to practice serve and return interactions
with young children (see Figure 2.4 below).

                            Figure 2.4 Serve and Return

     Additional Resources
        The Center on the Developing Child has created a

     number of resources and videos that show how these
     steps look in action. Click on the link below to see how
     the five steps of serve and return interactions could
     look in a variety of settings:

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 29
     https://developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/how-
     to-5-steps-for-brain-building-serve-and-return/

     Pause and Consider: Serve and Return with Harrison's Glove

        Return to the opening vignette and consider how Ms.
     Juanita moved through the five steps of the serve and
     return model with Harrison. Questions to consider: How
     did Ms. Juanita focus on what the child needs in this
     situation? How did she verbally label objects to support
     Harrison? What strategies did Ms. Juanita use to
     continue the interaction and shift when the child was
     ready?

2.3b Nurturing Relationships with Children

            While relationships are important to children's
development for many reasons, the impact on brain
development in many ways hinges on the quality of the
relationship. Relationships play a key role in the serve and
return process (or interactions) because brain researchers have
found that this format works best when a caring relationship
has been established with the child (National Scientific Council
on the Developing Child, 2007). Researchers have found that
"mutually rewarding relationships" are key to further brain
development.

            The presence of caring relationships with adults that
result in quality interactions lays the groundwork for continued

30 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
brain development. These types of relationships also create
secure attachments, which have been shown to positively
impact children's emotional regulation and cognitive
functioning (Center on the Developing Child, 2007). As with the
impact of trauma, it is important to note what the absence
of secure relationships does to children's brain
development. National Scientific Council on the Developing
Child (2012) notes,

               When decreased responsiveness persists, the lost
            opportunities associated with diminished interaction
            can be compounded by the adverse impacts of
            excessive stress activation, the physiological effects of
            which can have lifelong consequences. This
            multidimensional assault on the developing brain
            underscores why significant deprivation is so harmful
            in the earliest years of life and why effective
            interventions are likely to pay significant dividends in
            better long-term outcomes in learning, health, and
            parenting of the next generation.
            It is clear that children without secure adult
attachments will have difficulty engaging with other adults
and children in the classroom, directly impacting their further
brain development. Early maladaptive relationships can create
a cyclical problem; few secure relationships in early childhood
can create difficulty developing secure attachments in the
future.

                                      Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 31
                             2.4 Importance of Early
Childhood Educators in the Equation (BRANCH)

Teachers create opportunities for engaging in serve and return when
they join chil

            As adults who play an important role in the lives of
children, early childhood educators play a critical role in brain
development. However, the level of importance of this
workforce has in many ways historically been undervalued. For
instance, early childhood educators are typically the lowest
paid in the field, compared to their peers in the K-12 system. On
average, early childhood educators make merely $10-$13 per
hour (Loewneberg, 2018). Also, standards and competencies
32 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
have varied widely in this workforce, due in large part to an
uninformed perspective that working with young children
requires less skill. Knowing what we do now about the critical
nature of brain development, it is clear that this workforce is at
least as important if not more important than other educators
and that there are different, but equally important
competencies required (IOM & NRC, 2015).

            Looking at the importance of early childhood
educators from a numerical perspective, the number of
children throughout the United States in care and education
settings from birth through age five is over 60% of the
population (Childstats.gov, 2018). With well over half of children
in the U.S. being cared for and educated by someone in
addition to the support they receive in the home, it becomes
clear that the work of these educators has a significant impact
on children's development. Having a highly skilled workforce
is vital to ensure that we capitalize on children's learning
potential.

            As discussed in the last section, secure attachments
are vitally important. Early childhood educators have the
capacity to build these interactions and relationships as well
as develop the environment and experiences to foster deep
learning and lasting brain connections. These connections
encourage development through authentic instructional
programming that considers the context of the child and their
construction of knowledge. Through scaffolding, the effective
educator guides this development and the abilities of the child
emerge.

            Although educators often cannot change the trauma
children may be experiencing, it is important for early
childhood educators to recognize and understand the signs of
trauma. Educators can connect families to services that can
help alleviate the effects of trauma as well as address and
minimize its impacts in the classroom. Because trauma can
have long-term impacts on brain functioning, trauma-

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 33
informed practices have become a hallmark of publicly funded
prekindergarten programs. These programs focus heavily on
the socio-emotional development of children in recognition of
its profound impact on learning and well-being. Often, traumas
from a child's or family's past may manifest as behavioral or
learning difficulties in the classroom. A safe and healthy
learning environment is paramount to successfully guiding the
development of children experiencing the effects of trauma.
The good news for early childhood educators is that many of
the factors that build the foundation of the brain can be
positively impacted by our work. Because the brain functions
in an integrated fashion, learning and development are also
integrated and can impact each other. In short, when we are
exposing children to a new word, material, or experience, we
are also building their brains. We know that learning is an
active process and occurs within the context of social
interactions (Levitt & Eagleson, 2018). The choices that
educators make in the classroom to actively engage children
through play can have a lasting impact on children's lifelong
learning trajectory.

     Key Take-Aways

        We have learned a great deal about the important
     changes in brain development occurring in young
     children. Vision, hearing, language, cognition, motor
     skills, and social competence are all impacted by the
     experiences children have in the first five years of
     life. The adults in children's lives play key roles in
     fostering brain architecture, and early childhood
     educators, in specific, can be a dynamic factor in overall

34 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
     brain development and laying the foundation for
     literacy learning.

     Additional Resources

        Brain Development in Young Children:
     http://changingbrains.org/

        Center on the Developing Child:
     https://developingchild.harvard.edu/science/key-
     concepts/brain-architecture/

        CDC Act Early Checklists: https://www.cdc.gov/
     ncbddd/actearly/pdf/checklists/all_checklists.pdf

        Trauma and the Developing Brain:
     https://developingchild.harvard.edu/guide/a-guide-to-
     toxic-stress/

        Virginia's Early Learning & Development Standards
     (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines.
     https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
     curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

        Zero to Three: https://www.zerotothree.org/

                            References

Center on the Developing Child. (2011). Building the brain's "air
   traffic control" system: How early experiences shape the

                                     Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 35
development            of     executive              function.

https://developingchild.harvard.edu/

Center on the Developing Child. (2007). The science of early

childhood development. www.developingchild.harvard.edu

Gopnik, A. (2009). The philosophical baby. Picador.

Childstats.gov. (2018). America's children in brief: Key national

indicators        of   well-being. https://www.childstats.gov/

americaschildren/fam_fig.asp

Graham, J & Forstadt, L.A. (2011). Bulletin #4356, Children and

brain development: What we know about how children learn.

Cooperative Extension Publications - University of Maine

Cooperative Extension. https://extension.umaine.edu/

publications/4356e/

Institute of Medicine (IOM), & National Research Council (NRC).

(2015). Transforming the workforce for children birth through

age           8:       A      unifying               foundation.

http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports/2015/Birth-

To-Eight.aspx

Jones, D. E., Greenberg, M., & Crowley, M. (2015). Early social-

emotional functioning and public health: The relationship

between kindergarten social competence and future

wellness. American Journal of Public Health, 105(11),

2283-2290. https://doi: 10.2105/ajph.2015.302630

Levitt, P., & Eagleson, K. L. (2018). The ingredients of healthy

brain             and         child               development.

https://openscholarship.wustl.edu/law_ journal_law_policy/

vol57/iss1/9

Loewneberg, A. (2018). Despite minimum wage hikes, ECE

wages stay low. https://www.newamerica.org/education-

policy/edcentral/despite-minimum-wage-hikes-ece-wages-

stay-low/

Marrus, N., Eggebrecht, A.T, Todorov, A., Elison, J.T., Wolff, J.J.,

Cole, L., Gao, W., Pandey, J., Shen, M.D., Swanson, M.R.,

Emerson, R.W., Klohr, C.L, Adams, C.M, Estes, A.M.,

Zwaigenbaum, L., Botteron, K.N., McKinstry, R.C., Constantino,

36 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
J.N., Evans, A.C.,... Pruett, J.R. (2018). Walking, gross motor

development, and brain functional connectivity in infants

and toddlers. Cerebral Cortex, 28(2), 750-763. https://doi.org/

10.1093/cercor/bhx313

McCain, M., Mustard, J.F., & McCuaig, K. (2011). Early years Study

3: Making decisions taking action. Council for Early Child

Development.           https://www.academia.edu/17129326/

Early_Years_Study_3_Making_Decisions_Taking_Action

National Research Council (US), & Institute of Medicine (US)

Committee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood

Development. (2000). The developing brain.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK225562/

National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. (2004).

Children's emotional development is built into the

architecture of their brains. Working Paper No. 2.

https://developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/childrens-

emotional-development-is-built-into-the-architecture-of-

their-brains/

National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. (2004).

Young children develop in an environment of relationships.

Working Paper No. 1. https://developingchild.harvard.edu/

resources/wp1/

National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. (2007). The

science         of     early    childhood development.

https://46y5eh11fhgw3ve3ytpwxt9r-wpengine.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/

Science_Early_Childhood_Development.pdf

National Scientific Council on the Developing Child (2012). The

science of neglect: The persistent absence of responsive care

disrupts the developing brain. Working Paper No. 12.

https://developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/the-science-

of-neglect-the-persistent-absence-of-responsive-care-

disrupts-the-developing-brain/

Rosanbalm, K. D., & Murray, D. W. (2017). Promoting self-

                    Recognizing the Power of the Early Years | 37
   regulation in early childhood: A practice brief. Opre Brief
   #2017-79.
UNICEF ECARO & ISSA. (2016). Module 1 The early childhood
   years: A time of endless opportunities. https://www.issa.nl/
   sites/default/files/pdf/Publications/cross%20sectoral/
   Resource%20Modules%20for%20Home%20Visitors%20Modu
   le%201.web_.pdf
The Urban Child Institute. (2019). Baby's brain begins now:
   Conception to age 3. http://www.urbanchildinstitute.org/
   why-0-3/baby-and-brain

                               Image Credits

Figure 2.1: Bryanna Adams and Kalyca Schultz. "Neural
   Connections in Early Childhood." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 2.2: Dale Dulaney and Kalyca Schultz. "Human Brain
   Development by Age." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 2.3: Kalyca Schultz. "Factors Influencing Brain
   Development." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 2.4: Kalyca Schultz. "Serve and Return." CC BY 2.0.
Additional Images
Image, Section 2.2: Longwood University. [Child with Books] CC

   BY-NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 2.2: Longwood University. [Child Responding in

   Classroom Setting] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 2.2: Lucy La Croix. [Bird] CC BY 2.0.
Image, Section 2.3a: Longwood University. [Early Childhood
   Educator Interacting With Child] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 2.3 & 2.4: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.
Image, Section 2.4: Longwood University. [Serve and Return in
   Play] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

38 | Recognizing the Power of the Early Years
3. Examining Theories
that Support Literacy
Development

"Teaching can be likened to a conversation in which you listen
                to the speaker carefully before you reply."

   3.1 Introduction
   3.2 Constructivist Theories
   3.3 Sociocultural Theories
   3.4 Ecological/Contextual Theories
   3.5 Using Theory in Practice

     Opening Vignette: A Teacher's Morning

        Ms. Tori entered her three-year-old classroom
     carrying materials for her dramatic play area, currently

                                                        Examining Theories that Support
                                                                 Literacy Development | 39
     presented as an apple orchard shop. There was a
     puppet stage that could double as a countertop,
     aprons, a hay bale, tin pie pans, giant beige pom poms
     that almost looked like peeled apples, felt pieces, and
     wooden apples and apple pieces. The children had a
     written list of apple products with a picture next to the
     words. As Ms. Tori checked the apple orchard center
     once more, she considered that children learn by
     engaging with each other and wondered what she
     might add to encourage the children to play and
     interact with each other. She considered what songs
     they might sing in group time this week and what
     kinds of books would familiarize children with the
     concept of apple orchards and apple products.

3.1 Introduction

            The understanding of theory enables educators to
consider the ways children are exposed to and interact with
language. Educators apply this knowledge to enhance
teaching ability and support literacy learning. In the vignette
above, Ms. Tori carefully considers a variety of ways to stimulate
children's language development. She uses picture cues,
written words, songs, and books to draw on the children's prior
knowledge and introduce new concepts. Ms. Tori considers the
age and stage of the children as well as how her practices
foster literacy. She considers what the children already know,
the concepts they are learning, and the concepts she wishes for
them to learn. These practices are based on broader behaviors,
skills, and concepts that explain why and how children grow
and develop. It is not enough to merely provide experiences for
children, we should have a rationale for why we engage them

40 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
in certain practices. Theory gives us a framework and a logic for
our practices. Theories help us to organize the knowledge we
have, and they help us to make predictions about what might
occur in the future.

                           Figure 3.1 Developmental Theories

            Some theories focus on the skills reflected by children
as they engage with the world and move through
developmental stages (constructivist theories). Other theories
focus on the broader context of the child (ecological/contextual
theories), and some focus on the child's construction of
knowledge while also focusing on the immediate surroundings
(sociocultural/cooperative theories). Using theory as a
framework builds our scientific understanding of how children
grow and develop. The major developmental theories covered
in this chapter have been widely used both to verify and refute
ideas and to create road maps for early learning environments
and practices. Each section in this chapter discusses a broad
theory of cognitive development and then a specific theory
focused on literacy development. This chapter will explore the
following questions:

            What theories focus on the child's skills and

behaviors?

Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 41
                           What theories focus on the child and the
immediate environment?

                          What theories focus on the wider context?

                             3.2 Constructivist Theories

            Constructivism emphasizes the individual child and
defines indicators of development as the child continues to
grow. Children actively construct knowledge based on their
stage of development and previous knowledge. As children
engage with their environment, they create internal mental
structures to comprehend their experiences (Piaget, 1962).
Constructivism may also present children's growth and
development as a series of progressive stages. Stage theories
help educators recognize children's accomplishments,
anticipate areas of growth, and provide intentional literacy
experiences. Piaget's cognitive developmental theory
examines a child's developmental stage and how they acquire
and categorize information internally (Piaget, 1962). Pertaining
to emergent literacy progressions, Frith's theory of reading
acquisition presents stages of development as young readers
acquire an awareness of alphabetic systems (Frith, 1985).

42 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
3.2a Piaget's Cognitive Developmental Theory

            Jean Piaget's cognitive developmental theory is a form
of constructivism. According to cognitive developmental
theory, children construct their own learning through
interactions and experiences in the environment. Piaget (1962)
argued that we are constantly organizing our world by
categorizing information and determining ways of applying
this information. In the vignette above, Ms. Tori has created an
opportunity for children to access the categories of information
they have already acquired (e.g., apples are red, green, and
yellow) and use this knowledge to engage in discovery play in
the apple orchard center.

            Several key concepts are important for understanding
Piaget's theory. The units we use to organize our
understandings are called schemas. Schemas include not only
a concept like "birds fly," but all of the associations used to
develop the concept through past experiences. Piaget believed
that we form our schemas through a process called adaptation,
which allows us to create categories and subcategories for
emerging schemas. There are two types of adaptation:
assimilation and accommodation. Assimilation means that we
take new information and squeeze it into an existing schema.
This can happen whether it makes sense or not, such as trying
to fit a peg into a hole, whether it is square or round.
Accommodation literally means to make room for something.
For example, when most people have houseguests, they
accommodate them by altering their sleeping and eating
arrangements and their schedules. Assimilation would suggest
that hosts told the guests to forage in the fridge for themselves,
find a sleeping bag, and figure out where to sleep. Assimilation
makes no room--the schema does not change. But
accommodation means that there is now room to create or
understand something in a new or different way. The process
takes place as a result of disequilibrium, which reflects the

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 43
state a child is thrown into when they receive information that
is new. Humans generally experience disequilibrium as
uncomfortable, so we generally try to stay in a state of
equilibrium, a comfortable cognitive state, until or unless we
are exposed to new information that does not fit into our
existing schema (Piaget, 1962).

     Vignette: Broken Birds

        Three-year-old Li has developed a schema that birds
     fly. This is a reasonable schema based on Li's
     experience seeing birds fly in her neighborhood and
     places she has visited. Today she visited the zoo with
     her classmates and saw ostriches for the first time.
     After observing the ostriches, Li turned to her
     classmates and said, "The birds are broken." She had
     noticed that they do not fly. Because Li already has a
     schema "birds fly" and the non-flying birds have thrown
     her into disequilibrium, Li has decided that the birds
     are broken. She has NOT decided that the schema is
     incorrect. Thus, she has assimilated the ostriches in the
     "birds fly" schema, with a bit of a footnote that these
     birds are broken. This allows Li to return to a state of
     equilibrium as she has assimilated the new
     information. It takes multiple exposures to a violation of
     our expectation, or multiple instances of
     disequilibrium, in order for us to choose to
     accommodate new information and create new
     schema. Later that day, Li visited chickens who cannot
     fly high in the air. Perhaps that second time, she

44 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
     labeled them broken birds or she might have started to
     consider that some birds do not fly. The third time, Li
     visits the penguin house and sees definitive evidence
     that some animals, who are clearly birds, do not fly. At
     the point where Li creates a new structure that divides
     birds into "birds that fly" and "birds that do not fly," she
     has engaged in accommodation. This is crucial for all
     forms of cognitive development and has numerous
     applications to literacy learning when children must
     decide on the rules and usage of language in all its
     forms and when they engage in communication to
     express themselves about the world around them.

            Piaget also developed a set of four stages, with
individual substages, to map out a range of expected,
observable behaviors for children (1962). The sensorimotor
stage closely corresponds with infancy and toddlerhood. The
preoperational stage is associated with preschool years. The
concrete operational stage covers the elementary years, and
the formal operational stage applies to adolescence and
adulthood. These constructs are outlined in the chart "Piaget's
Stages" (see Table 3.1) and help us to formulate ideas about
what would be expected for children at particular ages.
Understanding the ages and stages delineated by Piaget (see
Table 3.1) helps us to consider the importance of sensory
experiences for infants and toddlers.

                               Table 3.1 Piaget's Stages

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 45
    Piaget's Stages of Cognitive Development

46 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
Stage         Approximate Age Range Characteristics  Example

Sensorimotor  Birth to       The child               Children may
              about 2 years  experiences the         put new
                             world through the       objects in
                             fundamental             their mouths
                             senses of seeing,       (e.g., the
                             hearing, touching,      parent's
                             and tasting.            cellphone).

Preoperational 2 to 7 years  Children acquire        Children start
                             the ability to          using words
                             internally              and phrases
                             represent the           to
                             world through           communicate
                             language and            their desires
                             mental imagery.         (e.g., "cookie").
                             They also start to
                             see the world
                             from other
                             people's
                             perspectives.

Concrete      7 to 11 years  Children become         Children can
Operational                  able to think           tell the
                             logically. They can     difference
                             increasingly            between their
                             perform                 own
                             operations on           perspective
                             objects that are        and another
                             only imagined.          person (e.g., "I
                                                     can see out of
                                                     the window,
                                                     but you
                                                     cannot.").

Formal        11 years to    Adolescents can         Children can
Operational   adulthood      think                   consider
                             systematically, can     hypothetical
                             reason about            situations
                             abstract concepts,      (e.g., What if I
                             and can                 need
                             understand ethics       something in
                             and scientific          an
                             reasoning.              emergency
                                                     and there is
                                                     no adult to
                                                     ask?).

       Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 47
            With regard to language development, parents and
educators are encouraged to sing, talk, and tell stories to
children; we couple that with cradling a child or clapping our
hands together. We know that children in the sensorimotor
stage are learning about their world by touching and being
touched, sniffing items, putting everything in their mouths,
looking around, and listening with avid interest. Children use
these experiences to create schema to apply to the world
around them and this fosters their ability to communicate
orally and start to perceive symbols. For example, when a child
builds a tower of blocks, they start to learn how many blocks
can be stacked along with efficient strategies for stacking
them. At that point, they can then add blocks to their mental
schema for items that can be stacked on top of each other.
This knowledge then creates space for a child to use language
to express their zeal (or disappointment) in how the block-
stacking is going and to beckon others to join in.

Children construct learning by interacting with their environment,
such as when stacking blocks.

48 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
            Upon entering the preoperational phase, children use
symbolic thinking--including language--to communicate
their thoughts and ideas. They were able to do so during the
sensorimotor phase by indicating and pointing and using
some language, but in the preoperational phase, they do so
with complexity. Additionally, in the preoperational phase, they
can use language to express thoughts about objects or people
that are not immediately present. An older infant may point
at the elephant while at the zoo, but a preschooler may talk
about the elephant they saw at the zoo on a previous day. This
greater sophistication reflects children's ability to engage in
symbolic thinking. Children in the preoperational phase need
opportunities to develop their increasingly complex language.
Providing opportunities for children to engage in pretend-play,
participate in social conversations, and use language to solve
tasks promotes children's use of complex language.

3.2b Frith Theory of Reading Acquisition

            Literacy experts also use a stage model to describe
children's literacy progressions. Although the various stage
models of reading have some distinctions and focus on
different elements of reading processes, they all share an
approach which focuses on children moving from one stage to
another with increasing complexity and include features that
build on the previous stage. One literacy model is Uta Frith's
theory of reading acquisition. In Frith's theory, children acquire
literacy by moving through particular stages that are
developmental and associated with both age and experience.
Frith includes three stages of reading acquisition in her model
(see Figure 3.2). The first stage, the logographic stage, is
characterized by instant recognition of symbols, images, or
words. Children demonstrate emerging logographic
understandings when they read out familiar logos like Target's
bullseye or McDonald's golden arches. In the second stage,

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 49
the alphabetic stage, children begin to use letter symbols to
represent the sounds they hear in individual words. Children in
this stage demonstrate an emerging understanding of sound
and symbol relationships, such as writing /kt/ for cat. The child
may hear the beginning sound and ending sound of cat, but
the internal vowel sound is not yet recognized. These early
approximations demonstrate that they can hear sounds and
represent them, but not always completely or correctly. The
third stage, the orthographic stage, involves the internalization
of spelling patterns and children begin to recognize and
reproduce words with increasing automaticity. In this stage,
readers do not need to sound out familiar words, though they
pause when confronting new words or letter combinations. For
example, a child may quickly read the word "kick" but pause to
consider how to read the more complex word "knife" because
the /k/ is silent. In each of these stages, children master greater
complexities of thought and language and teachers must
adjust their approaches in order to best foster the child's
growth (Frith, 1985).

                   Figure 3.2 Frith Theory of Reading Acquisition

50 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
            Constructivist stage models have many iterations that
metaphorically look like stair steps, a spiral, or an increasing
sloped line. But, in every case, the image implies that the child
is acquiring new and unique skills that capitalize on the
previous point and move the child to the next point. The stages
are successive and developmental, beginning in infancy. As
children master each successive stage, they still retain the skills
they attained in previous stages. Literacy stage theories
acknowledge that before children can read the list of what is
for sale at the orchard, they benefit from repeated exposure
to environmental print, letters, letter sounds, and other literacy
experiences. This is why intentional educators (like Ms. Tori) use
picture cues next to the words on the list of what is available
for purchase in the orchard shop. Deliberate actions like this
support children's emergent literacy and honor the
developmental nature of the process.

            Piaget's and Frith's stage theories place an emphasis
on seeing the child move forward from one set of capacities to
the next more complex set of capacities. Both Piaget and Frith
emphasize the process of observing what the child's behaviors
and skills reflect about their thinking. This approach is helpful
for educators because it fosters an understanding about where
the child is and gives a map for where the child needs to
progress next.

                                    3.3 Sociocultural
                                    Theories

                                                          Sociocultural theories
                                              bridge the gap between
constructivist approaches and ecological approaches by
emphasizing cooperation. These theories emphasize the
immediate environment and include educators' analysis of

               Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 51
children's observable skills and behaviors to present children
with the next valuable learning moment. Children develop
language skills individually, but they do so within a cooperative
learning context as peers, family members, teachers, and
others engage, support, and teach them. Vygotsky's
sociocultural learning theory is notable for focusing on what
the child can do, while also suggesting that a child's learning
is supported when the right amount of instruction is provided
at the right time. Marie Clay's theories and definitions of
emergent reading provide us with a framework for
understanding individual children's prior knowledge and
readiness for different literacy experiences. These theories
focus on the interactive nature of the child's capabilities,
experiences, and interactions with others.

3.3a Sociocultural Learning Theory

            Vygotsky's sociocultural learning theory emphasizes
the social aspect of children constructing their learning (1986).
Vygotsky believed that cognitive growth was a result of
interactions between people, after which a child internalizes
learning. According to this theory, children learn most
effectively by engaging meaningfully with someone who is
more experienced. Vygotsky developed the concept of the
zone of proximal development. He defines it as "the distance
between the actual developmental level as determined by the
independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem solving"
(Vygotsky, 1978, p86).

                      Figure 3.4 Zone of Proximal Development

52 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
            Vygotsky recognized a more knowledgeable other
could be another child, a family member, a teacher, or anyone
who can provide some support for a task. The support itself is
called scaffolding. Construction workers, painters, and others
use physical scaffolds when they work to reach areas beyond
their abilities if merely standing on the ground. In this same
way, the support of a more experienced peer giving guidance
or direction creates a support for the child to be able to
construct their own learning. As a child masters a task, they
need less scaffolding and eventually the scaffold disappears
(Vygotsky, 1978). For example, many young children have help
in learning to wash their hands. An adult may show the child
how to acquire the soap, rub their hands vigorously, and rinse.
Over time, children need less help with the task, and the
scaffold is removed as children are able to wash their hands
independently. Children are in progressive zones of proximal
development when they are still needing some guidance to
wash their hands. Vygotsky placed great importance on the
social experience, which provides the scaffold. This theory

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 53
allows for the notion that children construct their learning, but
it also emphasizes that construction requires some help from
others.

Children learn through social interaction.

     Pause and Consider: Is Speech the Chicken or the Egg?

        Read the following passage examining the
     differences between Piaget's and Vygotsky's
     conceptualizations of children's oral language. This
     creates an interesting chicken-and-egg dilemma with
     regard to language development. As you read, think
     about how each theoretical stance resonates with you.

        With regard to language, the differences between
54 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
the approaches of Piaget and Vygotsky can be
understood by looking at one aspect of oral language.
Children can often be observed engaging in a running
stream of commentary as they play and solve tasks.
Piaget referred to this action as egocentric speech
while Vygotsky termed the practice private speech. The
difference in naming reveals what each theorist
believed about language and cognitive development.
Piaget indicated that egocentric speech was an
additional marker of egocentrism, a hallmark of the
preoperational period (Piaget, 1962). Egocentrism
means that children's capacity for perspective-taking
or understanding another person's point of view is not
yet developed. Piaget argued that egocentric speech
reflects the developmental stage the child is in. He
reasoned children speak aloud to themselves in this
stage because they are unable to understand or
perceive that another person is hearing them. Vygotsky
indicated it is not merely a lack of perspective-taking
that causes children to talk to themselves, but that
children do this because they are trying to solve tasks
(Vygotsky, 1978). For example, children frequently talk
to themselves when they are learning to tie their shoes.
Vygotsky indicated that private speech never truly
disappears, but instead goes underground as children
grow older. It is true that while most adults will not talk
to themselves in public, many people will refer to
speaking out loud when working through a hard task,
such as being lost in traffic or trying to create
something complex. Both theorists agree that
perspective-taking is limited in this stage, but where
Piaget says that egocentric speech is merely a

        Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 55
     reflection of the child's development, Vygotsky says
     that private speech is being actively used as a tool.

        Is our language resultant from our cognitive
     development, or does language lead our cognitive
     development? Is it possible that both of these
     approaches are true?

3.3b Marie Clay's Emergent Literacy Theory

            Marie Clay's emergent literacy theory recognizes a
close relationship between the instructional scaffolds used by
educators to promote young children's emerging reading,
writing, and oral language skills (Clay, 1991). Drawing on the
work of Vygotsky, Clay argues, "The essence of successful
teaching is to know where the frontier of learning is for any
one pupil on a particular task" (Clay, 1991, p. 65). In this way,
Clay extends the value of understanding where an individual
child's zone of proximal development is so that educators take
advantage of learning spaces to enhance a child's literacy
learning (p. 65). Clay's emergent literacy instructional practices
underscore the interactions between educators and children
and focus on the social supports and contexts children and
educators co-create.

            Clay recognizes children construct their learning
within the context of their own developmental histories, prior
knowledge, and previous experiences with complex tasks (Clay,
1998). The focus of emergent literacy then is on the ways that
children process information and the subsequent strategies
that children learn to use to solve a problem. Moreover, as a
member of the early learning community, educators
encourage children to share the learning insights they achieve
so they, in turn, become valuable literacy resources for their

56 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
peers (Clay, 1991). Clay embraces teacher scaffolding as a
valuable support for children's literacy learning and views
teaching as an interaction between the child and the educator
(or other expert). Thus, it is important to have clear instructional
approaches that support the child's ability to discover and use
strategies to support their learning with regard to the
knowledge that literacy development is unique for each child
(Clay, 1998). Understanding emergent literacy approaches
means that teachers consider the opportunities that children
have had to complete the tasks set before them including their
access to previous experiences and prior knowledge. In other
words, whether children will choose to replicate creating an
apple pie by using beige pom poms, a circle felt crust piece,
and a pie tin may depend upon whether they have ever seen
anyone create an apple pie from scratch.

          3.4 Ecological/Contextual

Theories

            Ecological theories emphasize the child's system and
context. Ecological theories of human development focus on
the interrelationships between broader environmental systems
and their impact on a child's development. In contrast to the
theoretical approaches presented earlier in the chapter,
ecological theories look more broadly at the complex levels
of the child's environment and how this impacts learning.
Bronfenbrenner's ecological theory examines the social
resources and relationships that directly and indirectly impact
a child's development. Bronfenbrenner focuses on multiple

Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 57
environments of the child, including the contexts of home,
neighborhood, community, and culture (Bronfenbrenner,
1979). Friere's critical literacy theory focuses on understanding
the social, cultural, and political contexts of learners (Friere,
1985). These theories take an ecological approach as they are
focused on understanding the child in the backdrop of time,
place, and circumstance.

3.4a Ecological Theory of Human Development

            The ecological theory of human development
emphasizes the contextual interrelationships that exist
between individuals, families, the physical environment, the
community, and the cultural norms and values of a society.
Each of these relationships exerts contextual influence on the
individual and is depicted by concentric circles embedded
within one another. The nested spheres of influence are
represented in the graphic "Bronfenbrenner's Ecological
Systems" (see Figure 3.6) and include the microsystem,
mesosystem, exosystem, and the macrosystem, with each
system based on a greater understanding of influence
(Bronfenbrenner, 1979).

            Figure 3.6 .Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Systems

58 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
            The microsystem includes the interaction a child has in
their immediate surroundings. This includes the child's home
and the early learning setting as well as other environments
that are consistent and immediate. The interaction between
the parent and the child or the teacher and the child forms
a microsystem. The mesosystem brings together two settings
containing the child. For example, when the early learning
teacher and the parents interact, it is taking place in the
mesosystem. The exosystem is external to the child, although it
influences the child indirectly. The exosystem consists of areas
the child does not enter. Examples of the exosystem include
the parent's workplace. Yet, the parental workplace influences

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 59
the child because it influences the parent, which subsequently
affects the interactions between parent and child. Consider, for
example, how children and families are impacted differently
depending on whether or not the workplace provides access
to health care, sick leave, or family leave when needed. The
macrosystem consists of the norms and mores that influence
culture and customs. These beliefs, expectations, and rules
underlie the activities and institutions that constitute our
everyday lives. For example, policies around mandatory school
attendance were created in the macrosystem and influence
jurisdictions (also in the macrosystem) to provide schools for
the community (exosystem), for families to enroll the child
(mesosystem), and for the child to attend (microsystem). At
each of these junctures, there are interactions taking place in
the various systems indicated and the systems ripple in and
out accordingly. Ripple out occurs as the child has needs, the
family responds, the local environment reacts, and social
change can occur. In some places, early learning centers open
at 5:00 am to accommodate super-commuters. This is an
example of how the needs of the child and family create
change in the community. Other times, larger policies affect
whole communities or families in ways that impact their
practices. For instance, when airbags were required in new cars
(macrosystem), companies started installing them (exosystem),
and families stopped putting car seats in the front seat and
instead put the child in the backseat.

            As the child interacts with others in the supportive
context, the child is exposed to new discrete language skills,
such as vocabulary. In the Northern Virginia area, many
children are familiar with the word "pentagon" and are aware
it has five sides, even before this is introduced as a vocabulary
word. The Pentagon, which serves as headquarters for the
United States Department of Defense, is an important military,
political, and economic presence in the Northern Virginia area
(macrosystem). It is also a workplace for some families

60 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
(exosystem). The Pentagon's distinctive, five-sided shape is
visible from several major roads in the area and a child might
easily see it from the car, view it on a tour, or hear others speak
about it (mesosystem). This regular exposure influences the
words that adults or peers use while regularly interacting with
the child (microsystem), and this influences a child's likelihood
of hearing the word, "pentagon." As a result, children
comprehend and use the word "pentagon" earlier than some
peers in a different part of the country or state.

            The ecological approach, similar to the nested literacy
model, looks at the totality of language experience over time.
Just as the branch and tree provide the context for the bird
in its nest, children's wider backdrop for their experiences
influences what they learn to value and what they learn to
master. The "Pentagon" example focuses on vocabulary, but
the same principle applies for other discrete skills such as
phonological awareness and alphabetic knowledge. Each time
the child masters a new discrete skill, it ripples out and
interacts with the wider concepts of language development
(receptive and expressive language), reading, and writing. This
builds the capacity to think and understand. Each time a child
is exposed to the wider concepts of language, writing, and
reading, it helps to foster abilities in the areas of the discrete
skills. Indeed our discrete skills and language concepts are
connected in much the same way that microsystem
interactions are. It is difficult to say that speaking leads to
reading or that reading leads to speaking. It is more accurate
to say that they are transactional and interactive and develop
concurrently.

            Our understanding of language development must
take into account environmental aspects beyond the
immediate situation containing the child. This means that the
literacy interactions that a child experiences in their
environment influence the family and vice versa, causing
influential ripplings in and out. Children first learn what is

               Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 61
familiar and contextual. Development is influenced by
multiple systems, including the family, school, neighborhood,
and larger ecologies that encompass more immediate systems
(Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 2006). These systems are the context
in which children learn.

3.4b Freire Critical Literacy

            Paulo Freire (1985) defined critical literacy as the
capacity to analyze, critique, and transform social, cultural, and
political texts and contexts by having a thorough
understanding of the experience of the student. Freire went
on to suggest that in order to truly reach students, one must
be aware of their problems, struggles, and aspirations, while
also considering the power dynamics implicit in the ideas and
materials they are exposed to and the relationships they
develop. Additionally, these understandings should be followed
by a reciprocal exchange and a willingness for action in ways
that would meet the learner where they are.

            Critical literacy acknowledges teachers have the power
to send implicit messages about the importance and meaning
of some information above others. Teachers as decision-
makers determine the value of particular lessons, goals,
materials, and the structure of the learning day. Children
receive feedback about the relative importance of ideas within
teacher and classroom interactions. These differences are
contextual and socially constructed, even as they are
transmitted back and forth between speaker and listener,
between environment and child, and among each of these
characters as they move through their day (Luke, 2012).

            For example, a critical literacy approach prompts us
to stop and acknowledge our decision to choose the apple
orchard shop in the opening vignette as our theme for the
dramatic play area. We are making choices as educators about
the types of play contexts that have value and the types of

62 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
vocabulary that should be introduced. For example, Ms. Tori
may also choose to include a picture card that says "manzana,"
the Spanish word for apple, in order to support the home
language development that she has already identified in the
group of children she teaches. Even more broadly, critical
literacy challenges us to question the value of the apple
orchard center for learners. Would an apple orchard dramatic
play area hold the same relevance for children in south Florida
as it would for children in northern Michigan? The answer is,
it depends. When answering questions about instructional
practices, critical literacy asks us to consider: What is the
intended goal? What are the children's interests and how do
they connect to their real-world experiences? If not, what
would make these practices relevant and impactful for the
children? Are the children given only the materials for apple
pie, and might it be relevant to include materials for other
types of apple desserts, such as apple empanadas? What types
of play would be acceptable in this play area? Critical literacy
challenges teachers to always consider whether the
educational environment and experiences they choose allow
children to feel seen and heard as they acquire knowledge.

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 63
Early childhood teachers plan for instruction.

3.5 Using Theory in Practice

            Theories matter because they inform our practice.
When we stop to evaluate if a literacy activity seems
appropriate for the age and stage of the child, we are
grounding our practice in a theory (Piaget/Frith). When we set
up our classroom with learning stations to encourage children
to learn language from one another, we follow a theoretical
construct (Vygotsky/Clay). When we stop to ask about the
environmental influences on the family and, subsequently, the
child's language development, our practice reflects our
understanding of the factors that Bronfenbrenner and Friere
spoke about. Understanding the theoretical frameworks that
guide our practice helps us to be more effective and intentional
in the classroom.

64 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
Pause and Consider: Theory to Practice

   As you prepare and engage in your learning
environment, what do you take into account? How do
you think about the ages and stages of the children?
How do you think about the wider context? How do
you incorporate the voices and influence of children
and families? How do you think about ways to foster
interaction among children who are very experienced
with a concept and those that are less experienced?
Are these approaches contextual, cooperative, or
constructivist? How can you use theory to understand
what is occurring with a child, and how will you apply
this understanding to your practices?

Key Take-Aways

   Theories help us to understand child development
and to plan our instruction and environments
accordingly. We must understand the ages and stages
that children are in and allow children to construct
their own learning. We emphasize children interacting
socially because they learn from one another and from
themselves as they do so. Teachers should create
circumstances for children to learn new concepts and
explore with materials, always keeping in mind that
they are making decisions about what materials and

         Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 65
     lessons children will be exposed to. Finally, it is
     imperative to understand context so that children have
     every opportunity to make meaningful connections.

     Additional Resources

        Piaget Society Resources for Students:
     https://piaget.org/resources-for-students/

        Critical LIteracy: Promoting Equity in Early Childhood
     Settings: https://www.hekupu.ac.nz/article/critical-
     literacy-promoting-equity-early-childhood-settings

        Frith's Model of Reading Acquisition:
     https://esol.britishcouncil.org/sites/default/files/
     attachments/informational-page/
     Frith%27s%20model%20of%20reading%20acquisition.p
     df

        The Importance of Bronfenbrenner's Bioecological
     Theory in the Classroom: http://libres.uncg.edu/ir/uncg/
     f/J_Tudge_Importance_2017.pdf

        Marie Clay's Literacy Processing Theory:
     https://readingrecovery.org/reading-recovery/teaching-
     children/early-literacy-learning/

        Paolo Freire Institute for Learning:
     https: //www.f reire.org/paulo-f reire/

        Virginia's Early Learning & Development Standards
     (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines.

66 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
     https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
     curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

        Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development and
     Scaffolding: https://educationaltechnology.net/
     vygotskys-zone-of-proximal-development-and-
     scaffolding/

                            References

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development:
   Experiments by nature and design. Harvard University Press.

Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (2006). The bioecological
   model of human development. In R. M. Lerner & W. Damon
   (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical models of
   human development (pp. 793-828). John Wiley & Sons Inc.

Clay, M. M. (1991). Becoming literate: The construction of inner
   control. Heinemann.

Clay, M.M. (1998). By different paths to common outcomes.
   Stenhouse

Freire, P. (1985). The politics of education: Culture, power, and
   liberation. Bergin & Garvey.

Frith, U. (1981). Experimental approaches to developmental
   dyslexia: An introduction. Psychological Research, 43, 97-110.

Frith, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of developmental dyslexia.
   In K. Patterson, M. Coltheart & J. Marshall (Eds.), Surface
   dyslexia. Erlbaum.

Luke, A. (2012). Critical literacy: Foundational notes. Theory Into
   Practice, 51(1), 4-11. https://doi: 10.1080/00405841.2012.636324

Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood.
   Norton.

              Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development | 67
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of
   higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. MIT Press.

                          Image Credits

Figure 3.1: Leslie LaCroix and Kalyca Schultz. "Developmental
   Theories." CC BY 2.0, derivative image using untitled image,
   (https://pxhere.com/en/photo/941148) by unknown author,
   "Preschool Girl and Boy," (https://bit.ly/32F4Zgo) by Alliance
   for Excellent Education, and 070608-F-5217S-001.JPG,
   (https://bit.ly/3gsZCZP) by U.S. Department of Defense.

Figure 3.2: Kalyca Schultz. "Frith Theory of Reading Acquisition."
   CC BY 2.0, derivative image using "stop sign,"
   (https://www.flickr.com/photos/84388958@N03/7729300102)
   by Clover Autrey.

Figure 3.3: Kalyca Schultz. "Zone of Proximal Development." CC
   BY 2.0.

Figure 3.4: "Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Systems." Ian Joslin,
   LibeTexts, CC BY 4.0. (Retrieved from https://bit.ly/3aFI2OG)

Additional Images
   Image, Section 3.2: Lucy La Croix. [Bird] CC BY 2.0.

Image, Section 3.2a: Longwood University. [Constructing
   Learning] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 3.3: Lucy La Croix. [Nest] CC BY 2.0.

Image, Section 3.3a: Longwood University. [Feedback From
   Experienced Peer] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 3.4: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.

Image, Section 3.4b : Longwood University. [Teacher Planning]
   CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

68 | Examining Theories that Support Literacy Development
4. Understanding and
Valuing Children's
Home Literacy
Environments

     "Every child needs one adult that is crazy about them".
                                                                -Urie Brofenbrenner

   4.1 Introduction
   4.2 Family Role in Literacy Development
   4.3 Understanding Families' Diverse Social Contexts
   4.4 Working with Families to Promote Literacy

     Opening Vignette: A Tale of Two Teachers

        Head Start teachers, Jane and Mallory, are attending
     a professional development workshop. The first session
     of the day, "Early Literacy and the Home Environment,"
     presents the attendees with strategies to support
     families' home literacy environments. The presenters
     encourage the participants to utilize tools such as a
     home literacy screening inventory to determine which
     families might need additional support. During the
     discussion they highlight the value of literacy rich
     home environments where parents or caregivers

                                                      Home Literacy Environments | 69
     regularly share books with children. The presenters
     conclude the workshop by emphasizing the
     implications of early home environment on a child's
     language and literacy development.

        After the workshop, both Jane and Mallory have time
     to reflect on the content and their own literacy
     experiences. Jane experienced a very traditional
     middle-class upbringing. Her mother was a stay-at-
     home mom and she has vivid memories of her mother
     and father sharing books with her. Their home was
     filled with literacy materials and her parents often read
     for pleasure. She even remembers the excitement of
     the day she got her first library card.

        Mallory had a very different early literacy experience.
     Mallory spent most days with her grandmother. Their
     days were spent baking treats and tending to the
     garden. Mallory has memories of her grandmother
     telling her stories. The stories were sometimes based
     on their faith, and at other times they were full of
     magical creatures in far away lands. As a teenager
     Mallory learned that her grandmother could not read.
     This explained why her grandmother filled their days
     by telling stories, rather than reading books.

4.1 Introduction

            It is well-known that parents and caregivers, and the
home literacy environment they create, directly impact a
child's emergent literacy development (Weigel, Martin, &
Bennett, 2006; Waldrep, 2005). Beginning at birth, children

70 | Home Literacy Environments
acquire language and emergent literacy skills within social
contexts. The opening vignette demonstrates the beauty of
language and literacy development in different homes and
family environments. Emergent literacy skills are shaped by
the home and preschool literacy environment (Saracho, 2017).
Children enter school contexts with a wealth of language and
literacy experiences from the home and community contexts
they experience. It is important to use a strengths-based
perspective when considering the differences in family literacy
practices. In doing so, educators guard against deficit
perspectives that may privilege some literacy experiences over
others. In the opening vignette, it might be easy to conclude
that Mallory entered school with vulnerabilities based on family
structure and her grandmother's literacy level. Yet, Mallory's
family's rich oral storytelling practices supplied her with a
wealth of knowledge about narrative styles including plot,
theme, and character development. In addition, Mallory has
learned a great deal about how to create dialogue in a way that
captures a listener's attention. Jane's experiences in a book rich
environment also provided her the opportunity to see reading
as a source of pleasure. Although Jane and Mallory had very
different early experiences, both children entered school with a
love and eagerness for literacy. Both educators realized that the
workshop had presented an incomplete view about how home
environments can support children's literacy development.
Early childhood educators are tasked with the responsibility of
celebrating the individuality and strengths of each child and
their family. Partnering with families promotes a strong
foundation for successful literacy learning. In order to do this,
educators must recognize there are many contexts and
methods in which families transmit and share in literacy
experiences.

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 71
Early childhood educators collaboratively plan literacy activities.

This chapter will explore the following questions:

              What role does a child's family play in literacy

development?

                          How do families' social contexts differ?

                         How can educators in early learning settings
work with families to promote literacy?

72 | Home Literacy Environments
             4.2 Family Role in Literacy

Development

            Family literacy development refers to parents and their
children using literacy practices and strategies together at
home. These literacy experiences are usually informal and
occur within the context of the normal family routine (Wasik,
2012). These experiences, compounded daily, support the
influence of the family on a child's literacy development. Many
decades of research support the vital parental role in nurturing
a child's literacy development. Consider the literacy-rich
moments illustrated in the exchange between Ava and her
father getting ready to go to the store.

Vignette: Grocery Store Trip

        Two year-old Ava is happily drawing a picture while
     her father is creating a list for the grocery store. Her
     father mentions that he is planning to buy grapes at
     the grocery store. Ava proceeds to scribble across the
     paper and exclaims, "I added grapes to my list, too."

            This scenario demonstrates the value of an everyday
interaction that takes place in many homes. The daily
conversations and interactions between children and adults in
the home provide models of how people use reading, writing,

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 73
and language to engage with the world. Every day parental
interactions create opportunities for adults to model literacy
skills. Early childhood educators have the responsibility to
honor the language and literacy expressions present in
families' daily lives. When early educators focus on developing
partnerships with families and champion the role of the family
as a vital space for meaningful literacy interactions, they help
promote family literacy.

4.2a The Home Literacy Environment

            The home literacy environment is ordinarily defined as
activities facilitated by family members at home that relate to
literacy learning, and literacy resources in the home combined
with parental attitudes towards literacy learning (Weigel,
Martin, & Bennett, 2006). Home literacy environments include
practices such as shared picture book reading, storytelling,
conversations and singing songs. Literacy contexts reflect
multiple variables and include a child's interests, library
experiences, and how parents and children enact a variety of
literacy practices in the home (Myrtil, Justice, & Jiang, 2019).
Bronfenbrenner's human ecological theory suggests that
children must be understood in the context of their families
and communities (Rosa & Tudge, 2013). The ecological
environment is a set of nested structures, each couched inside
the subsequent one, similar to a set of Russian dolls where
each doll of decreasing size fits inside the next. The innermost
setting would include the developing child and their
immediate setting, likely home and classroom.
Bronfenbrenner's approach closely matches the nest model,
where not only is the child considered, but also the immediate
environment and the wider context.

74 | Home Literacy Environments
Sharing books with children is an important way to promote literacy
in the home.

            More recently, the concept of funds of knowledge
(Gonzalez, Moll, & Amanti, 2005) acknowledges the influence
of the household and community. Funds of knowledge
encompass families' traditions, experiences, information, and
practices. When educators and supportive adults establish a
relationship founded on the common goal of successful and
healthy development of the child, it supports the aims of
cultural responsiveness, equity, and inclusion. For example,
when a child shares their enthusiasm for a television program
their family is watching together, it draws upon many of the
child's own funds of knowledge. While the child is drawing
on a shared family and cultural experience in the show itself,
the child is also engaging with notions of occupations and
outings, values, chores and activities and vocabulary. A child's
experience shopping at the grocery story is another example of
funds of knowledge. A child may learn about quantity, money,
shopping practices, cultural norms around food, and patterns

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 75
of interacting, all while learning and practicing signs and
symbols. Drawing on socio-cultural perspectives, educators
embrace the funds of knowledge children possess utilizing
these resources and skills to build productive pedagogy. In this
way, educators acknowledge that every child comes to school
with previous experiences that influence their interactions with
language and support their emerging literacies.

            The home environment of each family is complex and
personal, and includes economic, social, and cultural
influences. The complexity of home and community
environments explains the diversity we see amongst school
readiness nationwide. The home literacy environment, parental
expectations for their child's literacy success, and parental
characteristics are influencing factors in literacy development
(Senechal & Lefevre, 2002). Ideally, prior to entering
kindergarten, children have the developmental precursors for
reading well-established. This includes skills children learn
from shared book reading and oral storytelling experiences,
exposure to rhyming structures, and opportunities exploring
alphabet material. Literacy development is "rooted" in
experiences young children have prior to formal schooling.
These informal literacy experiences take place daily in the
home environment and involve interactions with caregivers.
Examples include caregivers reading to children and an
emphasis on environmental print. The caregiver might point
out a word or sign to the child. It could also sound like a family
member singing a familiar song with a child, making up silly
words that rhyme, or saying the letters in the child's name.

4.2b Literacy Materials and Experiences

            There are many ways families engage in early literacy
experiences in the home. Research studies demonstrate the
strong relationship between school success and early literacy
exposure. Children who enter school with foundational literacy

76 | Home Literacy Environments
skills will likely have success in formal schooling. Children's
access to diverse literacy materials in the home encompass a
range of resources that promote children's interactions with
print. Literacy materials include children's access to print based
materials such as books and magazines as well as access to a
variety of writing and drawing materials that children can use
to generate print. The influence of technology is also situated
in this arena. Digital media offers children additional ways to
interact with text and acquire literacy as they read, play, or
otherwise explore words and sounds. Children's interactions
across a variety of literacy materials supports their emerging
knowledge about literacy practices.

            Reading aloud has long been touted as an important
practice to encourage literacy development. Educators and
parents have long known the positive impact of sharing books
with children. Positive interactions between children and
caregivers that include picture book reading promote
language skills and vocabulary development (Wells, 1985).
Additionally, research suggests the way in which children are
read to is related to their language gain. If children are given
opportunities to be actively involved in the reading experience,
for example, asking questions about the pictures, children
show greater gains than when an adult simply reads the book
(Whitehurst, et al., 1988). While this finding is valuable for
educators to consider, the mere value of reading to a child
should not be understated or undervalued. Providing children
opportunities to engage with books in various ways and
settings, including school settings, encourages positive
feelings related to literacy.

            Books offer children and families intentional and
focused opportunities to share, discuss, and experience
reading together. It is important to note the emotional
connection that is facilitated by sharing a book with a child.
This connection is valuable for development, but also for the
pure joy of learning to love books and the experiences they

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 77
create. Books are also used to teach young children skills and
to provide understanding of topics that may be difficult to
discuss. Shared storybook reading provides an avenue for
language learning, offering exposure to new concepts, ideas,
and vocabulary that might not be encountered in everyday
conversation. This learning occurs both through the text and
the talk that is facilitated around the text by the caregiver and
child (Brannon & Dauksas, 2014).

            Sharing books is not the only way to support literacy
development for young children. People use stories to learn
about curricular concepts, share life experiences, and capture
the imagination. Culture and history are, in part, transmitted
through story. Storytelling is frequently described as an oral
language activity, but the presence of gestures and physical
expression are also an important part of storytelling. Moreover,
storytelling can also take place through the use of signing,
gestures, picture cards or props, and assistive technology.
Storytelling is an important expression of symbolic thought as
children or adults use language to convey information beyond
the present moment or situation. Additionally, it allows
children to gain insight into the world of communicating ideas
to an audience. Children's response to stories is both social
(Alexander & Levine, 2008) and cognitive (Lehne, et al, 2015).
Speakers practice story concepts such as sequence and
structure, dialogue, and vocabulary. Storytelling allows children
to process emotions and find their voice.

78 | Home Literacy Environments
Sharing books with children provides a strong literacy foundation

            In addition to reading aloud, sharing books, and
storytelling, families can also build strong literacy experiences
through everyday conversations. Chapter two introduced the
idea of "serve and return" and the five steps in facilitating serve
and return interactions with young children. Engaging with
children regularly using these steps is an integral component
of supporting language development. Children successfully
acquire language through consistent experiences and
opportunities with adults they love and trust. When a young
child babbles and an adult responds appropriately,
connections are built and strengthened in the child's brain
that support the development of communication. Much like
a game of volleyball, the back and forth interaction is both
rewarding and capacity building. Responsive caregivers
provide an environment rich in serve and return experiences to
build language and literacy knowledge and skills.

                                                      Home Literacy Environments | 79
     Pause and Consider: How Does Our Own Literacy
     Background Influence Us?

        Our early literacy experiences influence how we think
     about children's home literacy environments. This
     includes previous experiences with family members,
     teachers, friends, and how our time and physical space
     were structured. Whether it is conscious or not, we are
     accessing our own memories. Did you have a family
     member who was a great storyteller at family
     gatherings? Did you have access to books? Were you
     read to? What was your own pathway to reading like?
     Our personal literacy journey is shaped by these early
     and formative experiences. Take a moment to consider
     the following questions: What were your personal
     home literacy experiences? How do you think these
     experiences supported your literacy development?
     How do your previous experiences impact your
     perception of what you believe families should provide
     to the children you are educating today?

                             4.3 Understanding Families'
Diverse Social Contexts

            Early childhood educators must recognize the

80 | Home Literacy Environments
uniqueness of all cultures, languages, and communities by
embracing the increasing cultural and linguistic diversity of
our society. All classrooms should be seen as multicultural and
inclusive, and promote equity by valuing and celebrating each
family represented. This includes understanding the influence
of multiple languages and dialects. These culturally responsive
practices engage children and families through authentic
home-school connections. As educators recognize and
understand diverse social contexts, they are strengthening the
effectiveness of instructional delivery. Academic progress takes
place within the context of a child's ecosystems and their
development is maximized when these ecosystems are
considered and respected. Diversity of social contexts is an
asset to educators, rather than a barrier to appropriate
development, when culturally responsive practices are
implemented in the classroom.

            Language development is influenced by exposure and
influence within a broader regional and social environment.
When considering our nest model, this means not only the
bird itself, and the nest, but also the tree and even the forest.
This illustration illuminates the continual theme that language
development is complex and influenced by many factors.
Language experiences build a foundation of thinking and
understanding upon which knowledge can grow. Educators
strategically craft language experiences which draw upon the
life experiences of students and add to their understanding of
the world. Language experiences that connect to the broader
regional and social environment bring life into the classroom
and make what is learned at school relevant and real.

4.3a Multilingual Learners

            Support of the family context may also mean
challenging our assumptions about what it means to support
a child's literacy. This is particularly true when it comes to

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 81
working with multilingual learners. Multilingual learners are
young children who are learning to speak their home language
as well as at least one other language during early childhood
(Castro, Espinosa, & Paez, 2011) or before the age of five
(McManis, 2012). This can happen simultaneously, such as
having parents or other primary figures use two languages.
It can also happen successively, such as when children are
exposed to and speak only one language at home in the first
one or two years and then are exposed to another language
in an early learning program (Genesee, 2010). English language
learners (ELLs) are children whose native language is not
English and who become immersed in an English-speaking
environment (Halle et al., 2012). This text uses the more
inclusive term multilingual learners, as it acknowledges that
children may speak more than just two languages.

            As infants, multilingual learners may appear to be
delayed in their language development. They may produce
language later and exhibit smaller vocabularies in either
language (Hammer et al., 2014). Children who are exposed to
more than one language may enter early learning programs
exhibiting lower English literacy skills than their monolingual
peers, but they catch up and reach the same skills level as
those same peers by the early grades (Hammer et al., 2014).
If educators focus on these deficits, they might miss the
significant advantages that multilingual learners experience.
Ultimately, children who are multilingual learners will acquire
proficiency in multiple languages through ongoing and
intentional language experiences in their home, school, and
community environments (Castro, 2013). In other words, there
is a long-term gain for language development.

            Aside from language development, the acquisition of
multiple languages has other benefits that support cognitive
development overall. Children who are multilingual may have
advantages in their capacity for attention control while
working on linguistic tasks and nonverbal tasks (Barac et al.,

82 | Home Literacy Environments
2014). Access to working memory seems to also be enhanced,
as well as a subsequent gain in executive function tasks such as
planning, rule acquisition, and cognitive flexibility (Castro, 2013).
It has also been suggested that bilingual children demonstrate
heightened creativity and divergent thinking, probably
because they are compelled to switch between two languages
(Castro, 2013). Overall, there is evidence that exposure to
multiple languages yields benefits for cognitive development
that can be translated to other areas besides literacy.

            Additionally, understanding multilingual learners
requires understanding their home context. Blank (1998)
suggests that children who speak more than one language
might be more likely to live in homes with multiple relatives.
Castro (2013) points out that while some may perceive living
with multiple family members to be detrimental because of
perceived crowded living situations, it is actually beneficial as
children gain greater exposure to enriched language
opportunities and cultural experiences. These rich
opportunities to observe and participate in family language
help to preserve and cement the dialogical skills that maintain
it. Children who move away from using their home language
to using English exclusively, tend to lose their ability to
communicate in the first language and start to prefer English
(Espinoza, 2013). This may depress academic achievement in
English (Espinoza, 2013) and also may result in cultural loss as
children lose the ability to communicate with extended family
members who speak the home language.

            Teachers can support families, even if they do not
speak the home language, by encouraging families to continue
to support the home language. A simple example of
supporting multilingual learners and their home language
would include making sure to pronounce a child's name
correctly (Fenner & Snyder, 2021). Research suggests that there
are multiple long-term benefits to promoting literacy skills in
the child's home language, as well as English (Espinoza, 2013).

                                                      Home Literacy Environments | 83
Below is a chart with suggestions for ways that teachers can
support English Language Development and the home
language.

          Strategies for Supporting Literacy Development
       and Home Language

             Meet with families and gather important
                information about the child and family

             Add items to the classroom environment
                that represent the cultures, languages, and
                practices of the children

             Include books and materials that represent
                each family and culture in an authentic way

             Give the parents' opportunities to introduce
                key vocabulary words in the home language

             Read stories in the classroom that represent
                each family

             Use pictures, objects, and experiences to
                demonstrate the meaning of words and
                concepts

             Use visual cues, physical gestures, and
                signals
                Adapted from: Espinoza, L. (2013). PreK-3rd:

       Challenging Common Myths about Dual Language
          Learners. An update to the Seminal 2008 Report.
        Foundation for Child Development Policy to Action
                                      Brief. No. 10.

84 | Home Literacy Environments
Pause and Consider: Home Language and Educator
Perspectives

   Read the two vignettes provided below and consider
the different stances the two early childhood educators
illustrate.

   Educator #1
   Anika's brother regularly picks her up from school in
the afternoon. On this particular day, Anika is eager to
tell her brother all about the happenings of the day.
She turns to him and speaking in Hindi says, "aaj
hamane beej lagae aur yah bade phoolon mein vikasit
hoga." (Today we planted seeds and they will grow into
big flowers.) Ms. Osborne overhears the conversation
and says to Anika's brother, "Anika really needs to be
working on her English."
   Educator #2
   Hugo's dad requested to have a parent conference
with Ms. Miller concerning Hugo's language
development. Mr. Lopez is concerned that Hugo is not
picking up English as quickly as he had hoped and he
wants to know what to do. Ms. Miller explains that it is
common to have a silent period while learning a new
language and the child is learning to receive the
language before producing it. Mr. Lopez suggests he
will start speaking only English at home. Ms. Miller
quickly responds and assures Mr. Lopez that he should
continue to use the home language.

                                                 Home Literacy Environments | 85
        Consider

        Imagine the strong impact the early childhood
     educators had on the way each family provides support
     and encourages language and literacy development.
     Which provider is knowledgeable about multi-
     language learners and is appropriately supporting the
     family unit?

4.3b Multi-Dialectical Learners

Standard English includes the language patterns and usage
of academic settings and published text. It has been codified
in dictionaries, grammar and usage handbooks, and adapted
by published English texts around the world (Biber et al, 1999).
The usage of Standard English for written materials is relatively
uniform. Spoken English, however, is less straightforward.
Speech does not always exactly match what one would write
on a page, particularly spontaneous speech used in informal
settings. Additionally, there are important speech patterns that
should be noted, including the use of dialects, which are rules-
governed linguistic systems derived from another parent
language, without achieving the socio-linguistic category of
a language (Maldonado Garcia & Sandhu, 2015). Dialects are
more complex than regional speech patterns or accents, yet
are sometimes undervalued as significant, culturally bound
practices. Persistent racial and classist biases work to
marginalize and devalue the use of some dialectic speech
patterns. Assumptions about dialects that are not considered
to be mainstream or prestigious can be harmful (Luu, 2020).
This text intentionally highlights African American English and
Appalachian Englishes as examples of culturally significant
dialects. It is important for educators to understand and affirm

86 | Home Literacy Environments
dialectical speech patterns as they serve an important function
for group membership and culture.

            African American Vernacular English (AAVE) is a
complex dialect of English that is used across the United States
( Green, 2002). AAVE is sometimes also referred to as Black
English, African American English, Black Vernacular English,
Ebonics, African American Language or African American
Regional Language. All of these terms refer to a variety of
language patterns that include complex systems for
phonology (sounds), morphology (word structure and
relationship), syntax (sentence structure), and semantics
(meaning). Some examples of AAVE speech patterns include
(a) leaving out an auxiliary verb (copula absence), (b) third-
person singular -s absence, and (c) invariant habitual use of
the word "be" (Cukor-Avila & Balcazar, 2019). Leaving out an
auxiliary verb would include statements such as, "He a football
fan" or "She over there." Third-person singular absence denotes
a missing "s" where it would be expected in standard English,
such as in "I run. He run too." The usage of the "be" might
include statements like "It be snowing!" or "I be playing." There
is substantial variation in the usage and occurrence of these
features, including generational and regional differences; and
for some speakers of AAVE, they do not occur at all (Cukor-Avila
& Balcazar, 2019).

            The origins of AAVE are rooted in the fusion of Standard
English and African linguistic forms (Easter, 2013) and hold
important cultural meaning within groups where spoken
(Labov, 2010). AAVE has complex rules and language features
(Green, 2002). According to Laneheart, et. al, 2015), "When
speakers use African American Languages, they know a system
of sounds, word and sentence structure, meaning and
structural organization of vocabulary items, and other
linguistic and metalinguistic information about their language,
such as pragmatic rules and the social function of African
American Languages" (p. 3). AAVE is used by its speakers to

                                                      Home Literacy Environments | 87
communicate,for social purposes, and even as a form of
cultural capital (Spears, 2015). Moreover, AAVE phrases,
features, and rules have been adopted into widely used,
mainstream patterns of language. Luu (2020) suggests,
"perhaps no other variety of speech has been quite so
significant and influential to the development of standard
American English" (para.11).

   The term Appalachian Englishes is plural because there are
different dialects, that evolved based on regions and migration
patterns. Appalachian Englishes are dialects spoken in
southern and mountain areas that include not only the
Appalachian mountain range, but surrounding areas as well
(Cramer, 2018). The histories of Appalachian Englishes are
traced back to diverse groups of settlers to the mountains
whose speech blended together over several centuries. Due to
the relative isolation of mountainous areas, a distinct regional
speech pattern, or dialect form, developed (Montgomery, 1989).
These speech patterns are sometimes referred to as Mountain
Talk, Southern Appalachian English, or Appalachian English.
Like all dialects, Appalachian Englishes have complex
grammatical features and linguistics, making them unique to
other dialects. For example, the word allow is expanded to
mean think, say, or suppose instead of the traditional meaning
of allow. In context it might be used in this way, "He allowed he
would get it done tomorrow." Another common feature of the
language is to add the sound "a" before a verb. For example,
"I've been a-studying for that lesson." Appalachian Englishes
contain many other grammatical features and linguistics that
make them unique; these are only a few. Like all languages
and dialects, they have changed and evolved throughout
generations. Unfortunately, there are negative stereotypes that
surround the Appalachian Englishes. Dialects and vernaculars
have complex grammatical features. The usage of Appalachian
Englishes and other dialects is not an indicator of a lack of
education, but rather demonstrates the usage of language in

88 | Home Literacy Environments
a way that denotes group membership, cultural identity, and
the innovation of the people of the Appalachian region
(Montgomery, 2004). As educators, we are charged with
providing the optimal experience to foster growth and
development. We certainly must use instructional and
assessment practices that are linguistically and culturally
responsive (Castro, 2011). Multilingual learners are acquiring
linguistic and cultural gains. By maintaining a strengths-based
perspective as we interact with families who speak languages
other than English, we will best support the child and family.

            Speakers of AAVE and Appalachian Englishes are often
able to code-switch, meaning that they use AAVE or
Appalachian Englishes in some settings and Standard
American English in other contexts (Easter, 2013). Code-
switching is common among speakers of English that also use
dialects or vernaculars. Children are able to modify their
language use as the circumstances require, and they learn to
code-switch or style-switch by the age of nine (Snell, 2015).
It is profoundly important for educators to be supportive of
children's use of languages and dialects as they serve as
important cultural markers and signify group membership for
users.

     Pause and Consider: I Saw a Bear!

        Jack entered his preschool classroom ready to tell his
     teacher, Mrs. Mullins, all about his weekend adventures.
     He entered the classroom and approached Mrs.
     Mullins, while shouting, "Mrs. Mullins, Mrs. Mullins, you
     will never believe where my granddad took me

                                                      Home Literacy Environments | 89
     yesterday....we went way up our `holler' into the woods
     and I saw a real live bear!" Mrs. Mullins could not help
     but notice his sheer joy and excitement. The class had
     studied bears the previous week and determined
     which kind of bears lived in their mountains. A teacher
     from outside of the region might have corrected Jack's
     pronunciation of the word `hollow' as `holler,' but Mrs.
     Mullins focused on the meaning of Jack's
     communication. She asked questions about the color
     and size of the bear, and what his grandmom had to
     say about this excursion. She made a mental note to
     talk with the children about the pronunciation of the
     word hollow when they learn their home addresses
     later on in the year. Mrs. Mullins knows this is a
     common word usage in the southern Appalachian
     region and she values the strong culture and
     accompanying vernacular structure of the language.
     She knows that children will be exposed to other
     language models through media, instructional
     materials, and her own language modeling. Mrs.
     Mullins knows that she will expose her students to
     more widely used word pronunciations, but in a way
     that does not detract from the contextual value by
     making a child feel ashamed or embarrassed. She
     knows it is important to preserve terms, usages, and
     pronunciations that are part of shared vernacular
     structures, as these serve important cultural functions.

        Can you think of a time when you encountered a
     situation that allowed you to supportively affirm a
     child's home language or dialect?

90 | Home Literacy Environments
                             4.4 Working with Families to
Promote Literacy

            As described in Chapter 2, Bronfenbrenner's model
demonstrates the strong influence and implications of a child's
family and home environment. This is especially true when
considering literacy development for young children. Early
childhood educators have the opportunity to build
relationships with families, support families, and engage
families in their child's early childhood experience.

            Building trusting relationships with families happens
over time and through a series of positive interactions. Trust,
empathy, and time are necessary components of building
positive relationships. When educators work to get to know
families personally, culturally relevant and powerful funds of
knowledge are revealed and can be used to enhance children's
literacy experiences. For example, an educator may discover
in conversations with the family that a child frequently cooks
with her grandmother and enjoys measuring ingredients and
following the recipe. The grandmother reads the recipe and
asks guiding prompts like, "Okay, let's see what's next." This
small insight into the child's literacy experience allows the
educator to draw the child into meaningful conversations, play
experiences, and cooking experiences that build on the
procedural literacy knowledge the child already knows about
how recipes "work."

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 91
4.4a Addressing Vulnerability

            Some children from vulnerable communities are less
prepared for the academic language tasks of school (Rivalland,
2004). Research often associates low socio-economic status
with poor school achievement, including literacy abilities
(Garrett-Peters et al., 2016).

   Children from vulnerable communities might need
additional scaffolding to bridge their home literacy experiences
to expected school literacy outcomes. Poverty can create stress
for young children and their families. Conditions such as food
insecurity, unemployment, community violence, and
inconsistent access to healthcare can impact one's capacity
for attentive parenting (Manz et al., 2010). These variables
potentially affect the health and well-being of the family and
(the or a) parent's ability to consistently provide enriching
language opportunities. However, it is negligent to say that
living in poverty equates to poorer academic outcomes.
Parents who interact sensitively with their children positively
impact language development (Raviv et al., 2004). Additionally,
access to high-quality early learning experiences with strong
family/educator relationships supports literacy development
for this vulnerable population. Adults in early care settings
nurture a child's language development by engaging in
verbally stimulating interactions (NICHD Early Care Network,
2000).

            When a child's early experiences with language are
limited, educators may need to develop intentional
interventions to mitigate literacy gaps that, if left unattended,
might result in negative academic outcomes for the child in
the future. Success in educational environments is connected
to strong language and literacy in the early years (Hirsch-Pasek
et al., 2015; Hoff, 2013; Huntsinger, Jose, & Luo, 2016).

            For children who have not participated in rich
language experiences, there are long-term implications related

92 | Home Literacy Environments
to language competency and overall school readiness (Merritt
& Klein, 2015). For example, parents who are engaging in
abusive or neglectful behaviors tend to speak less frequently
to their children and do not draw out conversations
(Christopholous et al., 1988; Eigsti & Ciccheti, 2004). This might
result in a longer lead time for children to feel comfortable
or competent in expressing themselves. Linguistic deprivation
may also occur with children who are hearing-impaired and do
not have adequate supports, and who lack access to methods
of communication (Humphries et al., 2012). Deprivation of
language creates other learning problems as children might
not follow typical developmental trajectories in other areas,
such as mathematical reasoning (Humphries et al., 2012) and
memory tasks (Newport, 1990). Any hindrance to a child's ability
to communicate impacts the child's literacy development.

            More recently, the influence of technology has
broadened the definition of the literacy environment and
further diversified children's literacy experiences. During the
COVID-19 pandemic of 2020, this diversification became keenly
apparent. The 2020 pandemic demonstrated how access to
technology and use of technology influences the ability of
children to acquire literacy concepts within virtual settings.
Some teachers held synchronous video-conference sessions,
reading a story to the students in their classroom. Certainly,
a familiar face reading a story fosters a social connection,
provides a forum for discussing books, and creates an
opportunity for developing children's literacy. Yet, accessibility
to the literacy experience for children was not equitable. Some
children may not have had the opportunity to participate in
the synchronous sessions with their classmates and viewed
recordings of the read aloud experience. Other students might
not have access to an appropriate device or wifi. A family's
economic capacity to mitigate and successfully utilize
technology varied greatly, and resulted in uneven access to
educational opportunities throughout the pandemic. For

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 93
example, some students may have access to a device, but
might be sharing this access with siblings or other family
members who also need them. Parents might be able to allow
a child to use their cell phone for a portion of the day, but few
adults can navigate a whole day without access to their own
cell phone. The younger the age of the child, the less likely they
might be to have access to their own device.

            Even when children had full access to technological
resources, the impact of Covid-19 greatly diminished children's
opportunities to develop their literacy understandings in
collaboration with their peers in play-based spaces. While read-
alouds can be done via video-conference, hands-on literacy
activities cannot. In-person school contexts allow early
educators to extend read alouds with sensory rich literacy
activities to support literacy development; these same
experiences are not readily transferable to online platforms.
In attempts to replicate the sensory experience at home,
educators sent families recipes to make playdough at home.
However, a solitary literacy activity is not the same as a social
literacy activity. In this particular example, educators' efforts
were further thwarted, as there was a flour shortage during the
pandemic, making a key ingredient for playdough inaccessible.
This brief discussion of some of the inequities experienced by
families living through the pandemic provides an example of
how the use of technology can certainly be a contributor to
literacy development. But, it also provides an important
illustration of how context is individual and connected to the
people and materials a child has access to.

            As early childhood educators interact with families,
they have the opportunity to make profound impacts. Children
and families might have past experiences or current situations
that complicate development; the educator has the
opportunity to partner with the family and work towards a
successful future. In order for the child to reach their optimal
development, they need strong social relationships and

94 | Home Literacy Environments
interactions that enhance their emotional well-being. This in
turn, prepares the child to grow cognitively, and enhances
language development. Families benefit from community
support as they engage in these tasks. Positive and consistent
interactions with their child's teacher provide an avenue of
support for families. In this way, early learning settings play a
vital role as community assets and resources to the family; and,
they have a direct impact on children. As a greater goal, early
childhood programs should work to build adult capabilities
and strengthen families as they support the needs of their
children.

4.4b Strategies for Promoting Diversity and Equity in
Language Learning

Working with families is an integral part of being a quality early
childhood educator. The profession requires us to approach
families in an unbiased manner. It is important to understand
what a bias is and our own "lens" or perspective from which
we make decisions and draw conclusions. Implicit bias refers
to unconscious attitudes, reactions, stereotypes, and categories
that affect behavior and understanding (Chin, 2020). Some
examples of implicit bias that might be relevant to language
and literacy are the teacher discounting the language used in
the home environment or the expectation to make eye contact
when speaking. Both of these examples are a result of cultural
bias and are sometimes prevalent in early childhood
classrooms. No one is immune from a bias; however, as a
professional, there are many resources available for exploring
possible bias.

            Being aware of our own biases can ensure that we
approach all families from a strengths-based posture and
restrain from judging situations and environments that are
different from our own experiences. This is an important first
step in creating a climate that promotes equity and diversity.

                                                       Home Literacy Environments | 95
Further work should always center on continually seeking to
understand how others are different and valuing differences as
they relate to supporting language and literacy development.
The key to promoting equity and diversity in early childhood
spaces is to appreciate and respect children's home languages,
cultures, and traditions. See the figure below for additional
strategies to support families.

          Strategies to Ensure Linguistic and Cultural
       Diversity

           Involve families in your classroom
           Educate families on the benefits of mastering
       more than one language
           Honor family's values and norms
           Assist families to ensure children stay connected
       to their home language
           Support the home language
           Provide children with many ways to
       demonstrate mastered skills

     Key Take-Aways

        Early childhood educators have an integral role to
     play in recognizing and celebrating the value in

96 | Home Literacy Environments
children's home contexts when making intentional
decisions, while being sure to capitalize on the
strengths for each child and family. In recommending
the integration of a culturally responsive stance, we
return to Gay's (2010) definition which explains that
when students' cultural knowledge, prior experiences,
frames of reference, and performance styles influence
our everyday instructional practices and the selection
of learning materials, we are responding more
effectively to learners' needs.

   Supporting families in a strength-based and
culturally sensitive way is critical for creating an
inclusive classroom environment and building
strength-based relationships with families. The role of
the family in a child's language and literacy
development is critical and individual. Early childhood
educators have the opportunity to build relationships
with families, and partner with them, to recognize the
influential role they already play in developing their
children's literacy expressions. Celebrating the
individuality of families allows educators to leverage
equitable practices and nurtures each child's unique
linguistic pathway. It is imperative that we understand
the diversity of families and work to build on their
strengths, while being aware of our own perspectives
and implicit biases. The bird in the nest model cannot
survive without the support of the nest in the tree. This
illustrates the vital role of families in young children's
language and literacy development.

                                                Home Literacy Environments | 97
     Additional Resources

        Appalachian Englishes in the 21st Century:
     https://www.linguisticsociety.org/resource/appalachian-
     englishes-21st-century

        Becoming Upended: Teaching and Learning about
     Race and Racism in the Early Childhood Classroom:
     https://www.naeyc.org/resources/pubs/yc/may2018/
     teaching-learning-race-and-racism

        Black English Matters: https://daily.jstor.org/black-
     english-matters/

        Building Adult Capacities to Improve Child
     Outcomes: (https://developingchild.harvard.edu/
     resources/building-adult-capabilities-to-improve-child-
     outcomes-a-theory-of-change/)

        Colorn Colorado: https://www.cal.org/
        The Dialect of the Appalachian People:
     http://www.wvculture.org/history/journal_wvh/
     wvh30-2.html
        Ebonic Need Not Be English: https://www.jstor.org/
     stable/43025634?mag=black-english-
     matters&seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents
        Funds of KnowledgeSurvey:
     https://earlyeducatorsupport.uncc.edu/sites/
     earlyeducatorsupport.uncc.edu/files/media/
     Funds%20of%20Knowledge.pdf

98 | Home Literacy Environments
   Funds of Knowledge: https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/
video/funds-knowledge-video

   Implicit Bias: https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/
takeatest.html

   Strategies to Ensure Linguistic and Cultural Diversity:
https://www.naeyc.org/sites/default/files/globally-
shared/downloads/PDFs/resources/position-
statements/diversity.pdf

   Multilingualism: https://www.zerotothree.org/
resources/2095-multilingualism

   National Association for Education of Young Children
(NAEYC) Equity Resources: https://www.naeyc.org/
equity/resources

   National Association for Education of Young Children
(NAEYC) Advancing Equity in Early Childhood
Education Position Statement: https://www.naeyc.org/
resources/position-statements/equity

   Teacher Tips: Storytelling:
https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/articles/teaching-
content/teacher-tips-storytelling/

   Virginia's Early Learning & Development Standards
(ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines.
https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

   What is Ebonics (African American English)?
https://www.linguisticsociety.org/content/what-
ebonics-af rican-american-english

                                                Home Literacy Environments | 99
                            References

Alexander, B., & Levine, A. (2008). Web 2.0 storytelling:
   Emergence of a new genre. EDUCAUSE Review. 43, 40-56.

Barac, R., Bialystok, E., Castro, D. C., & Sanchez, M. (2014). The
   cognitive development of young dual language learners: A
   critical review. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 29(4),
   699-714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2014.02.003

Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E.
   (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written English.
   Longman.

Blank, S. (1998). Hearth and home: The living arrangements
   of Mexican immigrants and U.S.-born Mexican Americans.
   Sociological Forum 13, 35-59. https://doi.org/10.1023/
   A:1022155914500

Brannon, D., & Dauksas, L. (2014). The effectiveness of dialogic
   reading in increasing English language learning preschool
   children's expressive language. International Research in
   Early Childhood Education, 5, 1-10.

Castro, D. C., Espinosa, L. M., & Pez, M. M. (2011). Defining and
   measuring quality in early childhood practices that promote
   dual language learners' development and learning. In M.
   Zaslow, I. Martinez-Beck, K. Tout, & T. Halle (Eds.), Quality
   measurement in early childhood settings (pp. 257-280).
   Brookes Publishing.

Castro. D. C., Garcia, E.E., & Markos, A.M. (2013). Dual language
   learners: Research informing policy. The University of North
   Carolina, Frank Porter Graham Child Development Institute,
   Center for Early Care and Education--Dual Language
   Learners.

Chin, M. J., Quinn, D. M., Dhaliwal, T. K., & Lovison, V. S. (2020).
   Bias in the air: A nationwide exploration of teachers' implicit
   racial attitudes, aggregate bias, and student outcomes.
   Educational Researcher, 49(8), 566-578. https://doi:10.3102/
   0013189X20937240

100 | Home Literacy Environments
Christopoulos, C., Bonvillian, J. D., & Crittenden, P. M. (1988).
   Maternal language input and child maltreatment. Infant
   Mental Health Journal, 9(4), 272-286. https://doi.org/10.1002/
   1097-0355(198824)9:43.0.co;2-m

Cramer, J. (2018). Perceptions of Appalachian English in
   Kentucky. Journal of Appalachian Studies, 24(1), 45-71.

Cukor-Avila, Pl, & Balcazar, A. (2019). Exploring grammatical
   variation in the corpus of regional African American
   language. American Speech, 94(1), 36-53. https://doi-
   org.proxy-um.researchport.umd.edu/10.1215/
   00031283-7321989

Easter, C. E. (2013). African American vernacular English and
   the urban Classroom. NAAAS & Affiliates Conference
   Monographs, 289-302.

Eigsti, I. M., & Cicchetti, D. (2004). The impact of child
   maltreatment on expressive syntax at 60 months.
   Developmental Science, 7(1), 88-102. https://doi.org/10.1111/
   j.1467-7687.2004.00325.x

Espinoza, L (2013). PreK-3rd: Challenging common myths about
   dual language learners. An update to the seminal 2008
   report. Foundation for Child Development Policy to Action
   Brief. No. 10.

Fenner, D. & Snyder, S. (2021). Unlocking English learners'
   potential: Strategies for making content accessible. Corwin
   Publishing.

Garrett-Peters, P. T., Mokrova, I., Vernon-Feagans, L., Willoughby,
   M., Pan, Y., & Family Life Project Key Investigators (2016). The
   role of household chaos in understanding relations between
   early poverty and children's academic achievement. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 37, 16-25. https://doi.org/
   10.1016/j.ecresq.2016.02.004

Gay, G. (2010). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research,
   and practice (2nd ed.). Teachers College Press.

Genesee, F. (2010). Dual language development in preschool
   children. In E.E. Garca & E.C. Frede (Eds.), Young English

                                                      Home Literacy Environments | 101
   language learners: Current research and emerging directions
   for practice and policy (pp. 59-79). Teachers College Press.
Gonzlez, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2005). Funds of
   knowledge: Theorizing practices in households,
   communities, and classrooms. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
   Publishers.
Green, L. (2002). African American English: A linguistic
   introduction. Cambridge University Press.
Halle, T., Hair, E., Wandner, L., McNamara, M., & Chien, N. (2012).
   Predictors and outcomes of early vs. later English language
   proficiency among English language learners. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 27(1), 1-20. https://doi.org/
   10.1016/j.ecresq.2011.07.004
Hammer, C. S., Hoff, E., Uchikoshi, Y., Gillanders, C., Castro, D., &
   Sandilos, L. E. (2014). The language and literacy development
   of young dual language learners: A critical review. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 29(4), 715-733. https://doi.org/
   10.1016/j.ecresq.2014.05.008
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Owen, M. T.,
   Golinkoff, R. M., Pace, A.,Yust, P.K.S., & Suma, K. (2015). The
   contribution of early communication quality to low-income
   children's language success. Psychological Science, 26,
   1071-1083.
Hoff, E. (2013). Interpreting the early language trajectories of
   children from low-SES and language minority homes:
   Implications for closing achievement gaps. Developmental
   Psychology, 49(1), 4-14.
Huntsinger, C. S., Jose, P. E., & Luo, Z. (2016). Parental facilitation
   of early mathematics and reading skills and knowledge
   through encouragement of home-based activities. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 37, 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.ecresq.2016.02.005
Labov, W. (2010). Unendangered dialect, endangered people:
   The case of African American Vernacular English.
   Transforming Anthropology 18(1), 15-27.

102 | Home Literacy Environments
Lanehart, S., Bloomquist, J., & Malik, A.M. (2015). Language use
   in African American communities: An introduction. In S. L.
   Lanehart (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of African American
   language (pp. 1-21). Oxford University Press.

Lehne, M., Engel, P., Rohrmeier, M., Menninghaus, W., Jacobs,
   A. M., and Koelsch, S. (2015). Reading a suspenseful literary
   text activates brain areas related to social cognition and
   predictive inference. PLoS One, 10(5), 10:e0124550.
   https://doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0124550

Luu, C. (2020, February 12). Black English matters. JSTOR Daily.
   https://daily.jstor.org/black-english-matters/

Maldonado Garcia, M., Sandhu, A. (2015). Language and dialect:
   Criteria and historical evidence. Grassroots, 49(1), 203-217.

Manz, P., Hughes, C., Barnabas, E., Bracaliello, C., & Ginsburg-
   Block, M. (2010). A descriptive review and meta-analysis of
   family-based emergent literacy interventions: To what extent
   is the research applicable to low-income, ethnic-minority or
   linguistically-diverse young children? Early Childhood
   Research Quarterly, 25, 409-431. https://doi:10.1016/
   j.ecresq.2010.03.002

McManis, L, (2012). TeachSmart ELL Spanish by Hatch. Research
   Basis Whitepaper. https://www.hatchearlylearning.com/
   documents/teachsmart_ell_spanish_white.pdf

Merritt D. H., & Klein S. (2015). Do early care and education
   services improve language development for maltreated
   children? Evidence from a national child welfare sample.
   Child Abuse & Neglect, 39,185-196. https://doi:10.1016/
   j.chiabu.2014.10.011

Montgomery, M. (1989). The roots of Appalachian English.
   English World-Wide, 10, 27-178.

Montgomery, M. (2004). The hills were alive with the sounds
   of English. The Great Smoky Mountains Colloquy, 5(1), 1-2.
   https://www.lib.utk.edu/smokies/colloquy/colloquy.5.1.pdf

Myrtil, M. J., Justice, L. M., & Jiang, H. (2019). Home-literacy
   environment of low-income rural families: Association with

                                                     Home Literacy Environments | 103
   child- and caregiver-level characteristics. Journal of Applied
   Developmental Psychology, 60, 1-10.
Raviv, T., Kessenich, M., & Morrison, F. (2004). A mediational
   model of the association between socioeconomic status and
   three-year-old language abilities: The role of parenting
   factors. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 19. 528-547.
   https://doi: 10.1016/j.ecresq.2004.10.007
Rivalland, J. (2004). Oral language development and access
   to school discourses. Australian Journal of Language and
   Literacy, 27(2),142-158.
Rosa, E. & Tudge, J. (2013). Urie Brofenbrenner's theory of
   human development: Its evolution from ecology to
   bioecology. Journal of Family Theory and Review, 5(4),
   243-258. https://doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/jftr.12022
Saracho, O. (2017) Literacy and language: new developments
   in research, theory, and practice, Early Child Development
   and Care, 187(3-4), 299-304. https://doi:10.1080/
   03004430.2017.1282235
Snchal M, LeFevre JA. (2002). Parental involvement in the
   development of children's reading skill: A five-year
   longitudinal study. Child Development, 73(2), 445-60.
   https://doi: 10.1111/1467-8624.00417
Snell, J. (2015). Linguistic ethnographic perspectives on
   working-class children's speech: Challenging discourses of
   deficit. In J. Snell, F. Copland & S. Shaw (Eds.), Linguistic
   ethnography: Interdisciplinary explorations (pp. 225-245).
   Palgrave.
Spears, A. (2015). African American Standard English. In S. L.
   Lanehart (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of African American
   language, (pp. 786-799). Oxford University Press.
Waldrep, D. (2005). Ecological influences of the home and the
   child-care center on preschool-age children's literacy
   development. Childhood Education, 82(1), 56.
Wasik, B. H. (2012). Handbook of family literacy (2nd ed.).
   Routledge.

104 | Home Literacy Environments
Wells, (1985). Preschool literacy related activities and success in
   school. In D. Olsen, N.Torrence, & A. Hillyard (Eds.), Literacy,
   Language and Learning. Cambridge University Press, (pp.
   229-255).

Weigel, D. J., Martin, S. S., & Bennett, K. K. (2006). Contributions
   of the home literacy environment to preschool-aged
   children's emerging literacy and language skills. Early
   Childhood Development and Care, 176(3-4), 357-378.
   https://doi:10.1080=03004430500063747

Whitehurst, G. J., Falco, F. L., Lonigan, C. J., Fischel, J. E.,
   DeBaryshe, B. D., Valdez-Menchaca, M. C., & Caulfield, M.
   (1988). Accelerating language development through picture
   book reading. Development Psychology, 24(4), 552-559.
   https://doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.24.4.552

                          Image Credits

Image, Section 4.1: Longwood University. [Teachers Talking] CC
   BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 4.2, 4.3, & 4.4: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY

2.0.
Image Section 4.2a: Joan C. Lacey. "Family." CC BY 2.0.
Image Section 4.2b: Family First. "Black Family Photo." CC0

   (Public Domain)

                                                     Home Literacy Environments | 105
5. Building the
Environment for
Play-Based Learning

   "When we observe the behaviors of people we notice that
    what they do is markedly influenced by where they are."

                                                Kounin & Sherman, 1979, p. 145
   5.1 Introduction
   5.2 Emergent Literacy Environments
   5.3 Using Theories of Play to Orchestrate Intentional
Literacy Learning Opportunities
   5.4 Designing Literacy-Rich Play Environments

     Opening Vignette: Prashant's Naan

        Four-year-old Prashant pulls a class recipe book from
     a shelf in the kitchen area that has a couple of recipe
     boxes, spice jars, and other photo and print-rich recipe
     books for the children to use. Recently, Prashant shared
     his family's recipe for making naan, an Indian flatbread,
     with his class. Today, he uses the class recipe book to
     begin his play in the home environment center. He
     carries the recipe book to the stove singing to himself,
     "Naan, naan, naan." He sifts through the pages of
     recipes with pictures of his friends enjoying their

106 | Building the Environment
for Play-Based Learning
favorite foods until he finds the recipe he is looking for.
On his recipe page, Prashant included a hand drawing
of his family eating naan together at home. Pointing to
text at the top left he says, "First, I have to put in flour."
He pauses reading to dip a measuring cup into a
canister with a picture of wheat and the word "flour"
taped to the outside. He gestures, dumping two scoops
of flour into a bowl on the counter. He returns to the
book and reads, "Then, I have to put in the water."
Prashant reaches for an empty pitcher and pours water
into the bowl. Prashant reads again from the book and
adds "yogurt" to the bowl. He picks up a spoon and
begins stirring the ingredients in the pot. Then,
Prashant scoops the mix into a pan on the stove
singing, "Cook, cook, cook."

   Prashant pulls naan from the stove top and places
the pan on the table. Prashant reaches into a small
block basket on the shelf and puts blocks on the tray.
Taking the tray to the table he calls out, "Naan for sale,
come have a piece of naan!" Desmond, a 4  year old,
hears Prashant's invitation and sits down at the table
near the kitchen area. Desmond says, "I would like to
buy a piece of naan. What kind of naan do you have?"

   Miss Elise, the instructional assistant who was
documenting Prashant's play episode nearby, joins in
the play prompting, "Oh, I think your customer might
need a menu to help him decide what kind of naan he
would like to order." Taking Miss Elise's suggestion,
Prashant picks up a clipboard hanging on a hook next
to the table and a marker and begins to write three
strings of letter-like symbols across the page. As

               Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 107
     Prashant writes, Desmond says, "I hope he has the
     butter kind." Prashant hands the clipboard to Desmond
     and says, "We have garlic and plain naan with butter.
     What kind would you like?"

        Miss Elise moves on to observe other children in the
     class as the two boys continue to enact Prashant's play
     episode making naan.

5.1 Introduction

            Throughout this text, we use the nest as an analogy
for reflecting on the multitude of factors that support a child's
emerging literacy skills. Reflecting on this analogy, we
recognize each nest is influenced by the larger ecosystem in
which it is constructed. Diverse species of eagles, owls, pigeons,
and penguins thrive in uniquely different habitats and use the
available natural resources to build viable shelters. Similarly,
early childhood educators work in diverse and complex
learning environments. Early education contexts include (but
are not limited to) early intervention settings that occur with
young children and families in the home, early care centers
serving children and families from birth through age five, and
Early Head Start and Head Start programs located within
public and private schools. The physical spaces early educators
and children occupy greatly influence their interactions,
behaviors, and collective literacy experiences. Referred to as
the ecology of the classroom (Reutzel & Jones, 2013) each early
learning context is as richly varied as the birds' environmental
habitats noted above. Early educators play a central role in
strategically drawing upon and enriching each learning

108 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
context to promote young children's literacy development and
engagement.

            Intentionally designed environments encourage
children to experiment with a variety of materials, prompt rich
dialogs between children and educators, and challenge
children to use their emerging oral language, reading, and
writing skills for a variety of purposes. Classroom environments
need to be strategically arranged to increase the likelihood
that rich literacy interactions will occur. Consider the exchange
between Prashant, Desmond, and Ms. Elise in the vignette at
the beginning of this chapter. The class recipe book, labeled
cooking containers, writing materials, and language
exchanges worked in complementary ways to inspire and
extend the literacy rich play opportunity. When early educators
pause to identify the environmental factors influencing
particular learning contexts, opportunities for enriching young
children's literacy spaces are revealed. This chapter prepares
educators to intentionally construct classroom environments
to enhance children's emerging literacies. This chapter will
explore the following questions:

                             How do early learning environments
influence children's emergent literacy experiences?

                          How do educators use constructivist,
sociocultural, and ecological perspectives to shape literacy rich
play experiences?

                          How do educators intentionally design and

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 109
evaluate rich literacy environments to enhance children's
literacy experiences?

              5.2 Emergent Literacy

Environments

            Effective early learning environments consistently
provide opportunities for young children to use emerging
literacy skills and understandings in personally relevant ways.
To orchestrate meaningful literacy environments, educators
make strategic decisions about the people, materials, and
experiences available to children. Children's interactions with
the people and objects in their physical environment
influences their cognitive development (Reutzel & Jones, 2010).
Educators draw on ecological and sociocultural perspectives
when reflecting on how specific features of the learning
environment affect children's engagement in a variety of
literacy events. When combined with constructivist
perspectives, ecological, and sociocultural perspectives (see
Chapter 3 for more on educational theories) provide useful
lenses for analyzing the instructional environments educators
create to enhance children's literacy.

            Early childhood classrooms are common
environmental contexts. By this we mean that most people,
especially early educators, can easily describe characteristics
commonly found in classrooms designed with young children
in mind (e.g., colorful charts, small tables, low bookshelves, art
easels, water tables, library nooks, dramatic play centers, and

110 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
construction spaces). Identifying the physical areas and
materials in early learning contexts is an important first step in
learning how to effectively orchestrate meaningful emergent
literacy contexts. When educators consider different learning
spaces for young children, they also envision children using
the space to engage in different activities. Understanding the
ecology of a classroom challenges educators to consider how
the space itself influences the types of activities children and
teachers engage in because they inhabit a particular space,
at a particular time, with specific people. We use the word
challenge above to emphasize that learning to see how
materials, classroom design, and children's interactions shape
literacy opportunities is not necessarily an easy task. This is
because the "patterns, structure, and organization of activities
in the classroom environments are often invisible to the mind's
eye but are essential elements of designing effective classroom
learning environments" (Reutzel & Jones, 2013, p. 83).
Intentionally focusing on how educators and children use
spaces and materials to engage in a variety of literacy
expressions makes invisible patterns visible.

                       Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 111
Children learn by interacting with environment materials such as
letter stencils and sticks.

            As early educators we may take for granted the basic
premise that a child's learning environment influences their
cognitive development. At the same time, we may also surmise
that designing emergent literacy environments may require
practice as we learn to notice the people, materials, and
activities occurring in a given space with the intention of
extending and enhancing children's literacy enactments.
Fortunately, we have a significant amount of research
demonstrating that educators' intentional efforts designing
literacy-rich learning spaces and facilitating literacy-rich play
experiences promote children's emergent literacy practices.

5.2a Research Examining Emergent Literacy
Environments

            Studies exploring children's interactions with materials

112 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
and teachers inform contemporary classroom design practices
and provide research evidence for the intentional structuring
of centers to challenge and engage children in meaningful
literacy experiences. Early research capturing human behavior
in authentic contexts leads educators to wonder how
classroom environments sustain children's interests and
influence their behaviors (Barker, 1968; Roskos & Neuman,
2002). Children self-select certain play areas with more
frequency than others. Some children may choose blocks
routinely, while others seek out dramatic play. Additionally,
different play areas sustain children's engagement longer than
others. For example, research shows block centers and art
stations tended to be more popular with preschool children
than other center opportunities. For instance, the art center
has more "holding power" for children than other centers
(Weinstein, 1979). Educators repeatedly shift their attention to
meet specific environmental demands (e.g. art commands
more attention from educators than the reading corner).
Finally, the complexity of children's social interactions also vary
by center (e.g., children's interactions with dolls demanded
more complicated exchanges to sustain play scenarios)
(Weinstein, 1979).

            In early childhood contexts, centers offer small learning
environments for children to exercise their emerging literacy
skills. Centers, also called learning stations, should be
strategically redesigned and enhanced to entice children's
spontaneous literacy enactments (Roskos & Neuman, 2002).
The design of centers should be intentional. For example,
children interact more frequently with books when the
classroom library displays books with the cover facing out
instead of shelving books with only the bound spine exposed
(Roskos & Neuman, 2002). As a result, early childhood
classrooms frequently use front facing bookshelves or put
books in bins with the covers facing forward to entice children
to read. Similarly, literacy play props (e.g., note pads, writing

                      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 113
tools, envelopes) encourage children's explorations with print
and support children's emergent writing skills (Souto-Manning
& Martell, 2016).

            Early learning settings use essential design elements
to organize the physical space. Roskos & Neuman (2002)
encourage educators to use hard and soft boundary markers
(e.g., low shelving and carpeting) to organize physical spaces
and guide children's play within each area. Defined areas
organize spaces visually for children and encourage them to
use easily accessible materials as a part of their play.
Accordingly, educators should enrich play areas with
appropriate, relevant, and authentic literacy materials.
Intentional literacy materials will influence play complexity and
invite children to use literacy rich materials for a variety of play
purposes. Extended time engaged in purposeful play scenarios
allows children "to move from exploratory play to mastery of
concepts" (Roskos & Neuman, 2002, p. 285). Children's literacy
knowledge develops when they have time to experiment with
the literacy props in their play environments. Children's literacy
environments have the greatest impact when educators
provide time for children to engage with meaningful literacy
spaces, materials, and activities.

5.2b Linking Theory to Research and Practice

            Ecological and sociocultural theories provide rich
theoretical perspectives for educators to use when designing
effective literacy play-spaces for children. In fact, when
educators pause to consider the physical and human factors
influencing a particular environment, they begin to notice
children's patterns of behavior and anticipate opportunities for
scaffolding children's attention and engagement. The Ecology
of an Early Childhood Literacy Classroom, presented in Figure
5.1, illustrates how educators might think about the contextual
factors influencing their emergent literacy environments.

114 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Based on a study conducted by Cambourne (2002), the model
situates people, materials, and routines as the interrelated and
interdependent characteristics shaping literacy environments.
The round dots that permeate the environmental
characteristics represent the intentional literacy experiences
educators create to scaffold children's literacy acts.

                Figure 5.1 Ecology of the Early Childhood Literacy
                                       Classroom

            The Ecology of an Early Childhood Literacy Classroom
model invites educators to ask intentional questions about the
classroom environment. When educators pause to consider
when, where, with what, and with whom literacy experiences
might occur, they can intentionally change the environment
to make the literacy experiences more powerful. Educators
exercise the greatest power in the classroom and this allows
them to orchestrate the environment "to create the kind of
learning culture they desire" (Cambourne, 2002, p. 359). As
decision makers, educators determine how the people,

                      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 115
materials, and routines will interact to support children's
emerging literacies. In fact, many of the literacy experiences
educators create become part of children's regular routines.
This helps children engage in literacy practices in predictable
ways (e.g., finding their name card and putting it under their
picture as the attendance routine).

Children practice literacy in many ways, such as by tracing stick
letters with a paint brush.

            The Ecology of an Early Childhood Literacy Classroom
model invites educators to consider how they might
manipulate the materials, people, and routines to work
together in a variety of ways to enrich children's literacy
experiences. Educators frequently use a circle time, or group
time, as an opportunity to bring children together for a whole
group activity. For example, it is common to do the daily
calendar, weather, and a welcome song in a circle time as part
of the morning meeting. As such, circle time is a common
routine for preschool children, books are prevalent materials,
and several children (people) usually participate in circle time
116 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
together. Consider how children's language and literacy
interactions might shift if the educator ended every circle time
with a paired buddy "reading." In this example, we can predict
the regular opportunity to share a book with a friend allows
children frequent and predictable opportunities to practice
actions associated with reading. In this shared literacy space,
children will practice a number of reading strategies and skills
including talking about books, turning pages, examining
illustrations, making predictions, making personal
connections, expressing opinions, and learning new
vocabulary. Introducing the "buddy reading" routine to the
children will require some scaffolding on the part of the
educator and will be determined by the children's needs, ages,
and previous experiences sharing books. Once the routine is
established, the educator can begin to strategically enhance
children's "buddy reading" time by introducing new reading
concepts and skills in circle and challenging them to find or do
something similar with their buddy.

            The following box provides another example of how
the ecology of the early childhood literacy classroom may be
used to enhance children's literacy opportunities in diverse
spaces.

               Lunch Time: A Time for Intentional Literacy
                                        Routines

          Lunch time is arguably a hectic period of the day
       for educators and children. Educators are concerned
       with supporting children throughout the
       community experience and need to attend to the
       hand-washing, eating, milk pouring, and clean-up
       routines. Within this context, opportunities for

                      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 117
       enhancing children's literacy may become invisible
       as educators strive to stay on schedule. However, an
       analysis of the lunch time routine reveals
       opportunities for embedding simple environmental
       prompts to guide children's intentional use of
       language, writing, and reading.

                                          Table 5.1

118 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Instructio    Literacy         Literacy Routine

nal Moment Material

   Choosing      Provide          Educators and children
Lunch Items   laminated        can use the menu to talk
              menus with       about the lunch
              f requent        selections. The visual cue
              lunch            of the menu prompts the
              choices          literacy experience and
                               encourages children to
                 f ruit        "read" their choices and
              choices          communicate their
                               preferences.
                 vegetable
              choices

                 drink
              choices

                 entree
              items

   Lunchtime     Velcro           Children work with
Helper        charts with      educators to select a
Routines      picture          helper job for the day.
              symbols and      The routine encourages
              labels for the   children to identify their
              lunchtime        own name card and
              helper jobs      place it under the helper
              children (i.e.,  job for the day. As
              napkin           children's writing
              helper,          develops they are invited
              sweeper,         to write their name next
              menu             to a job instead.
              collector,
              etc.)

                 Children's
              name cards
              with photos
              as needed

   Using the Ecology of an Early Childhood Literacy
Classroom model, the people influencing the

Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 119
       literacy opportunity include the children and the
       educator, the illustrated menus and helper charts
       are the materials extending children's literacy
       engagement, and the children's selection of specific
       lunch items and jobs become the enacted literacy
       routines.

            Finally, it is important for educators to value their
capacities for flexibly responding to shifting classroom
contexts. We know an early childhood classroom is anything
but static; it changes constantly. Roskos and Neuman (2011)
remind us, "At one point or another (and at every turn),
teachers confront what is and is not possible in the classroom
environment they inhabit with their students" (p. 110). Learning
to identify, evaluate, and modify classroom learning spaces will
enhance the early childhood literacy classroom environments
you create and increase opportunities for you to intentionally
nurture young children's literacy understandings.

                             5.3 Using Theories of Play to
Orchestrate Intentional Literacy Learning
Opportunities

            The first part of this chapter discussed how people,
materials, and routines/activities shape early childhood
classroom environments. The intentional literacy learning

120 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
opportunities that "float" on top of these ecological dimensions
influence children's emergent literacy practices. In the second
part of the chapter, we will focus on how early childhood
educators use constructivist and sociocultural play theories,
alongside ecological perspectives to prepare, manipulate, and
enhance young children's literacy environments.

            Play remains an essential element of the early
childhood classroom context. It is through a child's intentional
exploration and engagement in the world around them that
they gain important understandings about their communities
and build agency as literate members. Saracho and Spodek
(2006) explain, "Play experiences provide young children with
opportunities for them to use language in literate ways and
to use literacy as they see it practiced" (p. 708). Accordingly,
during play children reenact stories, simple and complex lived
experiences (like going to the store and cooking) and even
favorite movie or television storylines; in doing so they use
language, reading practices, and writing practices to drive play
scenarios forward. Early educators use constructivist and
sociocultural perspectives, alongside the ecological
perspectives explored in the first part of this chapter, to design
relevant and engaging literacy environments for young
children to support play experiences. As we will discover, the
three theoretical perspectives are not mutually exclusive,
rather their philosophical principles work in complementary
ways to support educators' facilitations of play-based literacy
environments.

5.3a Constructivism and Literacy Play

                   Figure 5.2 Constructivist Perspectives

                      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 121
            As discussed in Chapter 3, constructivist perspectives
recognize children gain important insights about how the
world works when they are engaged in rich play experiences.
Play supports children's literacy understandings through a
process of construction, during which children are acting on
the world based on their existing understandings or schemes
(Rosko et al., 2010). Framed as a stage theory, constructivist
perspectives reason children progressively acquire more
sophisticated logic patterns as they interact with their
environment. As children develop they use memory to engage
with their environment in increasingly sophisticated ways.

            Play opens important spaces for children to practice
emerging understandings about the world (Roskos et al., 2010).
During play children use object substitution and meta-play
talk to reenact and reimagine observed events from their own
lives. Review the excerpt from the running record captured
by Elise, the early childhood educator, who observed Prashant
making the naan to see how children reenact literate
experiences in their pretend play.

122 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Figure 5.3 Running Record of Prashant's Naan (1)

                              Date: 4/18/2020

   Student:     Center: Home     Time: 9:42 -
Prashant     Living           9:47

   Prashant carries the recipe book to the stove
singing to himself, "Naan, naan, naan." He sifts
through the pages of recipes with pictures of his
friends enjoying their favorite foods until he finds
the recipe he is looking for. On his recipe page,
Prashant included a hand drawing of his family
eating naan together at home. Pointing to text at
the top left he says, "First, I have to put in flour." [...]
He picks up a spoon and begins stirring the
ingredients in the pot. Then, Prashant scoops the
mix into a pan on the stove singing, "Cook, cook,
cook." Prashant pulls naan from the stove top and
places the pan on the table. He reaches into a small
block basket on the shelf and puts several rainbow
blocks on a tray. Taking the platter to the table he
calls out, "Naan for sale, come have a piece of
naan!" [...]

            In Prashant's case, both object substitution and meta-
play talk promote his exploration of important literacy skills.
Renaming objects (e.g. "nann" instead of "blocks") and offering
running narrations (e.g. "Naan, naan, naan" and "cook, cook,
cook") bring to life pretend play scenarios, making them "real."
Using other objects to represent items not readily accessible is

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 123
considered an important first step toward understanding that
letters are symbolic representations of oral language. Similarly,
meta-play talk provides ongoing narration of children's actions
and propels storylines forward. Indeed, young children
frequently narrate and negotiate their play, even when playing
independently. Through their oral narrations, children
negotiate literacy enriched spaces and use environmental tools
to represent their understandings about how the world works.

            Additionally, in Prashant's Naan play scenario, we see
examples of how dramatic play affords children opportunities
to explore concepts of sequencing, to practice procedural
activities, and to recognize text as informative resources. We
also see Prashant practicing important language skills such
as vocabulary usage, word order, gesturing, and soliciting
conversational partners. Prashant strengthens his cognitive
skills and practices using his prior knowledge in play. The exact
sequence of events for making a naan and the ingredients may
be creatively imagined, but it is hard to overlook that Prashant's
focused and intentional reenactments mirror common kitchen
and literacy practices. Pretend play opportunities reinforce
children's current conceptualizations regarding how and why
people use language and support their emerging literacy skills.

5.3b Sociocultural Perspectives and Literacy Play

                         Figure 5.4 Sociocultural Perspectives

124 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
            Sociocultural perspectives also recognize innovative
play exchanges promote children's emerging literacies. When
children play, they use language, gestures, and materials in
their environment to sustain play narratives. Play intentions
and goals inspire meaningful actions and children embrace
flexible representation of objects to drive their play narratives
forward (Roskos et al., 2010). For example, Prashant approached
his play session with the intention to make bread. He accessed
materials to represent real-world items and used language to
reenact the preparation process and later sale of the naan.

            Play provides a setting for children to use their creative
thinking and to communicate their thoughts. Accordingly,
sociocultural perspectives encourage educators to consider
how children's interactions with objects and more experienced
people, including peers, educators, and parents, promote
cognitive development (Roskos et al., 2010). Thought and
meaning support children's interactions with playmates and
objects to nurture literacy development. Prashant's thoughts
on making the naan and the meaning of the item he was
producing (it should be made and then shared), supported
opportunities for Prashant to interact with his classmates.

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 125
Vygotskian perspectives consider play "a strong social `push'
from the outside" compelling children to develop more
sophisticated interpretations of how their world works (Roskos
et al., 2010, p. 71). It is within complex sociocultural exchanges
that children's narrative expressions develop and how changes
in children's understandings occur (Nicolopoulou, 2005).

            Let's return to Elise's running record capturing
Prashant's play episode making naan to understand how
children's literacy development is also nurtured via their direct
interactions with people in their environment.

            Figure 5.5 Running Record of Prashant's Naan (2)

                                 Date: 4/18/2020

   Student(s):     Center: Home     Time: 9:42 -
Prashant +      Living           9:47
Desmond

   [...] Prashant pulls the naan from the stove top and
calls out, "Naan for sale, come have a piece of naan!"
Desmond hears Prashant's invitation and sits down
at the table near the kitchen area. Desmond says, "I
would like to buy a piece of naan. What kind of naan
do you have?"

   End memo

   In this case, Prashant expresses his desire to continue his
pretend play narrative by eliciting the support of a peer.
Enlisting the play of others into the cooking episode will
require the two children to work together to nurture the
narrative forward. As their play scenario develops, the children

126 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
will adhere to specific rules to ensure the meaning of their
play is maintained. In this manner, pretend play helps children
develop an understanding of different points of view. Miss Elise,
the educator, takes advantage of the shifting storyline
negotiated between Prashant and Desmond to draw the
children's attention to another kind of text people frequently
use in restaurants to help them make decisions, a menu. The
educator's casual language prompt provides an intentional
literacy scaffold to extend the narrative for the children and
supports "meaning-oriented thinking" (Roskos et al. 2010, p. 71).

   5.3c Ecological Perspectives and Literacy Play
                            Figure 5.6 Ecological Perspectives

            Constructivist perspectives focus on the child's internal
mental constructs, and sociocultural perspectives emphasize
the interactional exchanges that enhance a child's
understandings; however, ecological perspectives highlight
the role the environment plays in drawing a child into literacy.
Literacy-rich play environments allow children to explore

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 127
"literate ways of thinking" with their peers and use their
emergent literacy skills to influence evolving play scenes
(Saracho & Spodek, p. 711). Dramatic play opportunities
encourage children to recreate life experiences and provide
meaningful spaces for children to manipulate literacy materials
(e.g., books and writing tools) and grapple with foundational
skills that promote children's literacy (Saracho & Spodek, 2006).

            In "Prashant's Naan" play scenario, his incorporation of
diverse literacy practices (i.e., reading a recipe and creating a
menu) is not surprising when we use ecological perspectives
to consider the design of this literacy-rich classroom. Both
Prashant and Desmond utilized their environment and their
understandings of how people interact in different contexts
to support their play narrative. We can readily identify the
routines (i.e., center time that opened spaces for pretend play
and children's existing schemas of restaurant and cooking
rules), materials (i.e., books, cooking utensils and kitchen
supplies, paper and markers) and people (i.e., the children and
the educator) that collectively influenced the children's efforts.
Educators can positively enhance children's literacy
understandings when they intentionally analyze the
environment for opportunities that promote children's routine
interactions with print-rich materials and language-rich
experiences.

            As important people in the child's learning
environment, early childhood educators should seek
opportunities to scaffold children's expressions and
enactments during dramatic play experiences (Morrow et al.,
2013). In Prashant's play scenario, the educator's decision to
encourage children to bring in a recipe, share it with the class,
classify the food by category, and add it to a class recipe book
throughout the year established an instructional literacy
routine that became a natural part of the children's classroom
environment. This particular literacy experience allowed the
educator to add an additional print rich material (i.e., the class

128 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
recipe book) to the kitchen environment. In this case, the
educator recognized the class recipe book would be especially
appealing to her learners because it held family and cultural
relevance. Experiences like this that strategically blend
children's home and school environments further support
children's literacy development and illustrate how ecological
perspectives can be used to highlight the rich literacy practices
already supporting children's understandings in their home
environments.

                           Figure 5.7 Developmental Theories

            In complementary ways, constructivist, sociocultural,
and ecological perspectives invite educators to think

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 129
strategically about play-filled literacy environments. The
perspectives do not need to be considered as competing
frameworks, rather each perspective can be used intentionally
to consider how we can manipulate the environment to
enhance children's experiences using their oral language,
reading, and writing skills. In the following section, we focus
on principles and practices educators use to intentionally
orchestrate literacy-rich classroom environments for children
that are developmentally and contextually relevant.

                                  5.4 Designing
Literacy-Rich Play Environments

            Optimal learning environments are designed with
intentionality. When considering how to orchestrate effective
literacy-rich environments for young children, educators
strategically reflect on how the physical environment invites
children to actively use language in personally relevant ways.
The principles of universal design guide educators' decisions
about how to establish literacy routines that support all
learners within a particular learning environment. Originally,
architects used the concept of universal design to ensure
people with diverse interests, abilities, and needs were able to
successfully navigate a particular space with ease (e.g., curb
cuts, flexible seating, wide pathways, and automated doors and
lights). Educators use concepts of universal design to ensure
all children are able to meaningfully take part in and access
the learning environment (Dinnebee, Boat, & Bae, 2013). When

130 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
educators use concepts of universal design, they not only think
critically about the physical spaces children occupy, they also
think about how the learning experiences they create engage
and support learners with diverse background experiences.

                      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 131
Teachers use elements of the environment to engage students, such
as light play with shapes.

132 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
            Universal design principles encourage educators to (a)
develop curricular routines and classroom spaces that meet
the needs of all children, (b) recognize learning pathways for
children are unique, (c) appreciate learning differences as a
natural part of classroom communities, and (d) use open-
ended learning opportunities that allow children to represent
their understandings in diverse ways (Dinnebell et al., 2013). As
described, these principles advocate for learning environments
that are inclusive, flexible, and open for all learners as opposed
to making modifications for individual children. The universal
design principles ask educators to consciously attend to both
the physical aspects of an environment that define learning
spaces as well as the intangible classroom experiences that
engage children emotionally, socially, and cognitively.

5.4a Physical Literacy Learning Environments

            At the most basic level, the physical environment refers
to the design and layout of the classroom. The decisions
educators make about how to arrange the physical
environment within a classroom has implications for the types
of activities, behaviors, and learning routines children and
educators experience. While there are elements of the physical
environment that are beyond an educator's control, (e.g., the
overall size of the space and design details like sinks, bathroom
accessibility, and electrical outlets) educators enjoy control over
the learning spaces found in early childhood classrooms.
Effective learning environments use a combination of visual
cues (e.g., signs and pictures to identify learning spaces or
processes) and structural features (e.g., rugs, low shelves,
beanbags, play furniture, and tables) to divide the classroom
into distinct learning spaces. The visual cues and structural
features work together to guide children's behaviors, engage
learners, and inspire literacy explorations.

            To meet children's learning preferences and needs,

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 133
classroom designs include flexible individual and small group
learning spaces. Classrooms also need a space large enough
for a whole group of children to come together for shared
experiences. The whole group space may actually prove to be
the trickiest of all to "fit in." The space needs to be large enough
and situated so all children are able to share in the learning
opportunity. Children's sight-lines need to be clear and they
need to be able to sit comfortably. For some children, this
means providing wiggle cushions or small chairs, others need
room to safely extend or bend their legs as needed to ensure
they are comfortable. Traffic flow in and around this space
needs to be flexible and open as well. An open design will allow
guests, teachers, and children to enter and move around the
space more easily and enhance children's engagement.

Whole group space works well for read-aloud time.

         Whole group space works well for read-aloud time.
            Establishing the primary learning areas first will help

divide the room into distinct activity zones. When initially

134 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
designing classroom spaces for children, educators stop to
identify the types of learning opportunities they want young
children to experience and where these experiences will take
place. Common early learning areas include, but are not limited
to, library nooks, home living corners, STEM centers, art
exploration stations, and construction zones. The names of the
learning areas suggest the types of learning activities children
will experience and promote different kinds of play and
explorations. Thoughtful arrangement of learning centers and
activity zones within a classroom supports positive literacy
behavior patterns.

     Pause and Consider: Establishing Effective Classroom
     Climates

        Take a moment to read Table 5.2 "General Guidelines
     for Establishing an Effective Classroom Environment."
     As you read, consider how each suggestion might
     impact children in the learning environment. After
     reading the selection, make a mental list of
     characteristics of a literacy rich classroom, or use
     materials to create a mock map. One possible app for
     classroom design can be found at:
     http://classroom.4teachers.org/

                 Table 5.2 "General Guidelines for Establishing an
                     Effective Classroom Environment"

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 135
            General Guidelines for Establishing an Effective
                      Classroom Literacy Environment

             Divide the classroom into quadrants (wet,
                dry, noisy, quiet)

             Ensure wet areas are separated from dry
                areas and noisy areas are separate from quiet
                areas

             Design flexible whole, small group, and
                independent learning spaces

             Use furniture and materials to provide
                boundaries and define learning spaces

             Carpets, low shelving, front-facing book
                shelves, tables, chairs, open storage bins with
                writing tools and material, and easels inspire
                children's engagement within particular
                spaces

             Create soft and hard literacy play and
                learning spaces by offering flexible and
                moveable seating options, diverse writing
                surfaces, and cozy spots for reading, writing,
                and conversing

             Organize materials for easy accessibility to
                support literacy practices and make clean-up
                easier

             Label classroom spaces, shelves, and storage
                bins with words and pictures to guide
                children's patterns of behavior and infuse the
                classroom with meaningful print

5.4b Building Areas for Literacy-Rich Play

136 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
            Intentional learning areas invite children to engage in
hands-on, minds-on explorations of their literacy worlds.
During play children use and develop critical thinking skills
while increasing their oral language and other emergent
literacy skills and understandings. As Heath (1983) explains,

               In their play, the children tell stories to each other or
            they monologue their creations. They frame parts of
            the whole drama of adulthood in sandboxes, corners
            of the playroom, or the play yard. But there they also
            declare themselves members of the world of children
            and members of a community which does not let its
            members ever go too far or too long away from the
            constraints of reality (p. 162).
            Literacy-rich play spaces and learning experiences
encourage children to explore their understandings of the
world. To inspire children's active incorporation of diverse
literacy practices in play, educators need to take time to reflect
on (a) the amount of time children engage in dramatic and
guided play experiences, (b) the accessibility of intentional
materials that inspire creative literacy play opportunities, and
(c) the language they use to scaffold children's understandings
and support literacy-rich play experiences. Through their
interactions with purposeful materials, educators, and peers,
children manipulate and use language in flexible ways to learn
about and influence their world. Literacy-rich play areas
strategically infuse literacy tools (e.g. books, writing paper,
pencils, stamps, envelopes, etc. ) and props (e.g. mailboxes,
puppet theatres, recipe boxes, lab coats, aprons, etc.) to
increase children's incorporation of play scenarios that use
their emerging oral language, reading, and writing skills
(Walfersberger et al., 2004). "Literacy Enriched Learning Areas"
provides examples of how educators enrich learning areas to
intentionally promote children's literacy explorations.
            As you review Table 5.3, consider how the materials

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 137
invite children to engage meaningfully in literacy rich spaces
and nurture children's literacy understandings.

                Table 5.3 "Literacy Enriched Learning Areas"

                Literacy Enriched Learning Areas

138 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Learning  Emergent Literacy Examples of Relevant
Area
          Purpose               Literacy-Rich Materials
Library
           Connects             Books on a range of
             young children        topics
             to books
                                 Books from multiple
           Promotes print         genres
             awareness
                                 Books with diverse
           Supports               representations of
             children's            children and families (i.e.,
             comprehension         culturally, ability,
             and                   socio-economically,
             interpretations       geographically, and
             of text               children and families
                                   with diverse gender and
           Extends                sexual orientations)
             children's oral
             language            Puppets/Stuffed animals
             opportunities         for children to read to
             and enhances          and engage in story
             children's            retelling
             vocabulary
             through story       Soft materials (i.e., pillows
             telling               and cushions)

                                 Puppet theatres
                                 Felt boards

Writing    Encourages           Various types of paper
             children to         Writing utensils (pencils,
             understand
             letters combine       colored pencils, pens,
             to represent          markers)
             words in a          Clip boards
             written form        Hole punch/stapler for
                                   making books
           Develops             Envelopes
             children's letter   Ink pads and stamps
             formation           Magnetic letters
                                 Chalk and chalkboards
           Supports letter/     Dry erase boards and
             sound                 markers
             connection

           Expands
             opportunities
             for children to
             write in
             personally
             meaningful
             ways

          Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 139
Dramatic   Inspires           Themed props to
Play         children's oral     encourage imagination
             language and        and discovery
             supports
             vocabulary        Bakery theme: recipe
             development         cards, cake boxes, cake
                                 pans, spatulas, etc.
           Invites children
             to manipulate     Animal shelter: animal
             text in diverse     name cards, adoption
             ways                certificates, veterinarian
                                 health charts, etc.
           Promotes
             creative          Post office: envelopes,
             expression          mail boxes, stamps,
                                 boxes, labels, scales, etc.

                               Restaurant: menus, note
                                 pads, welcome signs, etc.

                               Writing utensils
                               Paper

140 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Math   Encourages         Manipulatives
         children's oral   Counting bears
         language          Snap cubes
         fluency with      Blocks
         mathematical      Cars
         and scientific    Collections of "things"
         concepts          Paper
                           Graph paper
       Extends            Tape measures
         children's        Rulers
         vocabulary in     Writing utensils
         personally        Weights
         relevant ways

       Promotes
         mathematical
         literacy

       counting,
       Cardinality (the

         total number in
         a set),
       Mathematical
         operations
         (adding,
         subtracting,
         multiplying,
         dividing)
       Algebraic
         thinking,
       Measurement,
       Data collection,
         and
       Geometry
         (shapes, lines,
         dimensions,
         etc.)

      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 141
Art           Extends             Construction materials
Exploration     children's           (know your
                voices by            learners-safety first as
                providing            always)
                opportunities
                for children to    Glue
                use multiple       Tape
                mediums to         String
                express            Staples
                themselves         Magnets
                and represent      Hammer and nails
                their ideas        Scissors
                                   Recyclables (boxes,
              Nurtures
                creativity           cardboard tubes, cans
                                     etc.,
              Promotes            Paper all kinds, sizes, and
                higher order         colors
                thinking skills,   Natural items (boards,
                including            sticks, rocks, slates, etc.)
                planning,          Paint
                designing,         Clay
                experimenting,     Playdough
                and examining      Crayons
                                   Markers
              Develops fine       Pastels
                motor skills       Pencils
                and eye hand       Colored pencils
                coordination
                for detailed
                work with their
                fingers and
                hands

142 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
STEM           Promotes            Natural elements (leaves,
(Science,        inquiry-based        shells, snake skins, dirt,
Technology,      thinking             water, ice, seeds, etc.)
Engineering,
and            Encourages          Physical elements
Mathematics)     children to ask      (ramps, marbles, wheels,
                 questions            magnets, pulleys, ropes,
                 about how            etc.)
                 their physical
                 world works        STEM inquiry tools
                                    Magnifying glasses
               Supports            Graph Paper
                 children's         Markers
                 documentation      Tape measures
                 of their           Rulers
                 thinking and       Scales
                 wonderings         Science Logs
                 using words,       Measuring Cups
                 print, pictures,
                 drawings,
                 diagrams,
                 videos, etc.

               Domain
                 specific
                 vocabulary

               Scientific
                 method (e.g.
                 investigation,
                 hypothesis,
                 research,
                 inquiry)

               Physical
                 science (e.g.
                 volcano,
                 earthquake,
                 ocean)

               Biology (e.g.,
                 chrysalis, hive,
                 stem)

               Chemistry (e.g.
                 reaction,
                 dissolve,
                 combine)

               Technology
                 (e.g. coding,
                 streaming,
                 cloud)

            As the Literacy Enriched Learning Areas table
demonstrates, once foundational structures are decided upon,

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 143
educators can enrich the learning environment with a variety
of materials to scaffold children's literacy interactions.
Classroom environments that are predictable support
intangible, emotional elements that impact the nature of
instructional literacy play experiences, children's learning
progressions, and educator-child interactions (Reutzel & Jones,
2013). Intentional design strategies help educators create
places where children feel comfortable exploring their
environment and empower children to modify learning spaces
to meet their play goals and preferences.

Children extend their play and build on their language with each
other at the sensory table.

5.4c Print-Rich Environments

            Print-rich environments promote classroom cultures
that value literacy explorations. Literacy rich contexts
intentionally display children' own writings, drawings, and
pictures alongside a variety of children's books, writing
materials, and engaging charts, diagrams, and signs. Print-rich
144 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
environments present children with a wealth of reading and
writing materials and encourage children to see that print has
meaning (McGee, 2007). In print-rich environments children
observe adults using printed materials in a variety of ways and
for a variety of purposes. In turn, children are guided by
educators to use printed materials for their own play purposes.
Therefore, careful attention to both the placement of print and
the amount of print found within the environment is
important.

            Images, symbols, and text designed to cue children's
interactions with text need to be strategically placed to draw
children's attention and encourage sustained engagement.
Writing materials, children's books, and other items that
support children's literacy enactments (e.g., puppet theatres,
construction signs in the block center, alphabet stamps in the
art center) need to be both visually and physically available so
that children instinctively use classroom resources to support
their learning explorations. When educators place print-rich
classroom literacy materials, including signs, materials, and
books, within children's natural sight lines the literacy materials
remain child-centric. This increases the likelihood that children
will use the resources in personally meaningful ways. Print that
is placed for intentional and functional purposes in "just right
spaces" allows children to meaningfully engage and interact
with the print. Conversely, print materials positioned in a space
"too high" for children to visually or physically access, will not
be easily incorporated by children into their play scenarios or
learning experiences.

            In addition to deciding where to position print-rich
material, educators also need to consider the amount of print
in the classroom. Classroom environments with too much print
can be overwhelming and distracting to young learners.
Environments that overload children's sensory capacities may
impact how children interact with peers and adults and
undermine children's literacy enactments. Ultimately, the print

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 145
displayed within the classroom should be done so in an
intentional manner with children's literacy interactions in
mind. For example, in a veterinarian dramatic play center
thematic word and picture charts (e.g., bird, snake, dog, cat),
scales for weighing animals, record forms for the children
taking care of the animals, and relevant labels (e.g., water, food,
check-in) support children's literacy play experiences.

Children's verbal statements and a photograph next to their artwork
enhances the print-rich environment.

            5.4c1 Critically responsive children's books. Children's
books offer a rich foundation for children's literacy explorations.
However, the quality of literature children are immersed in
matters. Emergent readers, writers, and speakers need
consistent opportunities to engage in texts they find
compelling. Educators can use books to spark and provoke
children's interests. Intentional literature experiences
encourage children to consider multiple perspectives and
allow children to vicariously experience worlds beyond their
immediate classroom environment. Narrative texts (fiction
146 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
texts) invite children to problem solve along with central
characters, explore places beyond their own communities, and
listen to lived experiences of other people. Expository texts
(nonfiction or informational texts) promote children's inquiry
and encourage children to use texts as mediums for learning
about how the world works and consider how people influence
our communities. Educators play a critical role in determining
children's access to print and their intentional selection of
compelling children's texts is essential.

            Children need to see themselves represented in the
books embedded within their early learning spaces. In 1990, Dr.
Rudine Sims Bishop published a seminal article titled, "Mirrors,
Windows, and Sliding Glass Doors." Dr. Sims Bishop explains,

               Books are sometimes windows, offering views of
            worlds that may be real or imagined, familiar or
            strange. These windows are also sliding glass doors,
            and readers have only to walk through in imagination
            to become part of whatever world has been created
            or recreated by the author. When lighting conditions
            are just right, however, a window can also be a mirror.
            Literature transforms human experience and reflects
            it back to us, and in that reflection we can see our
            own lives and experiences as part of the larger human
            experience. (p. ix)
            Children's early literacy experiences offer the
opportunity for children to learn about new worlds or ideas.
For example, in the book, Bilal Cooks Daal, the main character,
Bilal, cooks daal with his friends who have never had it or made
it before (Saeed & Syed, 2019). Daal is a term used throughout
India and South Asia to broadly identify a variety of spiced
lentil and bean-based soups. The dish is described in the book
along with the cooking process and serves as a window for
children who have never heard of daal, a sliding glass door for
children to walk through and experience new cultural practices
(such as how daal is served in the bowl and the preparation

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 147
practices), and a mirror for children who regularly eat daal with
their friends and family.

            Daal is frequently served with rice or flatbread like
naan. So, for Prashant, Bilal Cooks Daal serves as a mirror,
reflecting the familiar food items his family prepares at home.
At the same time, the story offers windows and sliding glass
doors for his peers and educators who may not be as familiar
with Indian or South Asian cuisine. The story invites all children
to vicariously experience the rhythm of cooking daal and can
subsequently be used to extend the play scenarios Prashant
and his friends create. Diversity rich classrooms encourage
conversations and offer children opportunities to learn about
people and families that are different from themselves (Baker,
1990).

            NAEYC's 2019 Advancing Equity in Early Childhood
Education underscores the intentional infusion of literacy
opportunities that reinforce the dignity of each child, stating
"children of all genders, with and without disabilities should
see themselves and their families, languages and cultures
regularly and meaningfully reflected in the environment and
learning materials" (NAEYC, 2019, p.7). Educators must always
be mindful that in selecting materials, they are exercising
power to choose which windows, mirrors, and sliding doors
children will be exposed to. Accordingly, it is important for
educators to infuse children's literature that show children and
families of color as the central characters even if the classroom
demographic appears to be predominately white. When
selecting texts, educators need to "remember that the learning
environment and its materials reflect what [they] do and do not
value by what is presented and what is omitted" (NAEYC, 2019,
p. 7). With this power comes a responsibility to use a critically
responsive lens when selecting children's texts. Diverse texts
allow children to celebrate and honor cultural, linguistic,
socioeconomic, ability, family, and gender diversities. It also

148 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
creates opportunities for educators to challenge storylines that
stereotype, misrepresent, and marginalize.

     Pause and Consider: Diverse Children's Texts

        Looking for Diverse Children's Texts?
        If you are currently in an early learning context, take a
     moment to review the children's texts available to your
     young learners. Alternatively, take a moment to reflect
     on the diversity of children's text you read as a child.
     Mentally tally how many texts included children and
     families of differing ethnic, economic, ability, linguistic,
     and regional backgrounds. Then consider, whose voices
     were underrepresented or not represented in the
     mental evaluation you conducted? Consider if
     generalizations, stereotyping, or misrepresentations are
     present. How might the texts you reviewed serve as
     windows, sliding glass doors, or mirrors for children?

            Developing literacy opportunities and class libraries
that meaningfully infuse books with children and families that
bring diversities to the classroom takes planning. Fortunately,
there are a number of resources educators can access to
support their efforts in acquiring diversity rich texts. Take a
few moments exploring some of the resource sites in Table
5.4 "Finding Exemplary Children's Books." Then, make a plan
for enhancing children's access to a wide variety of texts with
multiple cultural, familial, and ability representations.

              Table 5.4 Finding Exemplary Children's Books

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 149
              Finding Exemplary Children's Books

150 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Resource        Description            Web Link

American        The Coretta Scott      https://bit.ly/
Library         King Award             3Au2L23
Association     recognizes African
(Coretta Scott  American authors
King Award      and illustrators
Books)          capturing the
                African American
American        experience.
Library
Association     The Pura Belpr        https://bit.ly/
(Pura Belpr    Award is presented     3yyY2ff
Award Books)    to a Latinx author or
                illustrator capturing
American        the Latinx cultural
Library         experience.
Association
(Schneider      The Schneider          https://bit.ly/
Family Book     Family Book Award      3s2gURf
Award)          recognizes authors
                and illustrators
Learning for    presenting stories
Justice         of the disability
                experience for
                children.

                Learning for Justice   https://bit.ly/
                is a project of the    3lM9kcv
                Southern Poverty
                Law Center that
                published
                guidelines to
                support educators'
                considerations of
                children's texts. The
                free resource
                guides educators to
                use a critical lens
                when selecting text
                for children.

Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 151
The National     The National           https://s.si.edu/
Museum of the    Museum of the          2VwcV3J
American         American Indian
Indian           online bookstore
                 presents a selection
                 of texts that show
                 children
                 contemporary
                 experiences of
                 Native Peoples and
                 challenge
                 stereotypes that
                 continue to
                 marginalize tribes.

National         The National           https://bit.ly/
Council for the  Council for the        3s3s5ch
Social Studies   Social Studies
                 Carter G. Woodson
                 Book Award also
                 honors a few
                 children's texts each
                 year "that depict
                 ethnicity in the
                 United States"
                 (NCSS, YEAR)

We Need          WNDB provides a        https://bit.ly/
Diverse Books    platform for           3yDhg3o
                 curating "literature
                 that reflects and
                 honors the lives of
                 all young people"
                 (WNDB, 2020).

5.4d Assessing Early Literacy Environments

            A number of program evaluations are currently used
in early education contexts to guide early educators' efforts
designing classroom spaces, negotiating and nurturing
relationships, and facilitating effective literacy experiences. In
Chapter 6: Exploring Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
there is a more detailed discussion of early childhood
education literacy assessment practices for young children. For
the purposes of this chapter, three evaluation scales are

152 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
considered to demonstrate how elements of classroom
environments are captured in evaluation instruments and help
guide program development and instructional practices in
diverse early childhood contexts. The Classroom Literacy
Environmental Profile (CLEP; Wolfersberger et al., 2004), the
Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS-R; Harms
et al., 2014) and the Early Language and Literacy Classroom
Observation (ELLCO; Smith et al., 2008) are grounded in
research that demonstrates positive correlations between the
unique environmental factors itemized on the scales and
children's learning. These tools help educators understand how
the physical environment and human interactions influence
children's learning. Table 5.5 below summarizes the broad
categories emphasized in each assessments' observational
protocol.

          Table 5.5 Classroom Literacy-Focused Assessments

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 153
Classroom Literacy-Focused Assessments

Early Childhood           Classroom            Early Language
Environment Rating        Literacy             and Literacy
Scale                     Environmental        Classroom
                          Profile              Observation
   (ECERS; Harms et al.,
2014)                        (CLEP;               (ELLCO; Smith,
                          Wolfersberger et     Brady, &
                          al., 2004)           Anastasopoulous,
                                               2008)

Environmental Subscales   Literacy             Literacy
                          Environment          Environment
                          Subscales            Subscales

1. Space and              1. Identifying       1. Classroom
     Furnishings               Literacy Tools       Structure
                               for Use in
2. Personal Care               Literacy-Rich   2. Curriculum
     Routines                  Classroom       3. Language
                               Environments
3. Language-Reasoning                               Environment
4. Activities             2. How to Use        4. Book and Book
5. Interaction                 Literacy Tools
6. Program Structure           or Props to          Reading
7. Parents and Staff           Support Such         Opportunities
                               an              5. Print and Early
                               Environment          Writing
                                                    Supports

            A quick analysis of the subscale titles across each
evaluation tool reflects the central role environment plays in
shaping children's literacy experiences. Across the scales some
of the indicators focus on how the environment is constructed
to support children's emergent literacy while other indicators
consider the literacy interactions between educators and
children. For example, the Early Childhood Environmental
Rating Scale (ECERS-R) includes an indicator encouraging
children to communicate in the classroom (Harms et al., 2014).
An example of this indicator would be to include "materials
that encourage communication throughout the room (e.g.,
puppet, small figures in block)" (Harms et al., 2014, p. 147). The
Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observation Pre-K Tool

154 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
includes an indicator for supporting children's writing and
gathers evidence demonstrating that educators engage
children in "authentic uses of writing that are integral to their
daily classroom experiences" (e.g., children make charts, dictate
stories, participate in daily sign-in) (ELLCO, 2008, p. 36).

            Early childhood educators will encounter diverse
assessment tools across their careers. It is beneficial for
educators to take time to understand the theoretical
perspectives that inform the nature of the items on each
assessment. It is also important for educators to consider the
assessment tool can be used to enhance their work with young
learners and the families they serve. Just as we use a variety
of assessment tools to understand what our children know, we
can use a variety of tools to analyze how we use intentional
teaching practices to promote children's learning. Collectively,
the human relationships, physical spaces, and literacy routines
young children experience make up the essential components
promoting children's emerging oral language, reading, and
writing skills.

                       Figure 5.17 "Sharing a Writing Moment"

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 155
Relationships, routines, and spaces create opportunities for
assessment.

     Key Take-Aways

        Educators' intentional interactions with children
     engaged in play experiences support children's
     emerging literacies (Saracho, 2004). In early childhood
     education contexts, play-filled experiences occur
     throughout the school day and are influenced by the
     decisions educators make when designing
     instructional spaces for young children. Children's
     diverse background experiences also provide rich funds
     of prior knowledge that educators use to extend
     children's literacy worlds and engage children in
     personally relevant play scenarios. As observed in the

156 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
opening vignette, educators play an important role in
guiding children's attention toward literacy rich
materials and scaffolding children's language
explorations. Early childhood educators are essential
guides for children as they learn to use the power of
language to speak, read, and write their own literacy
journeys.

Additional Resources

   Early Childhood InclusionJoint Position Statement:
National Association for Education of Young Children
and Division of Early Childhood of the Council for
Exceptional Childrenhttps://www.naeyc.org/sites/
default/files/globally-shared/downloads/PDFs/
resources/position-statements/
ps_inclusion_dec_naeyc_ec.pdf

   Literacy-Rich Environments, Reading Rockets
https://www.readingrockets.org/article/literacy-rich-
environments

   Language and Literacy Environments in Preschool,
Reading Rockets https://www.readingrockets.org/
article/language-and-literacy-environments-preschools

                         References

                Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 157
Barker, R. G. (1968). Ecological psychology: Concepts and
   methods for studying the environment of human behavior.
   Stanford University Press.

Cambourne, B. (2002). From conditions of learning to
   conditions of teaching. The Reading Teacher, 55(4), 358-360.
   https://www.jstor.org/stable/20205062

Dinnebell, L. A., Boat, M., & Bae, Y. (2013). Integrating principles
   of universal design into the early childhood curriculum.
   Dimensions of Early Childhood, 41(1), 3-14.

Harms, T., Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (2014). Early childhood
   environment rating scale (3rd ed.) (ECERS-3). Teachers
   College Press.

Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work
   in communities and classrooms. Cambridge University Press.

Kounin, J. S., & Sherman, L. W. (1979). School environments
   as behavior settings. Theory Into Practice, 18(3), 145-151.
   http://doi.org/10.1080/00405847909542824

McGee, L. (2007). Language and literacy assessment in
   preschool. In J. Paratore & R. McCormack (Eds.), Classroom
   literacy assessment: Making sense of what students know
   and can do (pp. 65-84). Guilford Press.

Morrow, L. M., Burkuel, S. B., Mendelsohn, A. L., Healey, K. M., &
   Cates C. B. (2013). Learning through play. In D. R. Reutzel (Ed.),
   Handbook of research-based practice in early education (pp.
   100-118). Guilford Press.

Reutzel, D. R., & Jones, C. D. (2010). Assessing and creating
   effective preschool literacy classroom environments. In M. C.
   McKenna, S. Walpole, & K. Conradi (Eds.). Promoting early
   reading (pp. 175-198). Guilford Press.

Reutzel, D. R., & Jones, C. D. ( 2013). Designing and managing
   effective early childhood classroom environments. In D. R.
   Reutzel (Ed.), Handbook of research-based practice in early
   education (pp. 81-99). Guilford Press.

Roskos, K. A., Christie, J. F., Widman, S., & Holding, A. (2010).
   Three decades in: Priming for meta-analysis in play-literacy

158 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
   research. Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 10(1), 55-96.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/1468798409357580
Roskos, K. A., & Neuman, S. B. (2002). Environment and its
   influences for early literacy teaching and learning. In S. B.
   Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy
   research (pp. 281-292). Guilford Press.
Roskos, K. A., & Neuman, S. B. (2011). The classroom
   environment: The first, last, and always. The Reading
   Teacher, 65, 110-114. https://doi.org/10.1002/TRTR.01021
Saracho, O. N. (2004). Supporting literacy-related play: Roles
   for teachers of young children. Early Childhood Education
   Journal, 31(3), 201-206. https://doi-org.mutex.gmu.edu/
   10.1023/B:ECEJ.0000012138.07501.44
Saracho, O. N., & Spodek, B. (2006). Young children's literacy-
   related play. Early Child Development and Care, 176(7),
   707-72. https://doi.org/10.1080/03004430500207021
Sims Bishop, R. (1990). Mirrors, windows, and sliding glass
   doors. Perspectives: Choosing and Using Books for the
   Classroom, 1(3), ix-xi.
Smith, M. W., Brady, J. P., & Anastasopoulous, L. (2008). Early
   language and literacy classroom observation: Pre-K tool.
   Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Souto-Manning, M., & Martell, J. (2016). Reading, writing, and
   talk: Inclusive teaching strategies for diverse learners, K-2.
   Teachers College Press.
Weinstein, C. S. (1979). The physical environment of the school:
   A review of the research. Review of Educational Research,
   49(4), 577-610. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543049004577
Wolfersberger, M. E., Reutzel, D. R., Sudweeks, R., & Fawson, P.
   C. (2004). Developing and validating the classroom literacy
   environment profile (CLEP): A tool for examining the "print
   richness" of early childhood and elementary classrooms.
   Journal of Literacy Research, 36(2), 211-272. https://doi.org/
   10.1207/s15548430jlr3602_4

                     Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 159
                          Image Credits

   Figure 5.1: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Ecology of the
Early Childhood Literacy Classroom." CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

   Figure 5.2: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Constructivist
Perspectives." CC BY 2.0, derivative image using untitled image,
(https://pxhere.com/en/photo/941148) by unknown author.

   Figure 5.3: Leslie La Croix. "Running Record of Prashant's
Naan (1)" CC BY 2.0.

   Figure 5.4 Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Sociocultural
Perspectives." CC-BY-NC 2.0, derivative image using "Preschool
Girl and Boy," (https://bit.ly/32F4Zgo) by Alliance for Excellent
Education.

   Figure 5.5: Leslie La Croix. "Running Record of Prashant's
Naan (2)." CC BY 2.0.

   Figure 5.6: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Ecological
Perspectives." CC BY 2.0, derivative image using
070608-F-5217S-001.JPG, (https://bit.ly/3gsZCZP) by U.S.
Department of Defense.

   Figure 5.7: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Developmental
Theories. " CC-BY-NC 2.0, derivative image using untitled
image, (https://pxhere.com/en/photo/941148) by unknown
author, and "Preschool Girl and Boy," (https://bit.ly/3sJg3U4) by
Alliance for Excellent Education, and 070608-F-5217S-001.JPG,
(https://bit.ly/32F4HpO) by U.S. Department of Defense.

   Additional Images
Image, Section 5.2: Longwood Universtiy. [Children and Early

   Educators Learning Together: Building Letters With Sticks]
   CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 5.2 & 5.4: Lucy La Croix. [Nest] CC BY 2.0.
Image, Section 5.2b: Longwood University. [Child Tracing Stick
   Letters With a Paint Brush.] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 5.3: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.

160 | Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning
Image, Section 5.4: Longwood University. [Light Play] CC BY-
   NC-SA 2.0.

Image, Section 5.4a: Longwood University. [Large Area With
   Storybook] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

Image, Section 5.4b: Longwood University. [Child Extending
   Kitchen Play With Measuring Cups and Pans] CC BY-NC-SA
   2.0.

Image, Section 5.4c: Longwood University. [Writing on the Wall:
   Print Rich Environment] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

Image, Section 5.4d: Longwood University. [Sharing a Writing
   Moment] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

                      Building the Environment for Play-Based Learning | 161
6. Understanding
Emergent Literacy
Assessment Practices

                                  With Sehyun Yun
       "Early childhood assessment should guide teachers to
 provide the best educational opportunities for children and,

                         ultimately, benefit the child."
                                                                                                                P

                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                             J
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                             w
                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             3
   6.1 Introduction
   6.2 Becoming Assessment Literate
   6.3 Understanding Diverse Literacy Assessment Practices
   6.4 Assessment Strategies and Tools

162 | Understanding Emergent
Literacy Assessment Practices
     Opening Vignette: Mr. Costello's Reflection

        Mr. Costello's most recent set of observational notes
     were collected after reading Chicka Chicka Boom
     Boom (Martin & Archambault, 1989). A checklist Mr.
     Costello completed during a brief four-minute
     observational moment shows Isabella identified 10
     lower case letters while playing with a friend at the
     water table. On this particular day, the water table
     materials encouraged children to float foam letters
     from the "shore" to "coconut island" for a letter parade.
     Mr. Costello smiles as he rereads the mini-note he
     attached to the checklist capturing how Isabella played
     with the lower case /b/ flipping it around and saying,
     "Look, I'm a B... Look, I'm a P...Look, I'm a B..." in a sing-
     songy voice as she danced the letter across the water.
     He knows this playful moment demonstrates a great
     deal about Isabella's alphabetic knowledge and shows
     a strength in her abilities to manipulate and recognize
     letters.

            Educators use a variety of assessment tools and
practices, like the observational assessment Mr. Costello
reviews in the opening vignette, to gain insight into children's
emergent literacy knowledge. Mr. Costello will keep his
observational note, along with the other pieces of assessment
data he gathers over time, to develop a holistic picture of
Isabella's emerging literacy skills. He knows when a single data
point is combined with additional pieces of assessment
information a more complete understanding of a child's
literacy knowledge begins to emerge. Children's work samples,

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 163
data from standardized assessments, and documentation
from other observational assessments collectively inform his
understanding of Isabella's literacy enactments. By
strategically combining formal and informal assessment
sources to demonstrate what young children know, Mr.
Costello embraces a strengths-based assessment approach
and intentionally positions children like Isabella as active
literacy agents ready to communicate, learn, and engage as
readers and writers in the world.

6.1 Introduction

            Early childhood educators play an essential role in
ascertaining how young children are developing nuanced
understandings of emergent literacy skills. Embracing
assessment as an ongoing and recursive practice supports
educators' efforts communicating children's progress in
meaningful ways. Strong assessment practices help engage
diverse stakeholders including families, administrators,
accreditation agencies, and children. Moreover, assessment
data guides the instructional decisions educators make on a
daily basis to enhance and promote young children's rapidly
evolving literacy skills and understandings. Accordingly,
learning how to use diverse sets of assessment tools and
interpret data to gain insight into young children's evolving
agency as readers, writers, and communicators is a critical part
of an early educator's professional practice. This chapter
prepares educators to develop, implement, and interpret a
variety of literacy assessment tools to document and enhance
children's emerging literacies.

            This chapter will explore the following questions:

164 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
                          How does becoming assessment literate
allow educators to see, support, and document children's
emerging literacy skills?

                          What kinds of assessment tools do educators
use to gain insight into young children's emerging literacy
skills?

                          How do early educators integrate a variety of
assessment practices into their curricular routines to
document children's emerging literacy skills?

          6.2 Becoming Assessment

Literate

            Our text focuses on examining a comprehensive
collection of literacy practices and strategies to ensure early
educators are well prepared to nurture young children's
emerging literacies. Determining how to facilitate literacy
experiences to meet individual children's needs and interests
relies on an educator's knowledge, use, interpretation, and
integration of a variety of assessment data points. To effectively

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 165
engage children in rich language, reading, and writing
experiences educators must become assessment literate.
Assessment literate educators possess a strong understanding
of a variety of assessment practices and know how to interpret
assessment results to inform their decisions about curricular
experiences for learners (Popham, 2011). Because assessment
results influence learning opportunities for children, it is
important for educators to develop intentional and ongoing
assessment practices and routines that illuminate children's
literacy learnings. Assessments are designed to meet specific
purposes and provide evidence of a child's knowledge or skill
at a particular moment in time. However, children's emergent
literacy knowledge involves the integration of complex
language-based practices and it is unlikely a single assessment
tool will provide all of the data necessary to make fully informed
decisions. Therefore, knowing that all assessments have
limitations, early educators need to develop a robust
understanding of how, when, and why they use specific
assessment tools to inform their work with children and
families.

            Educators and early education programs frequently
use a variety of assessment measurement tools including
standardized assessments, performance assessments,
curriculum-based assessments, and observation-based
assessments (Piker & Jewkes, 2013). Learning how to leverage
diverse assessment tools to meet different purposes is an
important aspect of an educator's work with young learners
and families. Becoming assessment literate empowers
educators to critically analyze assessment data for biases,
inherent in all assessments, that may under-represent a child's
emergent literacy knowledge. Accurate and full
documentation of a child's understanding is not only essential
for designing curricular experiences for learners, but
assessment results also influence the types of interventions
or additional special education services children and families

166 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
receive (McLean et al., 2020). Therefore, knowing how to use
diverse sets of data to discuss a child's emerging skills
strengthens educators' efforts advocating for children and
families (Mindes & Jung, 2018).

                             Purposes for Assessment
             Educators use assessments to understand

                learning and development and to guide
                instructional decisions
             Assessments help educators identify
                children who might benefit from receiving
                additional intervention services
             Educators use assessment data to evaluate
                program practices and processes for areas of
                continued improvement and professional
                growth (Kidd et al., 2019; National Research
                Council, 2008).

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 167
Educators use technology to monitor children's development and
make programmatic decisions.

            Understanding how to use numerous assessment tools
to advocate for children and families and guide young learners
is emphasized by professional organizations, including the
National Association for the Education of Young Children
(NAEYC) and the Division of Early Childhood (DEC). Both
organizations encourage early childhood educators to use data
strategically to enhance young children's learning experiences.
These organizations also maintain assessments for young
children must be developmentally appropriate and advance
the use of observational assessment practices to capture
children's literacy performances within their natural
environments (McLean et al., 2020, NAEYC & NAECS/SDE, 2003).

            Fortunately, children's literacy performances are readily
observable across a child's day as children talk, interact with
text, and create their own drawings and writings to express
their ideas. Knowing how to structure a child's environment
to elicit literacy rich interactions will make documenting

168 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
children's literacy enactments easier. Similarly, learning how
to identify components of children's literacy enactments and
capture evidence of their emerging literacy skills as they play
will enhance your savvy as an early childhood literacy educator.
As you learn to see, document, and interpret children's
emerging literacies you will develop a repertoire of assessment
and instructional practices that will inform your work
facilitating literacy experiences for young children.

                                  6.3 Understanding
Diverse Literacy Assessment Practices

            Young children enter classrooms with diverse
backgrounds and literacy skills. Children's daily emergent
literacy expressions reveal what they know and understand
about language, reading, and writing work. Interactions
between language, reading, and writing are reciprocal and
literacy enrichment in one arena bolsters knowledge and
growth in another. Language development serves as a
cornerstone for children's acquisition of reading and writing.
The integral nature of language, reading, and writing develops
throughout infancy, toddlerhood, and the early childhood
years. Intentional early childhood educators use varied
assessment tools and data sources to gain comprehensive
understandings of children's cognitive literacy development
across the domains of language, reading, and writing.
Accordingly, literacy assessment is an important part of early

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 169
educators' mission to provide high-quality early literacy
education for young children.

6.3a Formal Assessment Practices

Early educators use a variety of assessment tools to

capture and analyze children's literacy development and

learning. Assessments, by design, are broadly identified as

either formal (standardized) or informal. In early childhood

education, formal assessments are used for various purposes

including screening, diagnostic, readiness tests, and program

evaluation (Kidd et al., 2019). Formal assessments use

standardized instruments and processes that are

administered, scored, and interpreted in the same way for all

children (Shepard et al., 1998). This section examines the types

of formal assessments and how and when we will use them to

support children's literacy learning.

6.3a1 Types of formal assessments. Formal

standardized assessment results are translated into either

norm-referenced scores or criterion-referenced scores. Norm-

referenced scores allow educators to compare a child's

performance on specific skills to the performances of other

children within their peer group. Age-based standard scores,

age equivalent scores, and/or percentile ranks are frequently

used to communicate norm-referenced assessment results.

Norm-referenced assessments may be used to determine

eligibility for early childhood special education services,

however "norm-referenced tools should be used with caution,

as the accuracy and predictive value of these tools may be

compromised when used with young children" (Ohio

Department of Education, 2010, p. 9).

Alternatively,  criterion-referenced                        scores

communicate how well a child performs against a set of

predetermined standards or criteria. Criterion-referenced

assessments use numerical scores to represent the degree to

170 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
which a child has mastered specific content knowledge or
gained proficiency with a set of skills. Both norm-referenced
data and criterion-referenced data help educators understand
what a child knows and understands at a given moment in
time by either comparing a child's performance to the
performance of other children in their peer group or analyzing
the child's performance against specific criteria or
developmental benchmarks (Brown & Rolfe, 2005). Table 6.1
presents a set of common criterion-referenced and norm-
referenced assessments educators use to gain insight into
children's emergent literacy practices. The table highlights the
specific literacy components evaluated by each assessment.

          Table 6.1 Common Criterion and Norm-Referenced
                                     Assessments

             Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 171
     Common Criterion and Norm-Referenced
                           Assessments

172 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
Assessment Tool           Description          Literacy Domains and  Norm o
                                               Indicators            Referen

Ages & Stages             ASQ-3 is a            Communication       Criterio
Questionnaires, Third     developmental           Development
Edition (ASQ-3)           screening tool
                          designed for use
https://bit.ly/3yCiCv3    with children
                          between the ages
                          of one month to 5
                           years. It is a
                          great assessment
                          tool to partner
                          with parents,
                          making the most
                          of their expert
                          knowledge.
                          Questionnaires
                          are available in
                          Arabic, Chinese,
                          English, French,
                          Spanish, and
                          Vietnamese.

Assessment,               AEPS is an            Major Areas
Evaluation, and           authentic             Fine Motor
Programming System        assessment that       Gross Motor
for Infants and Children  combines              Cognitive
(AEPS)                    educator              Adaptive
                          observations of       Social-Communication Criterio
https://bit.ly/3s4IZYj    children in natural   Social
                          play-based            Pre-academic
                          contexts with         Literacy
                          family interviews     Numeracy
                          to evaluate and       Pre-writing
                          monitor children's
                          developmental
                          progressions.
                          Appropriate for all
                          children ages
                          birth through 6
                          years.

                          APES may be
                          used to determine
                          eligibility for
                          additional
                          services.

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 173
Battelle Developmental  A play-based          Communication       Norm-r
Inventory - Third       diagnostic              (BDI-3)
Edition (BDI-3)         assessment for                             Norm-r
                        children birth        Receptive           and
https://bit.ly/3AqjMu3  through age 7         Expressive          Criterio
                        years, 11 months. A   Articulation        invento
                        supplementary         Literacy (BEAS)
                        assessment, the       Listening           Norm-r
                        Battelle Early
                        Academic Survey         Comprehension      Criterio
                        (BEAS) is for         Fluency
                        children 3 years 6    Phonological
                        months - 7 years
                        11 months and           Awareness
                        offers additional     Print Concepts
                        assessments in        Phonics and Word
                        literacy and
                        mathematics.            Recognition

Brigance Diagnostic     The Brigance is a     Language
Inventory of Early      developmental           Development
Development             screener for
                        children birth        Expressive
https://bit.ly/3xyEfeu  through age 7.        Receptive
                        The assessment        Academic/Cognitive
                        uses observations,
                        performances,           Development
                        and interviews.       Literacy

Developmental           DIAL-4 is a global    Language
Indicators for the      screener. For         Expressive
Assessment of           children ages 2       Receptive
Learning, Fourth        years 6 months to     Phonological
Edition (DIAL-4)        5 years 11 months.
                                                Awareness
https://bit.ly/3fLwU5o
                                              Name writing
Phonological            PALS-PreK is an       Alphabet Knowledge
Awareness Literacy      early literacy        Beginning Sound
Screening (PALS-PreK)*  screening
                        assessment              Awareness
https://bit.ly/3lM3R5f  designed to           Print and Word
                        demonstrate
                        children's              Awareness
                        strengths and         Rhyme Awareness
                        areas where           Nursery Rhyme
                        children may
                        benefit from            Awareness
                        more intentional
                        support.

174 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
Teaching Strategies      TS GOLD is an           Language             Criterio
GOLD                     observation-based       Literacy             Criterio
                         assessment
https://bit.ly/3s7IgFx   system for              Communication
                         children from             Development
                         birth through
                         kindergarten. It        Language
                         blends ongoing            Comprehension
                         observational
                         assessment for all      Language Production
                         areas of                Pragmatics
                         developmental           Articulation
                         domains and             Phonology
                         academic skills         Voice and Fluency
                         (literacy and           Oral Mechanism
                         numeracy). It is
                         designed to
                         document
                         children's learning
                         over time, inform
                         instruction, and
                         facilitate
                         communication
                         with stakeholders,
                         but not for
                         screening or
                         diagnostic
                         purposes.

Transdisciplinary-Based  TPBA2 is a
Play Assessment,         diagnostic and
Second Edition (TPBA2)   progress
                         monitoring
https://bit.ly/37uaelr   play-based
                         assessment to
                         evaluate a child's
                         development and
                         provide
                         intervention for
                         children from
                         birth to age 6. It is
                         designed to
                         evaluate four key
                         developmental
                         domains
                         (sensorimotor,
                         emotional and
                         social,
                         communication
                         and language,
                         and cognition).

6.3b2 Purposes for formal assessments. There are a

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 175
number of reasons early educators integrate formal
assessments into early childhood contexts. This section
examines four purposes of formal assessment. Each of these
approaches to assessment provides us a window into young
children's literacy development. Often the formal assessments
used in early childhood spaces are selected by programs to
align with national, state, or local requirements. Therefore, it is
important for educators to understand the purposes of these
selected instruments and how the data collected can be used.
Figure 6.1 illustrates how assessment purposes and processes
are mutually informative and fluid in nature.

     Figure 6.1 Connection Between Assessment Purposes and
                                        Processes

176 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
            Screening and readiness assessments are used in
early childhood contexts to determine if a child needs further
specialized evaluations or instructional interventions to ensure
the child continues to thrive across developmental domains.
These assessments seek to identify children who may benefit
from additional intervention services designed to support a
child's cognitive, oral-linguistic, social-emotional, or physical
development. Screening assessments are designed to be
implemented and evaluated quickly to determine if follow-up
interventions are required to support a child's development.
Consider the Apgar test performed on infants immediately
after birth at the 1-minute and 5-minute mark. Focused on
determining the child's physical wellbeing, the Apgar monitors
a child's breathing, heart rate, muscle tone, skin color, and
reflex irritability (Simon et al., 2021). If the child receives a low
score on the scale, health care professionals will administer
the necessary interventions to ensure a child thrives outside
of the womb. Within school contexts, physical screening tools
may be used to evaluate a child's hearing or vision, and if their
performance on the screening tools indicate areas of concern,
the child will be referred for further evaluation by appropriate
care providers. Screening assessments are frequently
administered to all students at the beginning of the school
year in order to find students who need intervention as early as
possible.

                      Figure 6.2 Screening and Readiness

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 177
            Readiness assessments seek to reveal what a child
already knows about a set of precursory skills related to a
specific domain. Intentional educators use children's
performances on readiness assessments to structure curricular
opportunities for learners based on concepts a child is still
acquiring and to build on knowledge the child already
possesses. Readiness assessments should only be used to gain
insight into what a child already knows and is ready to learn;
they should not be used to perpetuate deficit perspectives that
emphasize what a child cannot do which, by default, implies
that a child is not ready. Simply put, although children may
demonstrate different degrees of understandings at any given

178 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
moment in time, all children are ready to learn. Unfortunately,
school systems sometimes use readiness assessments as
predictive measures to group or track children into specific
instructional programs or ability-based classrooms. While it
makes sense to reflect on data gained through readiness
assessments in strategic ways, educators and school systems
should not use this information to make broad generalizations
about a child's overall capabilities and should avoid using
readiness data to make decisions or recommendations that
limit children's curricular and experiential opportunities, such
as suggesting a child defer enrolling in kindergarten with age-
appropriate peers (Brassard & Boehm, 2007). When
assessment results are used to make decisions about a child's
access to curricular experiences, assessments become "high-
stakes" for individual learners and the educational
ramifications experienced by the child can persist throughout
their academic career.

            Early literacy assessments, developed for initial
screening purposes, usually measure students' phonemic
awareness, alphabetic knowledge, and print knowledge which
are literacy competencies associated with children's future
reading performance (Coyne & Harn, 2006). Results from
literacy screening assessments help educators recognize
which children might experience reading and writing
difficulties in the future without additional instruction or
intervention (Coyne & Harn, 2006). When considering early
literacy screening data, educators should keep in mind that
performances on initial screenings are suggestive of a child's
future performance. In reality, research documenting children's
literacy progressions overtime demonstrates that many
students who demonstrate weaker phonological sensitivity
(the ability to hear the sound components that make up words)
on early literacy screening assessments will go on to become
accomplished readers (National Research Council, 1998). This
finding does not negate an educators' need to monitor a child's

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 179
emerging phonological skills. If a child continues to
demonstrate weak phonological sensitivity, it is increasingly
likely the child will need more intensive support to develop
proficient reading and writing skills (National Research Council,
1998). Therefore, early educators are encouraged to use
children's performances on screening assessments to provide
intentional instructional literacy experiences targeting a child's
knowledge in specific literacy arenas. When emergent literacy
screening, diagnostic, and readiness assessments are used in
this way, early childhood educators gain insight into what their
students currently know and can plan literacy experiences by
targeting areas of growth for individual children (Ivernizzi et al.,
2010)

Educators observe children as they practice curricular concepts.

            Diagnostic assessments also document areas of
strength and areas for growth across specific literacy
components. Diagnostic assessment enables teachers to
modify and improve the current instruction practices to

180 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
support individual children (Coyne & Harn, 2006; Gilliam &
Frede, 2015). Diagnostic assessments are more detailed than
initial screening assessments and data from diagnostic
assessments can help educators ascertain (a) the specific
emergent literacy skills a child has mastered and which skills
they are still developing, (b) the most promising intervention
programs for children based on individual profiles, and (c)
make intentional decisions about how to sort children into
meaningful instructional groups (Coyne & Harn, 2006, p. 40).

                                 Figure 6.3 Diagnostic

            Progress monitoring assessments are used at periodic
intervals overtime. Progress monitoring is appropriate for

             Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 181
typically developing children as well as children who are
meeting developmental milestones at a slower pace than their
age-level peers. The Transdisciplinary-Based Play Assessment
(TBPA) (Linder, 2008) is an example of a formal assessment
system designed to document a child's performances across
developmental domains (i.e., sensorimotor, emotional and
social, communication and language, and cognition). This
particular assessment "presents a process for planning,
implementing, and evaluating intervention for children from
birth to 6 years of age who need supports to enhance their
development" (Linder, 2008, p. 4). As the name suggests, TBPA
is a play-based assessment and a play-facilitator guides the
child through a series of play spaces designed to elicit
particular performances. TBPA uses a team approach
(including the family, educator, and other service providers)
to evaluate a child's understanding and establish baseline
developmental performance levels. Upon completion of the
initial observation-based assessment, the team works together
to identify learning goals for the child, determine eligibility for
additional services, and make recommendations for
interventions.

            Subsequently, educators use the TBPA Age Tables and
9-point Goal Attainment Scales to monitor a child's
development over time. The educator uses the scales to
document the child's play-based performances attending to
the strategic interventions embedded to promote the child's
growth. The educator shares the progress monitoring reports
with relevant stakeholders and uses the assessment data to
modify instructional practices to support the child. Learning
how to monitor young children's developmental progress in
response to special intervention services they are receiving is
an essential assessment practice for all early childhood
educators. It takes time to understand comprehensive
developmental progressions used by formal assessment
systems like TBPA but, ultimately, they are rich resources for

182 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
educators, families, and early care programs. Such assessment
systems provide educators with meaningful growth
trajectories and support educators in the creation of
developmentally appropriate learning experiences for all
learners.

                         Figure 6.4 Progress Monitoring

            Formal assessments support educators' overall
understanding of children's literacy progress. In collaboration
with families and outside specialists, educators use formal
assessments along with other assessment practices to
encourage holistic pictures of children. Figures 6.2, 6.3, and
6.4 summarize the purposes for formal assessment and the
section below explores informal assessment practices
educators use to make instructional decisions with children in
mind.

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 183
6.3c Curriculum-Based Assessments

            Curriculum-based assessments, a subset of criterion-
referenced assessments, document a child's mastery of
specific goals and objectives after engaging in a particular
curriculum. Early childhood educators use these assessments
to identify the knowledge and skills the child possesses.
Educators use information from curriculum-based
assessments to design intentional instructional experiences in
response to the child's demonstrated knowledge.

            Teaching Strategies GOLD and Assessment,
Evaluation, and Programing System for Infants and Children
(AEPS) are two examples of common, curriculum-based
assessment systems designed to support educators'
intentional documentation of children's understandings and
guide curricular decisions linked to children's performances.
Teaching Strategies GOLD uses a digital portfolio assessment
system to store and evaluate artifacts (e.g., photographs,
videos, and observational notes) to capture children's literacy
expressions as they interact with their environment in
authentic ways. GOLD uses color-coded developmental
milestone charts to monitor and support a child's literacy
growth. Similarly, AEPS is also grounded in observational
assessment practices capturing children's play-based
expressions. AEPS provides educators with observational data
forms to document how well a child performs specific tasks
within sets of developmentally progressive, criteria-based
learning objectives. APES uses a scaled evaluation system (i.e.,
2- consistently meets criterion, 1- inconsistently meets criterion,
and 0- does not meet criterion) to determine how children are
currently expressing their emergent literacy skills.

            Early childhood programs also develop their own sets
of curriculum-based assessment practices. When early care
and education centers create their own curriculum-based
assessment programs they still use developmental

184 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
progressions like the ones articulated in Virginia's Early
Learning & Development Standards (2021) to inform their work
with young children. Designing their own curriculum-based
assessment practices affords programs flexibility to align
practices with their unique pedagogical philosophies, values,
and goals (e.g., Montessori, Reggio, outdoor learning schools,
STEAM centers, etc.). Curriculum-based assessment practices
help educators strategically structure learning experiences to
monitor and promote children's progressions through critical
literacy milestones.

Educators use formative assessment practices to provide in the
moment guidance for young children.

6.3d Informal Assessment Practices

            Informal assessments are frequently designed by the
educator or the program to capture children's literacy
performances throughout the school day. Informal
assessments are distinguished from formal assessments in
that the assessment tools have not undergone extensive

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 185
piloting with diverse student populations to determine
developmental norms and establish inter-rater reliability, test-
retest reliability, and validity metrics. The informal label does
not mean these assessment practices are not as "good" as a
formal assessment. In fact, informal assessment practices are
essential aspects of early childhood educators' daily routines.
Informal assessments are grounded in systematic observation
practices and typically leverage a number of documentation
tools (e.g., anecdotal notes, observational running records,
checklists, work samples, portfolios, etc.) to capture children's
literacy expressions within familiar play-based learning
contexts. Data gathered within authentic contexts provides
actionable information regarding the strengths and needs of
individual children without the additional scoring or
comparison of a child's performance to other children (Brown
& Rolfe, 2005; Lonigan, 2006; Navarrete et al., 1990).

            Educators develop informal assessment for a variety of
purposes. Some informal assessment tools capture children's
conversations, other tools document children's attention to
rhyme schemes embedded in songs and read alouds.
Educators also use informal assessment tools to gain insight
into children's preferences and attitudes toward specific
learning centers and literacy play materials. Well-designed
informal assessment tools effectively document children's
literacy knowledge and expressions as they engage with "tasks
that are personally meaningful, take place in real life contexts,
and are grounded in naturally occurring instructional activities"
(Epstein et al., 2004, p. 6). When designing and implementing
informal assessments, educators need a clear understanding
of developmental literacy progressions. Educators also need
to know what individual children already understand about
how language, reading, and writing interact to create literacy
learning experiences and environments that support children's
emergent literacy knowledge (Navarrete et al., 1990). As
educators continue to capture children's literacy expressions

186 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
over time, the intentional informal assessment notations
accumulate in incremental ways to generate a more holistic
representation of children's literacy repertoires. In turn, as
educators' knowledge of each child continues to grow, they are
able to make intentional instructional and curricular decisions
to better support children's literacy learnings.

            When educators first begin using embedded
assessment practices, it may feel awkward. Initially, children
may pose for photos and perform for videos while the perfect
authentic literacy enactments elude capture. Children may
openly wonder why their teacher is constantly jotting notes,
watching closely, taking photos, or making videos. That is
wonderful. Invite children into the assessment experience,
explain that capturing all of their thinking and creating shows
what they already know about how the world works. When
particular documentation tools are used frequently, children
and educators view the assessment practice as a natural part
of the classroom culture and the tools themselves become
invisible.

6.3e Formative and Summative Assessment Practices

            The terms formative and summative are frequently
paired assessment terms focused on documenting children's
learning as they progress through units of study. Educators
use formal and informal assessment tools as formative and
summative assessments to gain an understanding of a child's
developmental progressions. Formative assessments are used
to inform the next curricular and instructional decisions an
educator will make to meet children's interests, strengths, and
needs (Kidd et al., 2019). The formative assessment methods
include "all those activities undertaken by teachers [...] to
modify teaching and learning activities" (Black & William, 2010,
p. 82). In order for these everyday assessment moments to
be influential, educators need to (a) identify specific literacy

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 187
learning goals, (b) select an assessment method for capturing
evidence of the child's emergent literacy performances, (c)
create a plan for analyzing the assessment data collected, and
(d) take time to interpret the assessment data to understand
how a child is performing in relation to the specified literacy
goals.

           Questions Guiding Educator's Interpretations of
                         Formative Assessment Data

             What literate behaviors are children
                currently enacting?

             What aspects of literacy are children
                mastering?

             What literacy behaviors are children ready to
                begin integrating in the future?

             What instructional scaffolds, models, and
                materials can I implement to support the
                child's literacy development?

             What other information do I need to gain a
                more complete understanding of the child's
                literacy development?

            While formative assessments capture how a student is
performing in the moment and support an educator's efforts
to promote a child's learning in the near future, summative
assessments seek to present a final (or summative) evaluation
of student learning (Kidd et al., 2019). Summative assessments
are often utilized at the end of instructional units to "capture
what a student has learned" (National Research Council, 2001,
p. 25). Early education centers also use summative assessment

188 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
results to evaluate overall program effectiveness (Kidd et al.,
2019).

           Questions Guiding Educator's Interpretations of
                        Summative Assessment Data

             How does a child's literacy performances in
                language, reading, and writing compare to
                learning goals?

             How does the assessment data capturing
                children's overall literacy development this
                year compare to children evaluated in previous
                years?

             In what literacy areas are children meeting
                or exceeding expectations related to specified
                language, reading, and writing goals? And,
                what specific program literacy practices
                supported children's literacy expressions?

             In what literacy areas would children benefit
                from enhanced curricular development to
                bolster literacy expressions?

           6.4 Assessment Strategies

and Tools

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 189
         Children possess a wealth of knowledge and curiosity
that educators leverage intentionally to enrich, extend, and
enhance the knowledge and skills children demonstrate.
Assessment data guides educators' differentiation practices
and supports their efforts to provide meaningful and relevant
learning experiences for individual learner's literacy needs
(Ivernizzi et al., 2010; Rosko, 2004). When considering how to
embed effective assessment practices into daily instructional
routines it is helpful to think of assessment as a series of
ongoing evaluations that help educators' notice and note
young children's literacy expressions. Intentional noticings
influence how educators reshape the environment and
curricular opportunities to continue to nurture and challenge a
child's emerging literacies. To fully document a child's literacy
understandings, educators need to feel comfortable using
multiple assessment tools.

            The following section describes a number of
assessment tools educators use to capture children's literacy
expressions. The assessment tools are flexible and can be used
in a variety of ways to focus educators' intentional noticings.
To fully represent a child's emergent literacy knowledge,
educators frequently need to use a combination of assessment
tools. Learning how to manipulate a core set of assessment
tools eases educators' efforts embracing ongoing assessment
practices. Anecdotal notes, observational running records,
checklists, frequency counts, artifact sampling, documentation
panels, and portfolios provide educators with a variety of
options for capturing children's literacy expressions. These
assessment tools can be used informally or to provide evidence
as part of a formal assessment process (e.g., AEPSi, GOLD,
and Transdisciplinary-Based Play). The flexible nature of these
assessment tools allows educators to capture children's literacy
expressions throughout the day. Moreover, these assessment
practices can become a regular part of children's and
educators' daily routines.

190 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
6.4a Anecdotal Notes

            Anecdotal notes are brief and descriptive notes made
after a specific behavior or interaction occurs (Mindes & Jung,
2015). In the classroom, teachers write anecdotal notes to
record student behaviors, skills, and performance and compile
the anecdotal notes on students as a document system. The
cumulative information can be used to track progress and
changes in a child's behavior and performance as well as plan
for activities and strategies to use in the classroom. Once
environments are established, educators can use anecdotal
notes to document children's literacy performances as they
play with their peers in literacy enriched contexts.

            Figure 6.5 provides an example of an anecdotal note
captured by Jinah's teacher while she was writing a grocery list
in the dramatic play center. As the teacher paused to watch
and listen to Jinah and Emma, she focused in on Jinah's
emergent writing process. Jinah's focused effort illustrates an
emerging knowledge of the alphabetic principle and her ability
to identify initial, and some ending, phonemes.

                  Figure 6.5 Example of an Anecdotal Note

             Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 191
Context  Anecdotal Note

192 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
Grocery Store themes in                    Date: Sept 7,
dramatic play centers encourage                        2021
children to explore a number of
literacy concepts. Inventory        Jinah chose
sheets encourage grocery         dramatic play
workers to tally and count       during the center
supplies to stock the shelves.   time. She and
Notepads prompt children to      Emma decided to
create lists to help them        make fruit salad
remember what they want to       for their lunch and
buy when they are the            started to write a
customer. Labels with pictures   grocery list. They
on the shelves and at the        talked about
checkout support children's      which fruit they
"reading" of the play            wanted to add in
environment.                     their salad. In a
                                 grocery list, Jinah
                                 mouthed the word
                                 apple and wrote
                                 AL with a red
                                 marker. Saying A
                                 and L as she
                                 wrote. She
                                 continued... WN
                                 (watermelon), GS
                                 (grapes). Jinah
                                 identified the
                                 uppercase letters
                                 A, L, G, S, W, N. Her
                                 grocery list shows

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 193
                                                         she also
                                                         understands the
                                                         sounds of those
                                                         letters.

6.4b Observational Running Records

            Observational running records are detailed and
comprehensive notes written while an event is happening.
Running records capture an individual child's (or a group of
children's) language and literacy behaviors in a short period
of time, generally between 5 and 10 minutes. The extended
nature of a running record requires planning to ensure the
educator has enough additional instructor support to allow
for a focused observation with minimal interruptions. When
planning to conduct a running record it is a good idea to
identify the child, the context, and the duration of the
observation before scripting the observational data. Once a
running record is complete, educators typically rejoin the
learning environment or shift to observing another child.
Evaluations of the running records are completed at a later
time, when the educator has the time to intentionally analyze
the child's performances against relevant milestones,
trajectories, or benchmarks. Educators use running records
throughout the year and the collection of records reveals a
child's growth overtime.

            Figure 6.6 provides an example of a running record
focused on a child's language patterns, physical performances,
and emergent reading skills. During this observational

194 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
assessment moment, Ms. Everston planned to observe Danielle
during outdoor recess to document who she decided to play
with and the storyline she decided to enact. During the
observation block, Ms. Everston worked to write down
everything she directly observed regarding the child's actions
including body movements and gestures, verbal exchanges,
and facial expressions. Notice that she is not involved in
Danielle's play while writing notes, and in her written notations
she refrains from making judgements or assumptions about
the child's intentions or literacy performances.

                  Figure 6.6 Example of a Running Record

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 195
Date: 10-26-2020                             Observer: Ms. Everston
   Time: 2:15-2:22                              Objective for this observation:
   Child: Danielle (age 2  - 30 months)        To assess how Danielle spent her time at the playground and how
   Place: Playground
   Setting: Transportation Track             she used language to communicate with her peers and adults while
   Others involved: Miss Haskins (preschool  interacting with them.

teacher -MH)

Time  Observation

                                  Danielle walks up to a tricycle and points at it. She looked at the teacher who was assisting
2:15 another child. Miss Haskins (MH)- "Sure, you can ride the tricycle, Danielle." Danielle holds the right handlebar with her right hand and tries to lift her left leg to sit on the saddle. She repeats,

                                  "Ride bike." (MH) says, "Yes, Danielle go ahead. You can do it."

                                  She lifts her left leg over and sits down on the seat and shakes her hand for the teacher to come.
2:17 Again, she says, "Ride bike." MH "Where would you like to go?" D- "Go round" D gestures to the roundabout in the transportation track where two other children are going around and around

                                  the traffic circle.

                                  MH - "Okay, so how do you want to get there?" (At the start of the transportation track she can
2:19 choose to go around on a blue or green path.) D - "Go blue" D points to a path and points the front handlebars and tire to the blue path. D - motor noises begin "Broom, -oom" humming and

                                  buzzing of lips as D begins pedaling on the blue arrows.
      D pedals and "brooms" with head leaning forward toward the handle bars and eyes focused

2:21  slightly up. D's eyes go big and her voice gets louder ..."I see stop." D stops pedaling at the red

      stop sign on the track. "I go." D continues pedaling to the roundabout. (end-2:22)

Analysis date/time: 10/26/20 at 3:30
   Assessment: Transdisciplinary-Based Play II (Linder, 2008)
   Danielle's interactions with the teacher align with communication development milestones for a child of 30 months.

She names one color, uses two- and three-word combinations to communicate her ideas. Danielle's command of the
pedals on the tricycle is also developmentally appropriate. Danielle shows some evidence of problem-solving skill by
selecting a color path to travel around. Danielle also demonstrated memory skills in her response to the stop sign by
recognizing the sign and then performing the corresponding action. Danielle's reading of the stop sign also
demonstrates that she is recognizing some familiar signs/symbols, an important emergent literacy skill.
Children learn familiar symbols, such as stop signs, even before they
are connecting letters to sounds.

6.4c Checklists

Checklists are useful tools for documenting some emergent
literacy skills and behaviors (Mindes & Jung, 2015). Intentionally
designed checklists can help an educator attend to specific
literacy performances in the moment. Checklists are
particularly useful when an educator is learning to notice
particular literacy expressions or capturing a child's expressions
during play. Educators can use checklists to quickly document
specific literacy skills and use the list to determine subsequent
instructional opportunities. Checklists do not indicate how well
a child performs, they document moments when a child did
or did not perform a particular literacy skill. In the opening
vignette at the beginning of this chapter, Mr. Costello used

198 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
a checklist to document the letter names Isabella readily
identifies as she plays with letters at the water table. Figure
6.7 provides an example of a letter identification checklist
designed to document children's letter play across a variety of
contexts. Notice how this checklist is enhanced with a spot for
anecdotal notations. Adding a space for anecdotal notes helps
mediate the fact that a checklist alone provides limited insight
into a child's literacy performances.

                       Figure 6.7 Observational Checklist

                               Observation Checklist
                                      Alphabet Play

          Location: Water Table
          Context: Chicka Chicka Boom Boom Letter Island
          Letter Focus: 26 lower case letters
          Child's Name: Isabella Date: Nov 10
          Letters

          Anecdotal Notes: Isabella flipped the lower case b
       around singing, "Look, I'm a B... Look, I'm a P...Look,
       I'm a B..." in a sing-songy voice as she danced the
       letter across the water. Note: Play ended before she
       interacted with any additional letters.

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 199
6.4d Artifacts

Collecting artifacts as evidence of children's literacy
expressions is an essential authentic assessment practice for
early childhood educators. Artifacts provide evidence of
children's literacy expressions and learning at a particular
moment in time. Photographs, videos, work samples, child
generated products, and audio recordings of children
engaging in literacy explorations are some examples of
artifacts educators collect over time to understand children's
emergent literacy performances. Deciding what artifacts to
hold onto and what artifacts or archival moments to pass by
can be overwhelming as educators first begin collecting
documentation of a child's performances. To begin the process,
consider collecting at least one type of literacy-focused artifact
(e.g. a photograph, a short video, a writing sample, etc.) from
each child every week. As each artifact is collected, use the
developmental reading, writing, and language progressions
the school uses to notice what can be readily observed about
a child's literacy knowledge. With practice, recognizing when
an artifact yields important insight about a child's literacy
knowledge and how to analyze different artifacts becomes
easier. Over time, these authentic assessments are joyful
reminders for educators and families of how much a child
learns over the course of a year.

6.4e Frequency Counts

            As the name suggests, frequency counts are used to
document how often a particular event occurs. Educators
create frequency count charts to capture how many times a
child performs or engages in a particular literacy event. For
example, an educator might use a frequency count to monitor
how often a child self-selects reading a book in the class library
or uses the puppet theatre to tell a story. The information

200 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
provided by such frequency counts provides some insight into
where a child spends their time, but the information is limited.
A frequency count does not capture how the child is
interacting with the literacy rich materials and might not
capture other play spaces where the child is using their literacy
skills (e.g., when the child uses cookbooks and recipe cards in
the kitchen). Therefore, frequency counts should not be used
in isolation to draw conclusions about the child's overall literacy
enactments.

            On the other hand, literacy focused frequency counts
may be most impactful when educators use them to
determine how frequently particular learning centers and
literacy-rich materials are utilized by the children over a period
of time. This type of data could help an educator notice trends
in the children's literacy play routines to make intentional
changes to the children's instructional environment. A
frequency count could lead an educator to enhance particular
spaces by adding writing or supplemental text materials, or
prompt the educator to model the use of specific literacy tools
to support children's literacy-based play (e.g., felt boards, dry
erase boards, graph paper).

6.4g Event Sampling

            Event sampling is used to document a child's
performances during a specific event. Charts can be used to
quickly capture when a child engages in particular literacy
events. Figure 6.8 provides an example of an event sampling
chart designed to strategically focus on children's explorations
of fiction and non-fiction texts in the class library. Collected
over an extended period of time, the basic event sampling
chart information yields some insight into children's text
preferences and what the child attends to when reading or
retelling a text. When more information about a child's
behavior is desired, event sampling may be combined with

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 201
an antecedent, behavior, and consequence (ABC) assessment
frame to support an educators' sequencing of a particular
event. Figure 6.8 provides an example of how the teacher, Mr.
Thompson, uses the ABC assessment frame to analyze a video
he captured of Jonathan in the library corner. Mr. Thompson
uses the ABC lens to focus on Jonathan's emergent literacy
practices while he retells a story to his friend and some stuffed
animals in the library. The analysis space summarizes the
child's interactions and articulates the specific knowledge,
skills, and dispositions observed throughout the event.

                             Figure 6.8 Event Sampling

202 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
Reading Event Sampling

Name       Self-      Self-selects     Uses       Uses
        selects    informational    pictures   pictures to
        narrative  text             to orally  explain
        text                        retell     informational
                                    the        text
                                    narrative
                                    story

Jonath an 10/3* 10/1                10/3*

Liam    10/2

Olivia             9/23*                       9/23*

Patrici a 9/21 9/23 10/1

William 10/8       10/15

*Event sampling with video and ABC notations.

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 203
Jonathan
10/3 (Video recording)
Library

Ti      Anteceden       Behavior           Consequence

me t

   10:     Jonathan        He takes           After reaching the
06      says, "Let's    Anya's hand        library center,
        play            and they go to     Jonathan arranges
        storytime."     the library        the small rocker in
                        center.            the corner to create
                                           an open area on the
                                           carpet for his class.
                                           Anya begins putting
                                           stuffed animals in a
                                           semicircle facing the
                                           rocking chair.

   10:     Jonathan        He goes to         Anya sits down on
09      says, "I will   the library shelf  her knees behind the
        read first."    and begins         circle of animals.
                        looking for a
                        book to read.

   10:     Anya says,      Jonathan,          Anya folds her
12      "Let's read     laughing says,     hands in her lap after
        the penguin     "Okay" and         repositioning a bear
        book with       picks up The       that flopped over,
        the lollipop."  Penguin and        getting everyone
                        the Lollipop. He   ready to listen to
                        opens the book     Johnathan read the
                        on his lap with    story.
                        appropriate
                        directionality to
                        support his
                        reading.

204 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
   10:     Jonathan         Jonathan         Anya and the
14      holds up the     says, "Today we  animals wait.
        book with        are going to
        the cover        read, little
        facing Anya.     penguin eats a
                         lollipop."

   10:     Jonathan         Jonathan         Anya says, "Oh no,
16      puts the         pauses to turn   little bird looks mad."
        book back        the book
        down on his      around so the
        lap and says,    animals and
        "This is Little  Anya can see
        Penguin. He      the pictures.
        made a
        mistake and
        ate the little
        bird's
        lollipop."

   Analysis: Jonathan demonstrated a sense of
directionality while reading the book. He paused in the
beginning to state the title and mimic the way we begin
storytime. He began retelling the story on the first page
of the book where the story begins. Jonathan's retelling
demonstrates comprehension of the storyline elements,
including the main characters and the problem.

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 205
6.4h Time Sampling

Time sampling can be used to observe a child's engagement with a
particular activity such as constructing a block tower.

            Time sampling is another observational strategy used
by educators to capture how a child engages with their
environment over a period of time. Time sampling is
particularly beneficial when an educator is seeking to
determine how long a child sustains their engagement in a
literacy-rich play center. To conduct a time sampling, an
educator selects a focus child, determines which behaviors will
be observed, establishes the duration for the time sampling
period, and sets the time intervals they will use to monitor
the child's engagement. In Figure 6.9 Ms. Haskins captures
Aleksandra's block center play. Notice how the child draws on
her emerging literacy skills as she strategically constructs her
farm. What materials and practices in the classroom are in
place to support her literacy skills? How does the educator
support her creative efforts?
206 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
                   Figure 6.9 Time Sampling
Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 207
            Time Sampling
            Date : April 3, 2021
            Observer: Ms. Haskins
            Child's Name: Aleksandra
            Time interval: 5 minutes
            Time of Day: Center Exploration Time (10:30 - 11:30)

208 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
   10:  Aleksandra (A) heads to the block area.
30

   10:     A - is using a construction blueprint photo to build
35      a tower following the image - she is working by
        herself

   10:  A - is selecting a new blueprint photo
40

   10: A - is sorting through blocks to find the size she
45 needs for her second tower

   10: A - is building her second tower about 12 inches
50 from her first tower

   10:  A - is still working on her second tower
55

             A - is sorting through the blueprint photo file to
   11: find another tower
00

             her second tower is complete

             A - is working on a third tower

             Enrique and Emily pull the train tracks out next to
   11: A. A says, "Please make the train over there. By my
05 garage." E and E move over a bit to make room.

          Looking at her towers, Enrique says, "Where are the
          trucks?"

Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 209
   11:1     A - places the last block on the tower and stands
0        looking around the room

            -she moves to the writing center and collects a
         clipboard, small index cards, and a crayon

            - she goes back to her towers

   11:1     A - is writing on one of the index cards
5
            Another index card is in front of the first tower she
         built.

            In blue crayon she wrote "HS" on the index card.

   11:2 A - has three index cards placed in front of her

0        towers "HS" "B" and "G"

   11:2     A - is pulling cows and horses from the animal
5        basket and putting them around the tower with a B

            cars are placed under the G tower

   11:3     A - asks to take a picture of her farm so that she
0        can make it again tomorrow

            Ms. Hamilton takes a photo and suggests putting
         a big fence around her farm so she can continue
         making her farm the next day.

   Analysis: Aleksandra worked with intentionality to
create her farm today. She mentioned to Ms. Hamilton
that she wanted to keep it so that she could play "farm"
with her friend Sara tomorrow, who was not here today.
Ms. Hamilton asked her to tell her about her farm, and
Aleksandra showed her the house, the garage, and the
barn. The initial consonants are reflected in the signs
she made, as well as an ending consonant sound in
house. This demonstrates her emerging writing skills
and developing phonological awareness. Using the
blueprints for the towers also provides insight into how
she is reading images to create and interpret her world.

210 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
6.4i Assessment Practices for Communicating with
Families

Early childhood is an exciting time for capturing young
learners' emerging literacy performances and for sharing
children's growth with family members and other relevant
stakeholders (e.g., special educators, psychologists, other
educators, and program administrators). Children continually
acquire new insights about how language works, how text
conveys meaning, and how their drawings, scribbles, and
letters work to communicate their ideas to others. Young
children's literacy expressions are numerous and rapidly
evolving. Therefore, educators need to develop systematic ways
for gathering children's literacy performances and sharing their
efforts with others. Strong assessment practices inform
conversations with parents, colleagues, and other professionals
as they consider how to best support children in their
development. Documentation panels and portfolio
assessments are two holistic assessment practices educators
can use to illuminate children's emergent literacy
performances. These assessment tools encourage educators to
use strengths-based assessment practices, invite children to
actively reflect on their own learning, and celebrate children's
growth by making children's literacy understandings visible to
themselves and others.

            6.4i1 Documentation panels. Documentation panels
provide a public space for sharing children's work, posting
children's plans, and capturing the questions the children want
to resolve. Documentation panels are a unique assessment tool
designed to explicitly capture a curricular project as it unfolds.
The practice seeks to make learning visible and stems from the
Reggio Emilia philosophy. Traditionally, children and educators
used bulletin boards, blank walls, and hall spaces for posting

             Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 211
timelines of collaborative explorations. Today, digital photo
journals and other electronic platforms also provide
meaningful spaces for sharing and documenting children's
explorations while taking up minimal space in the classroom.
Documentation panels differ from the other assessment
practices discussed in this chapter, in that the children take an
active role in creating the panels and are encouraged to use
the practice as a way of synthesizing their thinking about a
particular topic.

            Children and educators use documentation panels to
explore numerous topics and ideas that frequently emerge
from children's own wonderings or interests. For example, the
Time Sampling assessment detailed in Figure 6.4g ended with
Aleksandra asking the educator to take a photo of the "farm"
she created. Aleksandra's sustained focus on building the farm
offered a possible starting place for engaging in an extended
exploration of life on a farm. By pausing to preserve
Aleksandra's work and photograph it for later reference, Ms.
Hamilton and Aleksandra have started documenting the
experience. Together they can brainstorm how to invite other
children into their exploration and begin adding to her tower
work.

            Over time, the documentation panels accumulate
collections of children's artifacts honoring children's
investigative work. Artifacts such as children's drawings,
responses to shared books, lists of books explored,
photographs of block cities or sidewalk chalk art, educator's
annotations, children's dictations, question boards, and more
illustrate children's literacy performances and document their
learning journey. In this way, the power of children's emergent
literacy performances become a central assessment tool for
driving curricular explorations and empowering children as
learners. To promote the dynamic power of documentation
panels, educators encourage children to share what they are
wondering and invite children to identify what they want to

212 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
learn more about. Then, in collaboration with children,
educators use documentation panels to set learning goals and
support children's interests by intentionally embedding
literacy-rich exploration opportunities.

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 213
Documentation panels describe children's curricular experiences,
such as color explorations during wheel painting.

214 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
            6.4i2 Portfolios. Portfolio assessment practices
encourage educators to integrate a variety of ongoing
assessment practices to capture children's learning and
development over time. Portfolios come in a variety of forms
and serve a variety of purposes. Educators create emergent
literacy portfolios to store evidence of children's literacy
expressions. Any of the assessment tools discussed throughout
this chapter are relevant portfolio artifacts. Portfolios offer
educators and children a tangible way to capture, monitor, and
evaluate children's diverse literacy enactments. Accordingly,
portfolios are typically child specific and educators can work
with children to select artifacts they would like to keep to share
as evidence of their learning. When educators invite children
to be a part of the portfolio assessment practice, it empowers
children and encourages them to be active and engaged
learners.

            Digital portfolio platforms linked to assessment
systems like Learning Systems GOLD or AEPSi are becoming
more common in early care and education centers.
Commercially available portfolio systems ease educators'
efforts organizing diverse assessment artifacts and support
educators' analysis of children's development through defined
learning progressions. When early care and education
programs use a common digital portfolio assessment system, it
is easier to share children's learning with relevant stakeholders
including families, other educators and early care professionals,
and state agencies. Digital portfolios also expand educators'
efforts engaging in program evaluations. Moreover, portfolio
assessment systems establish a common assessment
language for reflecting on children's growth and allows
educators across age levels to collaboratively analyze
assessment data to make strategic decisions regarding
curricular practices.

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 215
               Digital Portfolio Assessment Platforms are
                                       Appealing

          Digital Portfolios are
             Easily shared with relevant stakeholders
             Demand minimal classroom storage space
             Allow children and educators to preserve
                numerous artifacts and assessment records
             Offer meaningful assessment artifacts for
                families focused on understanding their child's
                growth

     Pause and Consider: Preparing for a Literacy Conference

        This chapter examined a number of assessment tools
     educators use to inform their understandings of
     children's emergent literacy progression. The chapter's
     opening vignette introduced you to Mr. Costello and his
     use of observational notes. The following vignette
     extends the narrative with Mr. Costello. As you read,
     identify the portfolio artifacts Mr. Costello will share
     with Isabella's parents to show how Isabella uses her
     emerging literacy skills in diverse and personally
     relevant ways throughout her school day.

216 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
   Mr. Costello is preparing for a conference with
Isabella's parents. He turns to review a set of artifacts
he has collected over the first part of the year. The
artifacts include the following items:

   1) photographs of Isabella painting in the art center,

   2) a video of Isabella retelling her favorite book to a
f riend,

   3) a menu she created as a prop for the new
restaurant the children created in the kitchen area
after he read aloud Dim Sum for Everyone, by Grace
Lin (2001), and

   4) focused anecdotal notes and checklists he
maintained when working with children in small
groups or individual teaching moments. One of his
anecdotal notes reveals Isabella demonstrated
confidence generating rhyming words as part of a
hopscotch game on the playground (bat and cat, see
and bee, duck and truck).

   Before reading on, consider what each assessment
you noticed reveals about Isabella's emergent literacy
development?

   Now consider the following assessment possibilities.
The photograph and the menu provide insight into
Isabella's emergent writing practices. The photograph
reveals insight regarding Isabella's fine motor
development, including handedness, grip, and control
with diverse writing instruments. The menu
demonstrates Isabella knows that writing is used to
reach a particular audience, has purpose, and can take
on a variety of forms. Isabella's printed text also shows
her emerging skills with the alphabetic principle,

      Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 217
     phonological awareness, fine motor control, and
     automaticity with letter formation. The video of Isabella
     retelling Dim Sum for Everyone provides evidence of
     Isabella's comprehension of storylines, integrations of
     new vocabulary words, and perhaps how she relates
     personally to the text.

            Collectively, the assessment strategies described
across this chapter offer educators a variety of ways to
intentionally notice and attend to children's emergent literacy
practices. To effectively integrate ongoing assessment
practices, educators begin with one tool and systematically
add new assessment tools to their repertoires. Over time,
educators build their confidence using, analyzing, and
discussing children's performances becoming assessment
literate.

     Key Takeaways

        Using diverse assessment tools to accumulate
     information capturing children's interests,
     understandings, and goals across all developmental
     domains (i.e., social, emotional, cognitive, and physical)
     allows educators to make informed instructional
     decisions about future curricular experiences (Kidd et
     al., 2019). Educators use their knowledge of the child,
     the curriculum, and literacy milestones when selecting
     an assessment tool to document a child's literacy
     expressions. In early childhood contexts, play-based

218 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
assessments capture children's literacy expressions as
they interact with materials, peers, educators, and
other adults in literacy rich environments. Ongoing,
intentional, and child-centric assessment practices
promote equity by honoring individuals' literacy
progressions in meaningful ways. As Mr. Costello
illustrated, diverse assessment practices yield rich and
nuanced understandings of a child's emerging
literacies.

Additional Resources

   Early Childhood Assessment, Curriculum, and
Program Evaluation Position Statement, National
Association for Education of Young Children
https://www.naeyc.org/sites/default/files/globally-
shared/downloads/PDFs/resources/position-
statements/pscape.pdf

   Promoting Positive Outcomes for Children with
Disabilities: Recommendations for Curriculum
Assessment and Program Evaluation Position
Statement, Division for Early Childhood of the Council
of Exceptional Children https://www.decdocs.org/
position-statement-promoting-positi

       Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 219
                            References

Black, P., & William, D. (2010). Inside the black box: Raising
   standards through classroom assessment. Phi Delta Kappan,
   92(1), 81-90. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 003172171009200119.

Brassard, M. R., & Boehm, A. E. (2007). Preschool assessment:
   Principles and practices. Guilford Press.

Brown, J., & Rolfe, S. A. (2005). Use of child development
   assessment in early childhood education: Early childhood
   practitioner and student attitudes toward formal and
   informal testing. Early Child Development and Care, 175(3),
   193-202. https://doi.org/10.1080/0300443042000266240

Coyne, D. M., & Harn, A. B. (2006). Promoting beginning reading
   success through meaningful assessment of early literacy
   skills. Psychology in the Schools, 43(1), 33-43. https://doi.org/
   10.1002/pits.20127

Epstein, A. S., Schweinhart, L. J., DeBruin-Parecki, A., & Robin,
   K. B. (2004). Preschool assessment: A guide to developing
   a balanced approach. National Institute for Early Education
   Research; High/Scope Educational Research Foundation.

Gilliam, W. S., & Frede, E. (2015). Accountability and program
   evaluation in early education. In R. C. Pianta, W. S. Barnett,
   S. M. Sheridan, & L. M. Justice (Eds.), Handbook of early
   childhood education (pp.73-91). Guilford Publications.

Ivernizzi, M., Landrum, J. T., Teichman, A., & Townsend, M. (2010).
   Increased implementation of emergent literacy screening in
   pre-kindergarten. Early Childhood Education, 37, 437-446.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10643-009-0371-7

Kidd, J. K., Burns, M. S., & Ilham, N. (2019). Promoting intentional
   teaching: The learn professional development model for early
   childhood educators. Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Linder, T. (2008). Transdisciplinary play-based assessment (2nd
   ed.). Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Lonigan, C. J. (2006). Development, assessment, and promotion

220 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
   of preliteracy skill. Early Education and Development, 17(1),
   91-114. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15566935eed1701_5
McLean, M., Banerjee, R., Squires, J., & Hebbeler, K. (2020).
   Assessment: Recommended practices for young children
   and families. Division for Early Childhood of the Council for
   Exceptional Children.
Mindes, G., & Jung, L. A. (2018). Assessing young children.
   Pearson Education.
National Association for the Education of Young Children &
   National Association of Early Childhood Specialists in State
   Departments of Education. (2003). Early childhood
   curriculum, assessment, and program evaluation: Building
   an effective, accountable system in programs for children
   birth through age 8. https://www.naeyc.org/sites/default/
   files/globally-shared/downloads/PDFs/resources/position-
   statements/pscape.pdf
National Research Council. (1998). Preventing reading
   difficulties in young children. (C.E. Snow, M.S. Burns, & P.
   Griffin, Eds.). National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2008). Early childhood assessment:
   Why, what, and how (C. E. Snow & S. B. Van Hemel, Eds.). The
   National Academies Press.
Navarrete, C., Wilde, J., Nelson, C., Martinez, R., & Hargett, G.
   (1990). Informal assessment in educational evaluation:
   Implications for bilingual education programs. National
   Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education.
Ohio Department of Education. (2010). Catalog of screening
   and assessment instruments for young children birth
   through age 5 (2nd ed.). https://www.escneo.org/Downloads/
   Catalog_Screen_assessment2.pdf
Piker, R. A., & Jewkes, A. M. (2013). Assessing young children's
   learning. In R. Reutzel (Ed.), Handbook of research-based
   practice in early education (pp. 250-271). Guilford Press.
Popham, J. W. (2011). Assessment literacy overlooked: A teacher

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 221
   educator's confession. The Teacher Educator, 46, 265-273.
   https://doi.org/10.1080/08878730.2011.605048
Rosko, K. (2004). Early literacy assessment-Thoughtful, sensible,
   and good. The Reading Teacher, 58(1), 91-94.
Shepard, K., Kagan, S. L., & Wurtz K. E. (1998). Principles and
   recommendations for early childhood assessments. National
   Education Goals Panel.
Simon, L. V., Hashmi, M. F., & Bragg, B. N. (2021). APGAR score.
   StatPearls Publishing LLC. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
   books/NBK470569/
Virginia Department of Education. (2021). Virginia's early
   learning & development standards (ELDS): Birth-five learning
   guidelines. https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
   curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

            Children's Literature Referenced

Lin, G. (2001). Dim Sum for everyone! Random House Children's
   Books.

Martin, B., Archambault, J., & Charles, R. (1989). Chicka chicka
   boom boom. Little Simon.

                   Assessment References

Bricker, D., Capt, B., & Pretti-Frontczak, K. (2002). Assessment,
   evaluation, and programming system for infants and
   children (2nd ed.). Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Brigance, A. H. (2004). Brigance diagnostic inventory of early
   development (3rd ed.). Curriculum Associate.

Invernizzi, M., Sullivan, A., Swank, L., & Meier, J. (2004). PALS
   pre-K: Phonological awareness literacy screening for
   preschoolers (2nd ed.). University Printing Services.

222 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
Linder, T. (2008). Transdisciplinary play-based assessment (2nd
   ed.). Brookes Publishing.

Mardell, C., & Goldenberg, D. S. (2011). Developmental indicators
   for the assessment of learning (4th ed.). Pearson Assessment.

Newborg, J. (200.). The Battelle developmental inventory (3rd
   ed.). Riverside Insights.

Squires, J., & Bricker, D. (2009). ASQ-3: Ages & stages
   questionnaires (3rd ed.). Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Teaching Strategies (2011). Teaching Strategies GOLD:
   Assessment system.

https://teachingstrategies.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/
   GOLD-Tech-Summary-8-18-2011.pdf

                          Image Credits

Figure 6.1: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Connection
   Between Assessment." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 6.2: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Screening and
   Readiness." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 6.3: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Diagnostic." CC
   BY 2.0.

Figure 6.4: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Progress
   Monitoring." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 6.5: Leslie La Croix. "Example of an Anecdotal Note." CC
   BY 2.0.

Figure 6.6: Leslie La Croix. "Example of a Running Record." CC
   BY 2.0.

Figure 6.7: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Observational
   Checklist." CC BY 2.0.

Figure 6.8: Leslie La Croix. "Event Sampling." CC BY 2.0.
Figure 6.9: Leslie La Croix. "Time Sampling." CC BY 2.0.
Additional Images
Image, Section 6.2: Longwood University. [Educator Analyzing

   Assessment Data] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

            Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices | 223
   Image, Section 6.2: Lucy La Croix. [Bird] CC BY 2.0.
   Image, Section 6.3 & 6.4: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.
Image, Section 6.3b2: Longwood University. [Educator Engaged
   in Observation] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 6.3c: Longwood University. [Formative
   Assessment Practices: Informing Instructional Supports] CC
   BY-NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 6.4b: emdot. "Commuting Through Bike Town."
   CC BY 2.0. (Retrieved from https://www.flickr.com/photos/
   emdot/15089676/in/photostream/)
Image, Section 6.4h: Longwood University. [Child Building With
   Tower Image Plans] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 6.4i1: Longwood University. [Documentation
   Panel Capturing Children's Experiences Wheel Painting] CC
   BY-NC-SA 2.0.

224 | Understanding Emergent Literacy Assessment Practices
7. Language
Development:
Promoting Speaking,
Listening &
Communicating

      "Language is the most powerful instrument of human
                                        progress."
                                                                     Maria Montessori

   7.1 Introduction
   7.2 Conceptualizing Language Development
   7.3 Components of Language
   7.4 Developmental Patterns of Language
   7.5 Language Differences in Children
   7.6 Strategies to Support and Promote Language
Development

     Opening Vignette: Block Tower

        Eighteen-month old Mark settled into a day of
     learning after being dropped off. He greeted his
     teacher, Ms. Claudia (quick hug), and said "Hi" as he
     looked expectantly at his classmates in the block area.
     At one point, he put his hand out, clenching and

                                                            Language Development | 225
     unclenching as he reached for a large rectangular
     block. When Mark was finished with his block tower, he
     said, "Look!" and pointed to it, smiling proudly while
     looking at the teacher. As Ms. Claudia looked and
     smiled, he said, "I did it" and knocked the blocks to the
     ground while laughing.

7.1 Introduction

            Speaking, listening, and communicating are vital to
our ability to connect with the world. A baby's first words are
often cause for celebration. Pointing and gesturing create
opportunities for adults to meet a child's needs and see the
resulting satisfaction on the child's face. In addition to verbal
words, there may be sign language, and important pragmatic
gestures such as kissing on the cheek when greeting, or raising
or lowering one's eyes. These language exchanges not only
foster understanding, but they are also social interactions that
may create or strengthen bonds. Unquestionably, the ability to
communicate rests upon the ability to express oneself, receive
information, and to negotiate the social aspects of
communication. In the example of Mark and Ms. Claudia, we
see several components of language displayed. We see that
Mark is using some words and phrases (hi, look, I did it) as well
as communicating his wishes nonverbally through pointing
and motioning toward the blocks. Mark also communicated
using facial expressions and eye contact. This chapter will
explore the following questions:

226 | Language Development
                          How         is

language conceptualized?

What are the components of language?

                          How does children's language progress on a
continuum of development?

                          How do individual differences influence
language development?

                          What can early childhood educators do to
promote children's language development?

                       Figure 7.1 "Nested Literacy Model"

                          Language Development | 227
7.2 Conceptualizing Language Development

            Language can be understood as a series of meaningful
exchanges to communicate information, including sounds and
sign language (Vygotsky, 1986). Toppelberg and Shapiro (2000)
indicate language is comprised of sounds, the way these
sounds are organized into words or parts of words, the
organization of concepts being communicated, and language
usage. This definition can be expanded to include expressive
and receptive signals and the exchange between language
partners. Receptive language reflects what a child is taking in
as information is passed to them. Productive and expressive
language are terms that are used interchangeably to indicate
that the child is creating their own signals to communicate.
Finally, there is a transactional component to language that
includes not only the speaker's intent, but also the receiver's
ability to comprehend what is being said, and the signals that
indicate that the information has been received. Language is
verbal and non-verbal, developing before a child is even born.

228 | Language Development
Theoretically and practically, language is a reflection of our
cognition and a mechanism that helps us solve problems.
Language emerges from our environment, and we use it as
a medium both to understand (other people and ourselves)
and to be understood. It is cultural, nested in our context, and
because it fosters our ability to connect with others, deeply
profound. Researchers and theorists explore a variety of
questions when considering how language develops in
children.

                                 7.2a Is Language Innate?

            Nativist theory suggests that we are prewired to learn
language through an invisible framework, acting as an internal
map. Noam Chomsky (1968), who invented this theory, believed
that human language is complex and we could not learn it
unless we already had a pre-existing physiological structure to
prepare us. In effect, Chomsky is suggesting that we have an
inborn structure for language, in the same way that we have
a skeleton providings structure for our physical growth and
development. Chomsky called this the "Language Acquisition
Device." As evidence for his theory, Chomsky points to the fact
that all over the world, humans develop language patterns
with similar features such as verbs and nouns, called universal
grammar. When children are exposed to language, it activates
the language acquisition device, but our propensity for
language is pre-existing. In fact, Chomsky describes language
development as one would describe physical growth, as
opposed to how one would describe learning. Chomsky is

                                                            Language Development | 229
essentially saying that although the environment is important,
it is only strengthening something that already exists. This
theory of language development is heavily focused on the
biological, or nature, part of development.

         7.2b Does Language Have

Stages?

            According to Piaget's Cognitive Developmental theory
(Piaget, 1962), as the child grows and develops, they moves
through normative, or predictable stages of growth. This
growth process allows and compels children to build their own
internal categories and rules of language. These internal
structures, called schemes, become more complex as children
interact with their environment to construct their knowledge.
One illustration of this is that a child's understanding of the
rules of language change and become more sophisticated as
the child develops cognitively. For example, young children
have a tendency to overregularize a word, such as calling all
four-legged animals, "doggie." Eventually, as their cognitive
schema becomes more complex, they recognize that four-
legged animals have other distinguishable characteristics and
can differentiate animals using this knowledge. Language
then, is a display of the child's cognitive understanding.
Language development reflects a complex interplay of
opportunities and experiences. Accordingly, there are wide
ranges in when children acquire or demonstrate particular
language skills.

230 | Language Development
                                      7.2c Does Social Interaction
Create Language? (NEST)

Children learn language through social interaction.

            Language helps us to connect with others and
communicate our thoughts and purposes. Language is a series
of social transactions. Lev Vygotsky (1986) described this
process in his seminal work, Thought and Language, where
he indicates that children have social exchanges of meaning
that help them to unite their ideas and speech, termed verbal
thought. In this series of cooperative exchanges, adults support
children by preparing, creating, and providing environments
and events. These transactions become pivotal to how children

                                                             Language Development | 231
construct their learning with the helpful support of a
conversational partner. Children may be serving as the more
experienced partner as they engage in transactions with less
experienced peers or learn new expressions from their
interactions with others. Vygotsky might argue that using
"doggie" to describe all four legged animals creates
opportunities to hear other animal names through social
interaction. Indeed the act of conversation itself might help the
child learn to self-correct and expand their understanding over
time. Vygotsky also indicates that this language learning takes
place in a social context, influencing how and where children
learn to apply their verbal thoughts to interactions. In the
Vygotskian view, language is less a reflection of learning, than a
tool for solving problems, socialization, and completing tasks.

                                 7.2d How Is Language
Reinforced In The Environment?

            Behaviorism theory of language development
(Skinner, 1957) suggests that children learn about
communication through a series of interactions where the
sounds they make, the words they produce, and the gestures
they use, are resultant from imitation and subsequent
reinforcement. This reinforcement, whether positive, negative,
or neutral, directs the language a child values and replicates.
Children may produce utterances at random, but when we
give children positive cues, it strengthens the likelihood that
the child will repeat those utterances intentionally (Menn &
Stoel-Gammon, 2005). For example, a babbling infant who says,

232 | Language Development
"mamamamama" may be reinforced by an enthusiastic
mother who smiles and becomes animated as she says, "That's
right! Mama!" In other words, the feedback cues in the child's
environment influence their language development.

     Pause and Consider: Is Language a Reflection or a Tool?

        Five-year-old Hassan sat on the floor with both feet
     pushed into untied shoes. As he handled the laces, he
     said aloud, "First you loop the bunny ears, and then you
     fold them over. Pull it...Ah! I have to try again." The
     teacher came over and asked Hassan, "Do you want
     help?" He replied, "I can do it." The teacher then
     encouraged Hassan to keep trying. After several
     iterations of trying to make bunny-eared shoelaces into
     tied shoes, Hassan was successful. Upon noticing

                                                            Language Development | 233
     Hassan's tied shoes, his teacher exclaimed, "You did it!
     Great job hanging in there. You kept trying until you
     did it." As you consider Hassan's words, can you see
     ages and stages reflected in his vocabulary? In this
     instance was the language being used as a reflection of
     Hassan's thoughts? Or was it a tool that helped Hassan
     to complete the task? What was the role of the social
     interaction between Hassan and his teacher?

7.3 Components of Language

            Language can be broken into four domains:
phonology, grammar, semantics, and pragmatics. These four
areas refer to the sounds of language (phonology), how the
sounds are put together (phonology and grammar), the
meaning/content (semantics), and the use of the language
(pragmatics) (Bloom & Lahey, 1978). Each of these domains
includes the expectation that the language users will produce,
receive, and comprehend the language.

7.3a Phonology

            Phonology is the ability to distinguish and create the
sounds of language (Bloom & Lahey, 1978). Phonemes are the
smallest units of language, representing individual sounds. For
example, the word "chip" has three phonemes: /ch/ /i/ /p/. Each
of these three sounds is a phoneme. A phoneme focuses on the
sound only, without regard for the letter or letter combinations.
It is simply the components of sound that we hear in language.
Children display phonemic awareness by attending to these
sounds, demonstrating the ability to hear and isolate them.

234 | Language Development
Phonics is the area of phonology that emerges last, as children
match sounds to letters and groups of letters.

7.3b Grammar

            Grammar is the combination of how individual words
and sounds are combined to express meaning (Bates et al,
1992). Grammar rules guide how words are combined to
communicate information. Grammar includes morphology
and syntax. Morphology focuses on the structure within the
word, and allows for the creation of complex words and
phrases. For example, many words can be made plural by
adding "s" to the end of a word (e.g., bird and birds).
Morphemes are the smallest units of language that contain
meaning. Some prefixes and suffixes of words contain their
own meaning, such as "un" or "ing" in the words, "undo,"
"untie," or "doing," "tying." Young children frequently make
mistakes in this area by applying a morphological rule in all
instances (Bates et al., 1992). For example, a child might say, "I
saw the deers" (plural /s/) or "I wented there" (past-tense /ed/).
These rules are complex and numerous and children apply
these rules as best as they can given the constraints of what
they have already learned. Syntax governs our grammatical
structures such as word order and phrasing. The meaning of
"Mommy feeds Brother" is different than "Brother feeds
Mommy." Infants show recognition of word order changes
(Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith, 2001), and eventually learn to
express word order differently to vary their message. A child
may say, "Mommy phone" to simply indicate that the phone
belongs to mom, or may say, "Phone Mommy" to indicate the
phone is lighting up or ringing. A father volunteering in a room
of four-year-olds will find that he is universally addressed by his
child's classmates as "Isaiah's dad." The use of the /s/ to indicate
possession on the end of Isaiah is a morpheme. "The child's

                                                            Language Development | 235
understanding that the order of the two words is `Isaiah's dad'
as opposed to "dad Isaiah's" is a usage of syntax.

7.3c Semantics

            Semantics is the study of meaning, including
vocabulary (Bates et al., 1992). Semantics may focus on the
significance of an individual word or the meaning of particular
words in the context of an entire sentence. As an illustration,
the word "friend" may be a noun, as in "I have a friend." Friend
may also be a verb when speaking about social media, "I will
friend you." The meanings have some similarities, representing
a connection to another person, but the usage creates a
difference in whether we are speaking about the actual person
or speaking about the connection to the person. Semantics
also include nonverbal aspects of words such as intonation and
gestures. For example, "whatever" can be an innocuous answer
denoting many possibilities, "What can I eat from the snack
table?" "Whatever." In this case, it indicates that the child is
welcome to eat anything from the table. With a change of
pitch and emphasis and tone of voice, "whatever" can signal
strong disapproval. "I didn't know I was not allowed to have
that." "Whatever!" Vocabulary building is a crucial part of
learning and understanding semantics. Infants will not
comprehend everything that they hear in the early months and
weeks, but they will notice the way that words are delivered
and the corresponding content. Exposure to rich opportunities
normalizes the use of the words introduced, which are of
course, entirely contextual. For example, three-year-old Alyssa
was given the choice between naptime with her bear and her
blanket, or her book and her blanket. In response, she told
her mother, "I want another `ternative." Alyssa has learned that
the vocabulary word, "alternative" is used to indicate a choice,
and she can use the word "alternative" even when she cannot
pronounce it. The variety of words that children are exposed

236 | Language Development
to, and how they are drawn into conversations, influences
individual differences in the rates at which children learn words
(Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith, 2001). The quantity and quality of
opportunities matter deeply. All children are exposed to the
language the adults around them choose for them, which is
why it is important that early learning settings provide rich
and varied opportunities for children to be exposed to word
meanings and word usage.

7.3d Pragmatics

            Pragmatics is the social or transactional use of
language, including context of the conversation. It
encompasses not just what we say, but how we say it and to
whom (Bates et al, 1992). Pragmatics includes rules of courtesy,
turn taking, and the practical aspect of communication.
Knowing that you should answer a question when a question
is asked, is an example of pragmatics. Another instance would
be knowing that one should stay silent in particular situations
or stay on topic during a conversation. Using different
communicative styles that suit different language partners is
a key component of pragmatics. One may greet a friend by
saying, "Hey!" But, one greets a boss by saying, "Good morning."
Pragmatics can also be non-verbal, such as in the use of eye
contact. Children may learn at an early age that an appropriate
greeting would be to kiss someone once on each cheek or to
nod politely. These expectations include an understanding of
culture and of conversational role. For example, a child may
recognize over time that family members or others with a
shared heritage should be greeted with the cheek-kiss
greeting, but that someone outside of this would be greeted
differently. Essentially, pragmatics includes the ability to
predict and notice cues from the other person, including
words, gestures, and non-verbal cues, and to react accordingly.

                                                            Language Development | 237
     Pause and Consider: I no like it: go-fish.

        Two and a half year old Imani wandered over to the
     table, where snack was being prepared. She noticed
     orange goldfish-shaped crackers being poured out
     onto a paper napkin. She wrinkled her nose, shook her
     head and emphatically said, "I no like it: go-fish." She
     walked over to the teacher, put her hand on the
     teacher's arm, and protested, "I no like it: go-fish!" The
     teacher acknowledged Imani and said, "You do not like
     goldfish. We have pretzels too." Imani shouted, "Petzas!
     Petzas!" The teacher then replied, "I will give you
     pretzels."

        Imani's manner of expression is dictated by her
     relationship with the teacher and the pragmatic
     conversational patterns that they have already
     established. When Imani placed her hand on the
     teacher's arm, she was signaling the importance of her
     message. The meaning of "Petzas" denotes a semantic
     understanding about what Imani wants. As you
     consider Imani's language exchange, how is phonology
     reflected in Imani's pronunciation? How is her
     understanding of grammar evident in her word choice
     and order?

7.4 Developmental Patterns of Language

            Children acquire language at their own pace,
mastering the components of language as they develop. The

238 | Language Development
entirety of their developmental journey is filled with cues that
they give to and receive from others. Children's individual
development has biological, environmental, and contextual
influences. This voyage is profoundly different for each child
based on their language experiences, which impart meaning
to their attempts at communication. Even with individual
differences, there are some predictable patterns. Language
development occurs as children develop receptive and
expressive language in ways that foster social communication,
and there are identifiable stages or windows of growth.

7.4a Receptive Language

            Receptive language can be defined as "how we receive
information and understand words and their meaning"
(Virginia Department of Education, 2021). For the purpose of
this textbook, receptive language is the ability to understand
information transmitted by others. This includes
understanding the words or sentences one hears as well as the
meaning of what is communicated through gestures or signs,
or in written form. Receptive language implies comprehension
of the material being received, and it develops prior to
expressive language (Bloom & Lahey, 1978). We generally
understand more words than we use. All humans have more
receptive than productive vocabulary, whether using their
home or a new language (Cleci-Murcia & Oshtain, 2001).
Receptive language requires knowledge of the meaning of the
gestures or words being communicated (McGuiness, 2005).

                                                            Language Development | 239
Children develop receptive language prior to expressive language.

            There is some evidence that we do respond to sounds
prenatally, indicating that receptive language begins before
birth. Babies in utero may sometimes respond to a loud noise,
suggesting that they can hear (Marno et al., 2016). In addition
to sound, there is evidence that babies are learning patterns
of speech and react in the womb by kicking or demonstrating
elevated heart rate (Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith, 2001). This
early exposure results in a preference for language or native
tongue of the mother in a newborn (Marno et al, 2016). Babies
show a change in their heart rate when a speaker uses their
mother's native tongue compared to a speaker using a
different language (Minai et al, 2017). Newborns even change
their thumb-sucking rhythm and pattern in response to the
language and the speakers they hear (Karmiloff & Karmiloff-
Smith, 2001).

            Parents engage infants in language that differs from
other points in the life cycle. They speak to babies using high-
pitched voices with exaggerated pronunciation and

240 | Language Development
movements (Koester & Lahti-Harper, 2010). This child directed
speech is also referred to as motherese or parentese, although
it is used by other adults besides parents. Hearing infants
respond to child directed speech with greater alertness and
exclamatory sounds. Parents who use sign language also
demonstrate a form of child directed speech with exaggerated
movements and facial expressions (Masataka, 1996). Child
directed speech is purposeful, and demonstrates attentiveness
toward the infant (Koester & Lahti-Harper, 2010), but it is
impossible to truly say if it is occurring because the parent
initiates or the child elicits the exaggerated response. Either
way, it is clear that there is something innate about our desire
and capacity for connection which is reinforced in our early
communication attempts. In other words, we bring our
preadapted language capacity into the world, and the
environment in turn shapes our development in these areas.

            During infancy the child amasses an understanding
of the sounds required for the language they are exposed to.
Children are born with the capacity to produce and distinguish
the sounds required for all languages, though they prefer their
home language (Marno et al, 2016). Within one year, their brains
begin to strengthen the connections they need to support
their home language, and prune away or disuse the
connections that do not help them meet their communicative
goals. By 10 months of age, their ability to distinguish among
sounds that are not in their home language has diminished
(Conboy & Kuhl, 2011), though this loss does not occur in their
native tongue. This process of distinguishing the sounds of
one's native language strengthens the ability to learn language
overall (Kuhl et al, 2005). Receptive language is developmental,
and benchmark timeframes overlap each other as seen in the
tables below.

   Table 7.1 "Developmental Progression: Receptive Language"

                                                             Language Development | 241
       Developmental Progression: Receptive
                             Language

242 | Language Development
Developmental Progression  CLLD1.2 Using Vocabulary and
                           Nonverbal Cues to
Early Infancy              Communicate
   0-8 months
                              Responds to speaker by
                                 turning head or shifting eye
                                 gaze (CLLD1.1a)

                              Responds to tone or voice
                                 changes (CLLD1.1b)

                              Directs attention to sounds
                                 or object pointed at/to
                                 (CLLD1.1c)

                              Responds by looking when
                                 name is called (CLLD1.1d)

Later Infancy               Follows simple requests
   6-14 months                paired with gestures
                              (CLLD1.1e)

                            Begins to respond through
                              sounds or gestures to
                              others' questions (CLLD1.1f)

                            Makes different sounds to
                              get attention (CLLD1.1g)

                            Understands and responds
                              to simple commands and
                              gestures (e.g., shared eye
                              gaze/contact; may be
                              influenced by cultural
                              expectations) (CLLD1.1h)

                            Recognizes common
                              objects when named (e.g.,
                              cup) (CLLD1.1i)

                            Begins to show
                              understanding of
                              approximately 50 words
                              (CLLD1.1j)

                           Language Development | 243
Early Toddler                Uses sounds or nonverbal
   12-24 Months                cues to respond to oral
                               reading (CLLD1.1k)
Later Toddler
   22-36 Months              Responds to simple
                               requests (CLLD1.1l)

                             Identifies familiar people,
                               animals, and objects
                               (CLLD1.1m)

                             Begins to understand nouns
                               (CLLD1.1n)

                             Begins to understand action
                               words (e.g., hop, jump, press,
                               go, stop) (CLLD1.1o)

                             Completes a task in
                               response to a request (e.g.,
                               pick up your cup, go find
                               your coat) (CLLD1.1p)

                             Identifies familiar people,
                               animals, and objects (using
                               gestures, words, or sounds)
                               (CLLD1.1q)

                             Begins to recognize some
                               body parts (CLLD1.1r)

                             Understands and responds
                               to some pronouns (mine,
                               you, me) (CLLD1.1s)

                             Listens to and attends to
                               spoken language and
                               read-aloud texts (CLLD1.1t)

                             Follows simple and short
                               directions for routine
                               practices (CLLD1.1u)

                             Understands and responds
                               to several hundred words or
                               more (CLLD1.1v)

                             Understands and responds
                               to basic attribute word
                               differences such as personal
                               (I/me/you/it) and possessive
                               (my and mine) pronouns
                               (CLLD1.1)

244 | Language Development
Early Preschool   Demonstrates
   34-48 Months     understanding by
                    answering questions
                    (CLLD1.1x)

                  Follows two-step unrelated
                    directions (CLLD1.1y)

                  Understands and responds
                    to spatial concepts (e.g., in/
                    out, under, front, behind)
                    (CLLD1.1z)

Later Preschool   Answers questions and adds
   44-60 Months     comments relevant to the
                    topic (CLLD1.1aa)

                  Begins to demonstrate
                    understanding of implied
                    messages based on
                    speaker's tone and/or
                    gestures (e.g., finger on lip
                    and saying "shhhh" means
                    be quiet) (CLLD1.1ab)

                  Understands and responds
                    to words for descriptive
                    concepts (e.g., hard, square)
                    (CLLD1.1ac)

                  Follows 2-3 step related
                    directions and some new
                    directions related to familiar
                    and daily routines
                    (CLLD1.1ad)

                  Demonstrates
                    understanding of
                    communication that
                    includes a variety of
                    complex sentences related
                    to familiar stories, learning
                    activities, and events (e.g.,
                    After Clifford the dog came
                    home, he played with Emily
                    Elizabeth.) (CLLD1.1ae)

                     Table 7.1 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.

                                                            Language Development | 245
7.4b Productive or Expressive Language

            Productive or expressive language is how we use
vocabulary to describe objects, actions, and events. In this
textbook, expressive language includes the language we
produce to communicate our meaning and messages to
others. This can occur through the use of verbal or non-verbal
sounds, gestures, words, or written language. Expressive
language and productive language are interchangeable terms
that imply that the child is expressing or producing language
for the purpose of having their intent understood. Expressive
language develops later than receptive language (Celci-Murcia
& Oshtain, 2001) and one's expressive or productive vocabulary
is less than receptive vocabulary. As Celci-Murcia & Oshtain
(2001) point out, expressive language usage implies receptive
language mastery, but the reverse is not necessarily true.
Infants show recognition of common daily words long before
they produce their own first words. Children turn their head at
hearing their own name before they can say it, and they will
eagerly clasp and unclasp their hands upon hearing that they
are about to eat a preferred familiar food.

            7.4b1 Preverbal stages of language development.
Language development occurs along a trajectory that begins
with preverbal expression. Productive/expressive language
evolves through stages that move from early sounds to word
formation. Stark (1986) created a framework for describing
expressive language, outlined in the table below.

                       Table 7.2 "Stark's Five-Stage Framework"

246 | Language Development
         Stark's Five-Stage Framework

Stage    Stage Name Age of Onset Characteristics
Stage 1
Stage 2  Reflexive      At birth               Crying
         crying and                            Sneezing
Stage 3  vegetative                            Burping
         sounds

         Cooking and laughter 6-8 weeks        Noises

         Vocal play     Between 17             Consonant
                        and 30                   sounds from
                        weeks                    front of mouth
                                                 such as muh,
                                                 puh, nuh, buh,
                                                 duh,

                                               Some presence
                                                 of vowel sounds

                                               Noises with
                                                 mouth such as
                                                 blowing
                                                 raspberries or
                                                 clicking the
                                                 tongue

Stage 4  Canonical/ reduplicative 7-9 months   Syllables in
                                                 consonant-vowel
                                                 combinations
                                                 (ma-ma-ma)

Stage 5  Non-           10 months              Various
         reduplicative                           consonant-vowel
         babbling                                combinations

                                               Takes on rhythm
                                                 and pitch of
                                                 conversation

Table 7.2 is based on Stark R. E. (1986). Prespeech segmental
                                                          Language Development | 247
   feature development. In Studies in Language Acquisition,
         Fletcher P, Garman M (eds). Cambridge University
                                     Press:149-173.
            Our first vocalizations are cries, beginning at birth, and

reflect our preverbal language production. While it may begin
as an instinct, these early cries let a caregiver know that a baby
is distressed and requires care. This certainly is an early form of
communication. Over time, children add other types of sounds
to their collection whether accidental, such as a sneeze, or
intentional such as a grunt. The first stage reflexive crying and
vegetative sounds, includes vocal cord vibrations, burping, and
blowing, and other sounds made accidentally or on purpose
(Stark, 1986).

            The second stage begins between 6 and 8 weeks and
includes cooing and laughter. Children in this stage sound
a bit like owls as they repeat these vowel sounds over and
over (Menn & Stoel-Gammon, 2005). During this stage, children
begin to laugh and signal their pleasure through use of the
social smile that emerges sometime between 4 and 8 weeks.

            The third stage, vocal play, emerges when children are
between 17 and 30 weeks old. In vocal play children make vowel
sounds and other sounds including consonants or friction
sounds, such as by blowing raspberries or clicking their tongue.
In this stage, children also add consonant sounds to their
cooing, called babbling (Fagan, 2015). These preliminary
attempts, called marginal babbling, see children producing
some consonants with vowel sounds, but without true
syllables. A child may produce consonants at the front of the
mouth, such as "buh", but might not necessarily produce the
vowel sound in a clearly distinguishable way.

            The fourth stage, canonical or reduplicative babbling
emerges when children are between 7 and 9 months old, and
is distinguished from the previous stage by distinct syllable
sounds. Babbling becomes more complex over time, taking on
closer approximations of words, and the rhythms and pitches

248 | Language Development
of the home language (Lipkind et al, 2013). This more complex
version of babbling is called variegated babbling (Gratier, et al,
2015) or canonical babbling (Vihman & Greenlee, 1987).

            The fifth stage, nonreduplicative babbling is the
production of sounds that sound very much like language,
even if the words do not match. Children use distinctive
consonant combinations, and the rhythm and pitch of the
language sounds like speech. In addition, parents and children
engage in communicative exchanges called protoconversation
(Gratier, et al, 2015). Protoconversation occurs when the baby
coos or babbles and the parent responds to the baby. Even
though the conversation may not communicate a particular
meaning, or could appear to be nonsensical, it is actually very
helpful as children are hearing language sounds, learning
about conversational turn taking, and learning that someone
will listen to them.

            7.4b2 Holophrases/single words. Holophrases/single
words appear as children move from babbling to producing
more organized and familiar sounds. The sounds that children
use for babbling, may be sounds that they hear in language
and can mimic, but may also represent their first words (Menn
& Stoel-Gammon, 2005). This may occur even if it is hard to
recognize the word from an adult perspective. Examples of this
may be a sibling's name that is hard to pronounce such as
"La-la" for "Greta" or "Go" for the more difficult to pronounce
"John." In addition, a child may use a word to denote a whole
phrase or intention they are meaning to communicate. For
example, "Fue-da" (an approximation of "afuera" which means
"outside" in Spanish) may communicate that the child wants
to go outside. In a seminal study of parents and children from
three cities, Bates et al, (1994), project that children may utter
their first word as early as eight months, increasing to a
vocabulary of approximately 10 words at the end of the first
year, and 312 words by the time they are at the end of the
second year. Productive language includes signs and gestures,

                                                            Language Development | 249
and as with receptive language development, has a trajectory
that allows for individual differences.

   There are substantial individual differences in language
development over time. Some children show evenly distributed
growth in vocabulary, while other children exhibit a vocabulary
"burst" (Bates et al, 1992). Just as physical development has a
range of normativity (e.g., walking between 10 and 16 months)
language development also has ranges for demonstrating
communication skills, as outlined in the chart below.

            7.4b3 Two-word phrases. Two-word phrases emerge
as children master single words, then start to put them
together in combination, "Me Cookie!" The developmental
range for this is approximately 14 to 24 months with 20 months
reported as the mean age (Bates, et al, 1992). There is a strong
relationship between the development of words and word
combinations, however there are variations in how children
combine words to use language. In previous research,
approximately 20% of children produced combinations of
words with vocabularies under 50 words, while another 15%
of children were not producing any word combinations even
though their vocabularies were between 100 and 300 words
(Bates, et al, 1992). Children typically add words to the two word
combinations in phrases that first appear without grammar
elements (Fenson et al, 1994). For example, when Imani said, "I
no like it: go-fish (goldfish)," this demonstrates how a child uses
short phrases to communicate their ideas without following
grammatical rules.

                             Table 7.3 "Expressive Language"

250 | Language Development
Expressive Language

                               Language Development | 251
Developmental Progression   CLLD1.2 Using Vocabulary and
                            Nonverbal Cues to
Early Infancy               Communicate
   0-8 months
                               Uses sound, inflection, and
                                  gestures to communicate
                                  needs, desires, or emotions
                                  (CLLD1.2a)

                               Cries, coos, babbles, and
                                  makes other sounds
                                  (CLLD1.2b)

                               Reaches and points to
                                  communicate (CLLD1.2c)

Later Infancy                Imitates actions of others as
   6-14 months                 nonverbal communication
                               (CLLD1.2d)

                             Makes vocal or non-vocal
                               protests/demands
                               (CLLD1.2e)

                             Vocalizes or gestures (e.g.,
                               pointing or using sign
                               language) to communicate
                               or to direct adult attention
                               (CLLD1.2f)

                             Participates and initiates
                               communication with family
                               members or familiar others
                               by using consistent sounds,
                               gestures, and some words
                               CLLD1.2g)

252 | Language Development
Early Toddler     Repeats words heard in
   12-24 Months     conversations (CLLD1.2h)

Later Toddler     Makes simple one-word
   22-36 Months     requests such as saying or
                    signing "milk' or "leche"
                    when asking for a drink
                    (CLLD1.2i)

                  Uses vocabulary for familiar
                    items and events (e.g., hat,
                    ball) (CLLD1.2j)

                  Begins to combine words,
                    verbally or through signing
                    (e.g., making requests
                    through two- and multiword
                    use/utterances such as "eat-
                    or comer- `nana'/banana")
                    (CLLD1.2k)

                  Asks short questions and
                    requests clarifications
                    (CLLD1.2l)

                  Speaks in or signs short
                    sentences, and some
                    expanded sentences, and is
                    understood by familiar peers
                    or adults most of the time
                    (CLLD1.2m)

                  Begins to use more diverse
                    types of words, such as color
                    and quantity words (all,
                    some, more, and including
                    numbers) (CLLD1.2n)

                 Language Development | 253
Early Preschool              Begins to use complex
   34-48 Months                sentences and ask simple
                               questions (e.g., "After the
                               gingerbread man ran, he
                               swam on the fox's back.";
                               "What happened to the
                               gingerbread man?")
                               (CLLD1.2o)

                             Answers questions from
                               unfamiliar people including
                               some open-ended
                               questions (CLLD1.2p)

                             Uses adjectives to describe
                               people, objects, or
                               environments (CLLD1.2q)

                             Begins to use prepositions
                               (e.g., in, on) (CLLD1.2r)

Later Preschool              Uses age-appropriate
   44-60 Months                grammar in conversations
                               and increasingly complex
                               phrases and sentences (e.g.,
                               uses irregular past tense
                               verbs such as came, ran, fell,
                               broke, went, told, did)
                               (CLLD1.2s)

                             Answers open-ended
                               questions comfortably
                               (CLLD1.2t)

                             Retells stories and events in
                               sequence with multiple
                               details (e.g., retells The Three
                               Bears noting three chairs,
                               three beds, etc.) (CLLD1.2u)

                    Table 7.3 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.

254 | Language Development
7.4c Social Language

            Language cannot be considered outside of its social
role as the purpose of language is to understand and be
understood. This carries with it the weight of expectations,
hopes, needs, and wishes. How we use sounds, gestures, and
actions to communicate are social in nature. Conversations
after all, must eventually have conversational partners.
Vygotsky emphasized the transactional nature of language as
he considered the influence of the social world on our cognitive
development. Vygotsky emphasized that language was a tool
for learning, rather than merely a reflection of what the child
knows (1986). In fact, the conversational style of those nearest
the child influences their language development as they
mimic those around them. Adult behaviors such as expanding
children's utterances, and recasting and commenting on these
utterances, is helpful for growth. Parents also differ in their
conversational style, and so do siblings. Social language
indicators include things like responding and turn-taking, or
other signs of pragmatic language. Children's language
develops when they have experiences with conversational
partners who engage with them and nurture their growth.

              Table 7.4 "Learning and Engaging in Conversational
                                     Interactions"

                                                            Language Development | 255
    Learning and Engaging in Conversational
                            Interactions

256 | Language Development
Developmental Progression  CLLD1.3 Learning and Engaging
                           in Conversational Interactions
Early Infancy
   0-8 months                 Responds and engages with
                                 an adult or older peer
                                 (CLLD1.3a)

                              Reacts to facial cues and eye
                                 contact (CLLD1.3b)

                              Engages by babbling
                                 (CLLD1.3c)

Later Infancy               Takes turns in "conversation"
   6-14 months                or vocal play with adults
                              (CLLD1.3d)

                            Turns, smiles, and begins to
                              speak when name is spoken
                              (CLLD1.3e)

                            Begins to follow adult
                              pointing or gaze to establish
                              joint attention (e.g. looks
                              across the room when adult
                              points or gazes) (CLLD1.3f)

Early Toddler               Responds with facial
   12-24 Months               expressions, vocalizations,
                              and/or gestures to engage
                              in conversation with others
                              (CLLD1.3g)

Later Toddler               Uses simple verbal
   22-36 Months               responses and nonverbal
                              gestures (CLLD1.3h)

                            Uses words, gestures, signs,
                              and phrases to converse
                              with others (CLLD1.3i)

                            Begins to ask and respond
                              to questions (CLLD1.3j)

                           Language Development | 257
Early Preschool   Continues a conversation
   34-48 Months     through several exchanges
                    with or without adult help
                    (CLLD1.3k)

                  Alternates between speaker/
                    listener roles (CLLD1.3l)

                  Asks and responds to
                    questions (CLLD1.3m)

Later Preschool   Begins to match language
   44-60 Months     to contexts (e.g., voice
                    volume, inflection/rise and
                    fall of voice in speaking, and
                    parting/greeting rituals)
                    (CLLD1.3n)

                  Engages in multiple
                    back-and-forth
                    conversations with adults in
                    ways that can be goal
                    directed (such as solving
                    problems) (CLLD1.3o)

                  Asks and responds to
                    questions with accurate
                    information (CLLD1.4p)

                    Table 7.4 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.

7.5 Language Differences in Children

            Developmental language progression tables show
typical patterns of language acquisition. However, many
children's language abilities develop according to different
timelines. Common areas of language differences might
include children who are multilingual learners, children who
are deaf or hard of hearing, and children who have autism.

258 | Language Development
Some children may exhibit language delays or speech delays
and show marked differences in how and when they
communicate. Understanding the typical developmental
patterns allows educators to recognize when additional
intervention service providers may need to be engaged. While
early childhood teachers should not be expected to diagnose
language delays, familiarity with language development does
help teachers to determine when to suggest a referral for an
evaluation and how to contextualize children's language
attempts and proficiency.

7.5a Children Who Are Multilingual Learners

Multilingual children learn to think in more than one language.

            Children who begin learning more than one language
prior to the age of five are defined as dual language learners
(McManis, 2012). This text uses the term multilingual learners
because it is more inclusive and recognizes that some children

                                                            Language Development | 259
may speak more than two languages across their home,
school, and community environments. Some children are
exposed to more than one language from birth, and others are
introduced to a new language upon entry to an early learning
setting (Castro, Garcia, & Marcos, 2013; Genessee, 2010). English
Language Learner is another term used to describe a child
who is immersed in English at formal school entry or later
and whose home language is not English (Halle et al, 2012). In
other words, when the exposure to a different language occurs
during the preschool years and younger, we would define
them as multilingual learners. Once they enter the K-12
education system, they may be identified as English Language
Learners. Recognizing that some children will come to
classroom contexts with more than one language is important
because when children are learning more than one language,
their trajectory of development differs from that of
monolingual children.

            7.5a1 Receptive language in multilingual children.
Young children have a pre-wired or innate capability of learning
more than one language from birth, and young children may
become proficient in more than one language if multiple
language exposure occurs in quantity, and with quality
(Espinosa, 2013). Infants who are bilingual develop two separate
but connected linguistic systems (Conboy, 2006). Because
bilingual children must develop neural pathways and
connections that are different from monolingual children, their
cognitive development will also look different from that of
monolingual children. Research demonstrates that acquiring
multiple languages influences cognitive and linguistic learning
mechanisms (Espinosa, 2013) and results in advantages that
are evident in cognitive development (Bialystok, 2009).

            7.5a2 Productive/expressive language learning in
multilingual children. As children enter new language
environments or negotiate multiple languages, educators may
notice differences in expressive language. Listening and

260 | Language Development
comprehension tend to develop first. Educators may notice a
child appears reticent to engage verbally in a new language
environment preferring to silently observe and listen to their
peers and educators talking around them. Frequently referred
to as the silent period, it is an important learning space for
children as they are internalizing the common phonological
and grammatical patterns of the new language. During this
time, a child's expressive language may seem to be lagging
behind, particularly at school, and even at home. But, it is
important to remember children are using this time to develop
their vocabulary across languages. The younger a child is, the
longer the silent period might last, thus it is commonly
observed in early learning settings (American Speech,
Language and Hearing Association n.d.).

            While multilingual children may present differently
than monolingual children in terms of literacy development, it
is important to consider their whole language context; failure
to do so might result in an early childhood educator
interpreting perceived differences as a language delay
(Espinosa, 2013). For example, multilingual children may appear
to have smaller vocabularies if only one language is assessed.
However, when educators evaluate a child's combined
vocabulary knowledge across language contexts, the true
depth of their language knowledge is recognized. Similarly,
multilingual children may take a little longer to articulate their
ideas when speaking because the child is working to
determine which language to use in the current situation. The
process multilingual children use to move from language to
language is called code switching and it is an additional
processing task for children (Castro, 2013). The additional
cognitive challenge of moving between two languages is
positively associated with executive function and cognitive
flexibility (Espinosa, 2013). Therefore, it is important for
educators to allow children who speak multiple languages
more time to communicate their ideas and provide additional

                                                             Language Development | 261
wait time when completing word retrieval vocabulary
assessments (Espinosa, 2013).

            In addition to code switching, some children might
also blend the languages in a process called code mixing
(Peterson, 1988). A child may start out speaking one language
and switch to the other or insert vocabulary from one language
into a sentence that begins with the other language. For
example, a child may say, "Quiero cookie" to indicate the desire
for a cookie instead of completing the entire phrase in English,
or the entire phrase in Spanish. Parents, teachers, or other
adults may perceive code mixing as evidence of a delay or
a problem (McManis, 2012). However, children who are code
mixing sometimes do so within a context where they might
be expected to be understood. A child who says, "more leche"
can reasonably anticipate that adults will discern the desire for
milk. Even when vocabulary words are inserted, children retain
the larger set of language rules for each of their languages
internally (McManis, 2012). Thus, code mixing should be an
indicator that children are still building vocabulary and
progressing with their language development while creating
their internal maps for each language.

            Young children are in an ideal window, or sensitive
period, for mastering the functions and structures of language
(Conboy & Kuhl, 2011). While there may be differences in how
quickly children who speak multiple languages communicate,
there are no apparent differences between multilingual and
monolingual children's phonological awareness or decoding
skills (Espinosa, 2013). The same is true for the developmental
window of first word occurrences. The early language skill
development of multilingual children, including semantics,
syntax, phonological awareness, and morphology, provide a
child with the ability to think about their language
understanding. Moreover, the ability to both comprehend and
think about language will be applied to both languages (Lopez
& Greenfield, 2004).

262 | Language Development
            The long-term gains for multiple languages are
compelling--they are evident in cognition and culture and
may have economic implications for the child later on
(Bialystok, 2009). Some teachers may worry that if a child is
not speaking English now, they will have difficulty with English
later on. In fact, children do eventually learn English. Learning
more than one language does not ultimately hamper the
ability to learn English or to perform well on academic tasks
when home and school languages are supported (Barnett et
al, 2007). Children who are English Language learners keep
pace or surpass native English speakers if they are proficient in
English by Kindergarten (Halle et al, 2012). Therefore, allowing
children to communicate across languages is a valuable
practice for educators to encourage.

     Pause and Consider: Pumpkin, Pumpkin

        Ms. Katrina held 22-month-old Sebastian on her lap,
     reading to him during the quiet morning in her two-
     year-old classroom. She pointed to the pictures in the
     board book and said, "pumpkin." Sebastian looked
     back at her with shining eyes and pointed to the
     picture and smiled. He did not reply. Repeatedly
     through the book, Katrina pointed out pumpkins and
     prompted Sebastian to say, "Pumpkin." Not only was
     Sebastian unwilling to repeat the word, "pumpkin,"
     while book-reading, but Ms. Katrina noticed that
     Sebastian had very little to say at school. Ms. Katrina
     asked the family if Sebastian talked at home, and mom
     immediately expressed her worry. Mom said that at

                                                            Language Development | 263
     home he pointed to items and would say, "Mama" or
     "Daddy," but he was generally very quiet. Mom
     indicated that she was worried Sebastian would "not
     learn English." The parents and Katrina worked
     together to refer Sebastian for an evaluation for early
     intervention services to determine if there was a
     language delay. Later that same week, the classroom
     went to a pumpkin farm for a field trip. Sebastian
     walked over to a very large pumpkin in the front and
     loudly said, "Cabasasa," an approximation of the
     Spanish word for pumpkin, "calabaza." He then started
     to giggle and put his hands on many of the large and
     small pumpkins right around him, each time calling
     out "Cabasasa!"

        What assessments could the teacher make about
     Sebastian's language development? What questions
     could the teacher ask the family that would have
     provided more helpful information? What assumptions
     should the teacher avoid? What should the teacher's
     orientation be to this student's needs?

7.5b Children who are Deaf or Hard of Hearing

            Oral language and listening are dependent on the
auditory system, and when there is hearing loss, language
development is altered. Hearing loss varies from complete
deafness to partial hearing. When hearing loss ranges from
severe to profound, there are substantial barriers to oral
language development (de Oliveira Sobreira, 2015). This is
particularly true in children who lose hearing soon after birth
or are deaf from birth (de Oliveira Sobreira, 2015). Deafness

264 | Language Development
and hearing impairments do not prevent a child from
communicating. Early diagnosis and intervention is important,
so that children may experience a full range of possibilities for
developing language, external to speech and hearing.

            7.5b1 Receptive language in children who are deaf
and hard of hearing. Acquisition of language for children who
use sign language has structural similarities to the
development of oral language in hearing children (Schlesinger
& Meadow, 1972). In fact, children who learn sign language
demonstrate an onset of first sign earlier than hearing children
demonstrate spoken words (Schlesinger, 1978). Bonvillian and
colleagues (1983) found that deaf children in their study
showed earlier attainment of additional milestones. Early first
sign production often occurs with the first word at
approximately 8.5 months with a range of 5.5 months to 12
months. Children acquire sign language vocabulary quickly,
demonstrating an average size of 10 signs at the age of 1 year,
and 50 words at 18 months (Bonvillian et al., 1983). The average
for putting two signs together is 17 months with a range of
12.5 to 22 months. This is consistent with what we know about
young children's capacity to use sign language. Schlesinger
and Meadow (1972) suggest that all children would learn to sign
before learning to speak, if exposed to sign language.

            The desire and effort to communicate is universal;
parents, family members, and other adults wish to engage in
social language transactions with children (Marschark &
Waters, 2008). Parent interaction has some features that are
the same with all children. Deaf parents demonstrate a version
of child-directed speech, emphasizing their signed
communication with infants using large movements,
incorporating repetition, and holding signs longer than usual
(Koester & Lahti-Harper, 2010). This is similar to how hearing
parents use exaggerated vocal input, changing pitch, and
melodic contours when they engage in child-directed speech
(Koester & Lahti-Harper, 2010). Deaf infants show greater

                                                            Language Development | 265
attention and responsiveness to infant-directed signs
(Masataka, 1996). Whether parents are communicating vocally
or through sign language with their babies, they are doing so
in a way that is more dramatic and exclamatory, accompanied
by exaggerated facial gestures. For all children, gestures are
among the first experiences of receptive and expressive
language, and these are precursors to developing more
complex language through speech or sign language (Volterra
et al., 2005).

            7.5b2 Productive/expressive language in children
who are deaf and hard of hearing. Infants and toddlers who
are deaf or hard of hearing engage in symbolic play as part of
their expressive language experiences and in doing so, practice
using gestures and sometimes oral sounds or words. The
development of gestures and the numbers of words and
phrases understood or produced is related to specific
attainments in symbolic play (Yoshinaga-Itako et al., 1998).
Children who demonstrate higher expressive language levels
make more attempts at utterances, words, and word
combinations. All manifestations of expressive language,
including spoken language and signed output, are strong
predictors of speech outcome, suggesting ample
opportunities for practice supports the development of speech
skills (Yoshinaga-Itako et al., 2020). Therefore, opportunities to
engage in social play strengthen productive language with
children who are deaf or hard of hearing.

Some children use sign language to communicate.

266 | Language Development
            Speech ability is impacted by the severity of hearing
loss (de Oliveria Sobreira et al., 2015). Some children are hard
of hearing with mild to severe hearing loss, and some children
are deaf with profound hearing loss, or have both hearing and
visual loss. All of these possibilities impact the trajectory of
how the child learns to communicate and how educators and
families structure learning opportunities for children. Children
who have early cochlear implants may have improved auditory-
linguistic abilities (de Oliveira Sobreira et al., 2015). However,
cochlear implants are not always sufficient to solve hearing
loss, and results are variable (Peterson et al., 2010). The speech
ability of children with mild to severe hearing loss becomes
more similar as children reach adolescence, but the speech
ability of children with profound hearing loss is less well
developed. A child's success may also be impacted by the
frequency of signs along with speech, coupled with one's level
of hearing (Marschark & Knoors, 2012, Yishinaga-Itano, 1998).
Approaches for communication may include sign language,
tactile sign language, cued speech, hearing aids, and cochlear
implants. Decisions about which strategies to use are
determined by the child's needs, the family preferences, and
the availability of services or early learning settings.

     Pause and Consider: Rainsticks and Picture Cards

        It is six weeks into the school year, and Ms. Noora has
     noticed that 3-year-old Deon tends to be the last child
     to leave centers and to join the group for activities.
     Deon does not usually sing along in circle time, though
     he does the hand motions and joins in some words in

                                                            Language Development | 267
     the chorus. Deon does respond to language, but it is
     inconsistent. Sometimes he seems to be in his own
     world instead of responding, until after the other
     children have already done so. Ms. Noora had thought
     that this might be a temperamental or developmental
     trait of Deon's. However, this morning, Deon's parents
     told Ms. Noora that they are worried about his hearing
     and are having him evaluated. Ms. Noora thinks about
     her routines this year. For transitions, she has mainly
     been using short special songs to indicate what is
     coming next and sometimes a rain stick. If Deon is hard
     of hearing, this might not have been as useful as a
     picture card or puppet. Ms. Noora immediately starts to
     pay attention to Deon's patterns and observes that he
     looks at other children when there is a transition. Later,
     Ms. Noora decides to take the children outside to play
     during a break in the rain. As Ms. Noora begins singing
     the recess song, she holds up the picture card from the
     daily schedule and waves it. She notices that Deon
     looks at the card and immediately goes to grab his
     coat.

        Accessibility in our classrooms means that we use
     strategies to include all children. What are some
     transition routines that can capture children who have
     language differences?

7.5c Children with Autism

The number of children diagnosed with autism spectrum
disorder has steadily increased over the last few decades. One
in every 54 children is identified with autism spectrum

268 | Language Development
disorders (Maenner et al., 2020). Autism, or Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD), refers to a broad range of conditions, usually
evident before age 3, causing challenges in a child's speaking
or nonverbal communication (IDEA, 2004; 34 C.F.R.  300.8 [c]
[1]). ASD is also characterized by difficulty with social skills and
changes in routines and unusual responses to sensory
experiences. Autism is considered to be the fastest-growing
childhood disorder (Gonzalez et al., 2017). The median age at
which a child is first evaluated ranges from 29 months to 46
months (Maenner et al., 2020) and often results from questions
about the child's language development. Language deficits
are often an early impetus for parents to seek answers and
begin the process of evaluation. Children with autism display
a wide range of language performances. Some children may
be considered non-verbal or use limited verbal speech. While
other children with autism may follow typical language
patterns. Additionally, some children have speech, but might
have trouble with specific forms of language, such as
pragmatic cues. Language development in children with
autism, like all children, is not fixed. A child who has no speech
may later develop speech (Boutot, 2016). All children can grow
and develop in their ability to communicate with supportive
instruction and early intervention.

            7.5c1 Receptive language in children who have
autism. Receptive language may be affected in young children
with ASD. For example, toddlers with autism may have
difficulty hearing words when the referent (person or object) is
absent (Fitch et al., 2018). In other words, referring to a dog if the
dog is not actually there, might be a receptive language task
that could be harder for a very young child who has autism.
Learning semantics, the proper usage of language in varying
social settings, is a difficult task for all young children. It
requires a utilization of receptive language that is interpretive.
For example, a child in an examination setting was given a set
of dolls and told by the adult, "We are going to play with my

                                                            Language Development | 269
family." The child was perplexed at how the adult's family could
be a set of dolls (Boutot & Myles, 2017). Very young children with
ASD may have trouble incorporating new information on the
basis of verbal cues alone, without visual support (Fitch, 2018).
However, with opportunity for repetition of verbal input and a
low-demand task, young toddlers with ASD can be successful
in acquiring newer mental representations (Fitch, 2018). It is
valuable to remember semantics can be taught and learned
through intentional opportunities and experiences.

            Children with autism may also have difficulty
interpreting components of nonverbal communication, such
as facial expressions and proximity (Boutot & Myles, 2017), and
might need coaching or instruction so that they acquire
knowledge of social reactions. Children with autism might also
find it more challenging to process language when immersed
in settings with distracting visual and auditory stimuli (Marco
et al., 2011). It is helpful to consider the environment, especially
if you are trying to help the child with an area of language.
Generally speaking, the social-communication impairments
associated with ASD are particularly impactful for the
development of receptive language (Reinhartsen et al., 2018).
Teachers need to pursue multiple approaches in order to make
sure that a child with ASD is understanding what is being
communicated.

            7.5b2 Productive/expressive language in children
who have autism. Many diagnostic tools focus on screening
for expressive language. For example, eye contact and pointing
are important indicators of productive language or potential.
Other markers include orienting to name, imitation, social
smiling, and social interest (Zwaigenbaum et al., 2005). While
orienting to name is a receptive skill, imitation, smiling, interest,
and name orientation are productive expressions of language.
Children who are diagnosed with ASD by 24 months tend to
display fewer phrases and gestures by 12 months, and
diagnosis of autism often occurs between 12 and 24 months

270 | Language Development
(Barbaro & Dissanayake, 2012). Parents and other adults expect
to see children become more communicative and start using
speech between the first and second year. Some examples of
expected productive language include shaking and nodding
the head in response to a question or pointing to communicate
that they want something. Children may also hold up their
arms to be picked up, which is an expressive language gesture.
In addition, we expect to see transactional language such as
giving items to another person and showing or demonstrating
something they find interesting (Mitchell et al., 2006).

            Children with autism sometimes exhibit productive
language called echolalia where a child repeats or echoes
what they have heard. You might ask a child if they would like
to go outside and instead of replying with a yes or no, the child
may repeat "outside, outside." Echolalia is sometimes present
with typically developing toddlers and becomes more visible in
children with autism as they age. Additionally, pragmatics is an
area that is of particular interest when working with children
with autism. When a child has other functional language areas
mastered, such as word meaning and order and pronunciation,
they may still struggle with understanding the rules and social
components associated with language (Boutot & Myles, 2017).
Pragmatics dictates that it might be appropriate after naptime
at a family home child care to say, "okay, up." But at home, a
child has the freedom to say, "I want to sleep!" Children with
autism may struggle with these contextual distinctions, which
vary based on the demands and structure of the social
environment (Boutot & Myles, 2017). In early childhood, all
children seem to struggle with pragmatics to varying degrees,
thus difficulty with pragmatics would be more pronounced as
the child with autism ages.

     Pause and Consider: Circle Time

                                                             Language Development | 271
        Ms. Tina called the students over to circle time in her
     young fives classroom. At circle time, the children start
     with a hello song where every child says their name.
     This leads into the next song for the week, which
     includes clapping and movements to practice rhyming
     words. During the circle time experience, Andrew walks
     around the room. He is verbal, but he does not say his
     name when it is his turn, and he does not join in any
     part of circle time. Ms. Tina knows from interacting
     with him at other points of the day that Andrew does
     not like it when the room gets "loud."

        The next group prompt gives every child the
     opportunity to think of a word that ends in the same
     way that the book emphasized. Should Ms. Tina call
     Andrew over to offer him a turn? Are there strategies
     she could use so that it would not seem so loud for
     Andrew that would still allow him to participate?

7.6 Strategies to Support and Promote
Language Development

Because language is social, development is driven by the
quantity and quality of interactions between a child and their
adults. Sensitive care promotes healthy development of a child
overall, but language is innately social. Communication
between young children and adults includes eye-gaze, sounds
and symbols, and often tactile sensations as a baby is held or
a toddler clasps the knees of a seated adult. Attunement, or
being aware and responsive to a child's needs, sends messages
to the child about their worth and whether those needs will be

272 | Language Development
met. As children grow and begin using more words, they are
constantly reaching out for our cues on their proficiency. The
serve and return interchange is not only building language, it is
building a social understanding, which then builds language.

                                                            Language Development | 273
Attunement to children's needs creates opportunities for language.

7.6a Eliciting Language Through Conversations and

274 | Language Development
Questions

            Adult-child interactions give opportunities to observe,
learn, and practice language skills. Even simple language
conversations foster this growth. Consider the example of
Imani's exchange with her teacher. She said, "I no like it: go-
fish." Her teacher responded by acknowledging, "You do not
like goldfish." This strategy, known as expansion, fills in missing
words and provides a model of language rules. A similar
strategy, recasting, fills in what is missing, while also extending
the child's idea or changing the sentence structure. A child
might exclaim, "Water, Cold!" The teacher may recast by asking
a question, "Is the water cold?" Further recasting might cause
the teacher to say, "You do not like this cold water on your
hands!" With recasting, the child's initial utterance may be
changed from a statement to a question, or ideas extended
and lengthened. Expansion and recasting provide language
models for children who are multilingual and engaging in
code-mixing to communicate their ideas. For example, a child
may say, "Quiero milk." The teacher may then respond by
saying either "풯uieres leche?" or "Would you like some milk?"
Recasting provides a language model without overtly
correcting the child. More importantly, it sends a message that
the child is understood. These supportive interactions provide
the cognitive stimulation, sensitivity, and responsiveness to
help foster language (Hamre & Pianta, 2005) and support
cognitive gains over time (Siraj & Asani, 2015).

            The quality of the interaction is also a relevant
component to consider. Interactions that emphasize close-
ended or one-word responses reduce a child to answers that
are brief and minimal (Pianta et al., 2012). "Did you go outside
yesterday?" yields a shorter conversation than asking, "What
did you do this weekend?" When children have opportunities
to have longer back-and-forth conversations with open-ended
questions, it naturally creates more opportunities for children

                                                            Language Development | 275
to practice their conversational skills and to expand their
thoughts (Pianta et al., 2012; Scull, Paatsch, & Raba, 2013). This
approach is not merely helpful for individual children in each
conversation, but there is a positive impact on the quality of
the classroom environment (Hamre & Pianta, 2005). Sustained
conversations promote enhanced language and literacy
practices in the classroom overall (Justice et al., 2008).

            One way to promote extended conversation is to use
a model of Shared Sustained Thinking (Siraj & Asani, 2015). In
Shared Sustained Thinking adults intentionally start teacher-
child dialogues designed to expand answers and keep children
engaged in conversation. Supportive shared conversations
include solving problems together, clarifying concepts,
evaluating activities, and the conversation extends as parties
are thinking about their own ideas and knowledge. Helpful
strategies for fostering supportive shared conversations are
outlined in the table below, with verbal examples and non-
verbal examples proposed by Siraj-Blatchford (2015) and
expanded by the authors of this textbook.

               Chart 7.5 "Supporting Children's Sustained Shared
                                        Thinking."

276 | Language Development
Supporting Children's Sustained Shared
                        Thinking

                                                   Language Development | 277
Strategy               Verbal Example           Non-Verbal

Tuning In              Greeting the child       Body oriented
                       and listening            toward child,
                                                bending over to near
                                                eye level to child

Showing Genuine        Verbal affirmation       Maintaining eye
Interest                                        contact, smiling,
                                                nodding

Respecting             Saying things like, "I   Listening and
children's own         really want to know      engaging in the
decisions and          more about this."        response
choices by inviting
children to elaborate

Re-capping             "So you think that..."   Drawing picture
                                                together or as a
                                                depiction that you
                                                understand the
                                                conversation

Offering the adult's   I like to...             Sharing photos or
own experience                                  pictures

Clarifying ideas       "So you think that       Use facial gestures,
                       this stone will melt if  such as a
                       I boil it in water?"     questioning
                                                expression

Suggesting             "Could we try doing      Pointing to item
                       it this way?"            while smiling

Reminding              "Don't forget that       Tapping forgotten
                       you said that this       item
                       stone will melt if I
                       boil it."

Using                  "You have really         Give your brain a kiss
encouragement to       thought hard about       (kiss hand and then
further thinking       where to put this        touch hand to head)
                       door in the palace.
                       Where will you put
                       the windows?"

278 | Language Development
Offering an            "Maybe Goldilocks       Showing another
alternative viewpoint  wasn't naughty          way to solve a
                       when she ate the        problem (e.g., a
                       porridge."              different way of
                                               stacking blocks)

Speculating            "What do you think      Act out pretend play
                       the three bears         and dress up
                       would do if             scenarios
                       Goldilocks knocked
                       on their door and
                       invited them to go
                       on a picnic?"

Reciprocating          "Thank goodness         Mirroring child's
                       that you were           gestures
                       wearing boots when
                       you jumped in those        Varied, animated
                       puddles! Look at my     facial expressions
                       feet. They are
                       soaking wet!"

Asking open-ended      "How did you...?"       Using drawing for
questions                 "Why does this...?"  communication and
                          "What happens        indicating questions

                       next...?"
                          "What do you

                       think...?"
                          "I wonder what

                       would happen if...?"

Modeling thinking      "I have to think hard   Demonstrating
                       about what I will do    thoughtful
                       this evening. I need    examination of items
                       to take my dog to       or drawings by
                       the vet because he      pausing first
                       has a sore foot, take
                       my library books
                       back to the library,
                       and buy some food
                       for dinner tonight.
                       But I won't have
                       time to do all of
                       these things."

Chart 7.5 is based on Siraj-Blatchford, I. (2015). Quality
Interactions in the Early Years Keynote Address at the TACTYC
Annual Conference, Cardiff, 5 November - Birth to 8 Matters!

                       Language Development | 279
Seeking Seamlessness - Continuity? Integration? Creativity?"

http://www.tactyc.org.uk/pdfs/2005conf_siraj.pdf  [Google

Scholar]

7.6b Instructional Opportunities That Support
Language Development

            Dramatic play creates opportunities for children to
engage with their peers and act out real life scenarios. Many
early learning settings have dramatic play areas, including
home living/kitchen, puppet stages, flannel sets, and
temporary thematic spots, such as an apple orchard or
mechanic's garage. These types of activities foster
opportunities for children to practice dialogue, use different
voices, and experiment with conversational rhythms. Teachers
may or may not join in, but having a richness of materials
available in the environment can help children to engage in
discussions with one another.

Dramatic play helps children practice language skills.

            The ability of children to discriminate sounds and
perceive rhythm and rhyme is associated with early reading
ability. Nursery rhymes are particularly effective. They are short
verses, making them easily repeatable. Children's exposure to
nursery rhymes is connected with spelling success in early
grades (Dunst et al., 2011) and are particularly effective with
English Language Learners (Prosi-Santovac, 2015). For

280 | Language Development
example, "Jack be nimble, Jack be quick, Jack jump over the
candlestick!" is easier for children to master and repeat than
a longer poem. Even short poems allow for practicing tone of
voice, inflection, grammar, and figurative language. These early
attempts help build a foundation for language development.
Hearing the sounds at the beginnings and endings of words
helps children explore connecting these sounds to letters and
prepares children for early reading (Rasinki & Zimmerman,
2013). As teachers introduce poems of different styles, they
create opportunities for the children to enhance their
vocabulary knowledge and to engage with their peers in
addition to enjoying and celebrating language.

7.6c Language Accessibility and Differentiated
Supports

            Assistive technology includes devices or services that
help children with disabilities to engage in learning and social
interactions (Lohmann et al., 2019). Common examples include
sign language, picture communication boards, adapted books,
and voice output communication devices (Lohmann et al.,
2019; Skau & Cascella, 2006). Sign language provides a visual or
tactile demonstration of spoken words and is used not only for
children who are deaf or hard of hearing, but hearing children
as well. A common strategy is to have parents and children
learn 20 to 30 words that are useful for the child and their
environments (Skau & Cascella, 2006). This approach allows
children to be able to communicate and understand some of
the most basic and fundamental concepts. In the same way,
picture boards allow children to touch or point to words they
hear or wish to say. These can be used at home or school
and can be relatively easy to produce or reproduce by using
computers and cardstock or poster boards. For example, a
picture of clothing, toothbrush, breakfast, then a car can
highlight the order of routine for a young child. This also allows

                                                             Language Development | 281
the possibility for the child to ask for or about a portion of
the routine as it is occurring by pointing to that same board.
Story and song boards create opportunities to point to pictures
as a story or song is being shared. This generates space for a
non-verbal child to respond, repeat, and participate fully in a
classroom environment. Using a communication board might
also be effective for a verbal child that is bothered by noise,
as a child could wear earphones to manage the noise, and
still participate by pointing to a board. It works best to include
interesting textures or even real objects attached to the board
(Skau & Cascella, 2006). As an example, an educator telling
the story of The Three Little Pigs enhances children's
understandings with the storyboard by affixing to the board
a picture of a brick, a small stick, and a bit of straw or raffia.
Teachers can also point to storyboards as an aided language
simulation for all children by pointing to words and pictures
to emphasize meaning while telling a story, "The first little pig
built his house out of STRAW."

            Vocal output devices produce pre-recorded messages
when children press a button or otherwise trigger a word
(Lohmann et al, 2019, Skau & Cascella, 2006). The child activates
the device to answer questions, prompt others to action, or
otherwise communicate. A vocal output device could be used
in the classroom to record phrases or lines from poetry, story, or
song. When the class joins in the story or song, the child with
the vocal output device can then also join in.

            Use of tablets and smartphones for assistive
communication purposes has increased more recently as
these items have become more readily available (Lohmann et
al., 2019). Smart devices can easily be used in a classroom as a
way of helping to create vocal output for a story. For example,
classmates or teachers could record voices on the phone or
tablet, "And I will huff and puff and blow your house down!"
The child using the technology could play it at the cue when
everyone joins in. The voice recording could be the child,

282 | Language Development
teacher, classmates, or even family members with some
planning ahead. Use of smart technology for assistive
communication is most effective when adults have positive
beliefs about the use of these devices (Zajc et al., 2018).
Similarly, teachers' use and comfort integrating assistive
technologies develops as they gain more experiences using
adaptive technologies within young learners .

     Key Take-Aways

        Children's language development depends on ample
     meaningful language experiences with peers and
     adults. These experiences allow children opportunities
     to express themselves and be understood. When
     educators and parents provide these opportunities
     they support children's language development.
     Understanding typical language trajectories allows
     educators to anticipate children's language needs and
     enrich language environments accordingly.

        It is also important to understand differences in the
     developmental trajectories. Children who are English
     Language Learners might have some initial delays as
     they navigate a silent period of receptive language
     before becoming more expressive/productive. Home
     language retention and multilingualism results in
     cognitive gains and maintains important cultural ties.
     Children who are deaf and/or hard of hearing may have
     language delays depending on the severity of the
     hearing loss and the type and timing of intervention.
     All children with hearing loss benefit from social play

                                                            Language Development | 283
     opportunities as this strengthens productive language.
     Children who have autism may struggle with receptive
     and expressive language. Nonverbal cues may be
     particularly difficult for a child to master. Early
     intervention is helpful, not only for language
     development itself, but for the social transactions that
     take place. Shared conversations help to elicit growth
     in listening, speaking, and nonverbal communication.
     Assisted technology can help to bridge the gap when
     children need communication support.

        Intentional educators promote children's language
     development by attending to children's individual
     differences, remaining culturally responsive, providing
     context and environmental supports, and using
     adaptive technologies that enhance children's
     engagement. Children have a desire to communicate
     and a right to be understood. Language in its many
     forms allows this process to unfold.

     Additional Resources

        American Society for Deaf Children:
     https://deafchildren.org/parents-and-families/

        American Speech-Language-Hearing Association:
     https://www.asha.org/

        Autism Speaks: https://www.autismspeaks.org/

284 | Language Development
   Bilingualism in the Early Years: What the Science
Says: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6168212/

   Center for Applied Linguistics: https://www.cal.org/
   Chomsky's Universal Grammar:
https://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/capsules/
outil_rouge06.html
   Colorn Colorado: https://www.cal.org/
   Components of Language and Reading
Instruction:https://nche.ed.gov/wp-content/uploads/
2018/11/read_ch5.doc
   Division for Early Childhood of the Council for
Exceptional Children: https://www.dec-sped.org/ei-
ecse-standards
   Language in Brief: https://www.asha.org/practice-
portal/clinical-topics/spoken-language-disorders/
language-in-brief/
   Multilingualism: https://www.zerotothree.org/
resources/2095-multilingualism
   National Center on Deaf Blindness:
https://www.nationaldb.org/
   National Association for Education of Young Children:
https://www.naeyc.org/
   National Professional Development on Autism
Spectrum Disorder: https://autismpdc.fpg.unc.edu/
evidence-based-practices
   Virginia Cross-Sector Professional Development:
http://vcpd.net/
   Virginia's Early Learning and Development

                                                      Language Development | 285
Standards: https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-
childhood/curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

                            References

American Speech, Language and Hearing Association (n.d.).

Acquiring English as a second language: What's normal and

what's     not.             https://www.asha.org/public/speech/

development/easl/

Barnett, W.S., Yarosz, D.J., Thomas, J., Jung, K., & Blanco, D.

(2007). Two-way and monolingual English immersion in

preschool education: An experimental comparison. Early

Childhood Research Quarterly, 22(3), 277-293.

Bates, E., Marchman, V., Thal, D., Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J.

S., & Hartung, J. (1994). Developmental and stylistic variation

in the composition of early vocabulary. Journal of Child

Language,           21(1),  85-123.     https://doi.org/10.1017/

s0305000900008680

Bates, E., Thal D., & Janowsky J.S. (1992). Early language

development and its neural correlates. In S. J. Segalowitz &

I. Rapin (Eds.), Handbook of neuropsychology (Vol. 7), (pp.

69-110). Elsevier.

Bialystok, E. (2009). Bilingualism: The good, the bad, and the

indifferent. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12, 3-11.

Bloom, L., & Lahey, M. (1978). Language development and

language disorders. Wiley.

Bonvillian, J. D., Orlansky, M. D., & Novack, L. L. (1983).

Developmental milestones: Sign language acquisition and

motor development. Child Development, 54(6), 1435-1445.

https://doi-org.proxy-um.researchport.umd.edu/10.2307/

1129806

Boutot, E. A., & Myles, B. S. (2017). Autism spectrum disorders:

286 | Language Development
foundations, characteristics, and effective strategies.

Pearson.

Castro. D. C., Garcia, E. E., & Markos, A.M. (2013). Dual language

learners: Research informing policy. The University of North

Carolina, Frank Porter Graham Child Development Institute,

Center for Early Care and Education--Dual Language

Learners.  https: //f pg.unc.edu/sites/f pg.unc.edu/files/

resources/reports-and-policy-briefs/FPG_CECER-

DLL_ResearchInformingPolicyPaper.pdf

Celci-Murcia, M., & Olshtain, E. (2001). Discourse and context

in language teaching: A guide for language teachers.

Cambridge University Press.

Chomsky, N. (1968). Language and mind. Harcourt, Brace &

World.

Conboy, B. T., & Kuhl, P.K. (2011). Impact of second-language

experience in infancy: Brain measures of first- and second

language speech perception. Developmental Science, 14,

242-248.

Conboy, B. T., & Mills, D.L. (2006). Two languages, one

developing brain: Effects of vocabulary size on bilingual

toddlers' event-related potentials to auditory words.

Developmental Science, 9(1), F1-F11.

De Feyter, J. J., & Winsler, A. (2009). The early developmental

competencies and school readiness of low-income

immigrant children: Influences of generation, race/ethnicity,

and national origin. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 24,

411-431.

de Oliveira Sobreira, A. C., Capo, B. M., Gil, D., & Dos Santos,

T. S. (2015). Speech and language development in hearing

impairment: Two-case report. Revista CEFAC, 17(1), 308-317.

Dunst, C. J., Meter, D., & Hamby, D. W. (2011). Relationship

between young children's nursery rhyme experiences and

knowledge and phonological and print-related abilities.

CELLreviews, 4(1), 1-12. http://www.earlyliteracylearning.org/

cellreviews/cellreviews_v4_n1.pdf

                                   Language Development | 287
Espinoza, L (2013). PreK-3rd: Challenging common myths about
   dual language learners. An update to the seminal 2008
   report. Foundation for Child Development Policy to Action
   Brief. No. 10. https://www.fcd-us.org/prek-3rd-challenging-
   common-myths-about-dual-language-learners-an-update-
   to-the-seminal-2008-report/#node-1367

Fagan, Mary K. (2015). Why repetition? Repetitive babbling,
   auditory feedback, and cochlear implantation. Journal of
   Experimental Child Psychology, 137, 125-136. http://dx.doi.org/
   10.1016/j.jecp.2015.04.005

Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J., Pethick,
   S. J., Tomasello, M., Mervis, C.B., & Stiles, J. (1994). Variability
   in early communicative development. Monographs of the
   Society for Research in Child Development, 59(5).
   https://doi.org/10.2307/1166093

Fitch, A., Valadez, A., Ganea, P. A., Carter, A. S., & Kaldy, Z. (2019).
   Toddlers with autism spectrum disorder can use language to
   update their expectations about the world. Journal of Autism
   & Developmental Disorders, 49(2), 429-440.

Gonzalez, K., Cassel, T., Durocher, J., & Lee, A. (2017). Overview
   of autism spectrum disorders. In A. Boutot (Ed.), Autism
   spectrum disorders (2nd ed., pp. 1-20). Pearson Education.

Gratier, M., Devouche, E., Guellai, B., Infanti, R., Yilmaz, E., &
   Parlato-Oliveira, E. (2015). Early development of turn-taking in
   vocal interaction between mothers and infants. Frontiers in
   Psychology, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01167

Halle, T., Hair, E., Wandner, L., McNamara, M., & Chien, N. (2012).
   Predictors and outcomes of early vs. later English language
   proficiency among English language learners. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 27(1), 1-20. https://doi.org/
   10.1016/j.ecresq.2011.07.004

Hamre B. K., & Pianta R. C. (2005). Can instructional and
   emotional support in the first-grade classroom make a
   difference for children at risk of school failure? Child

288 | Language Development
Development, 76(5), 949-67. https://doi: 10.1111/

j.1467-8624.2005.00889.x.

Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. Individuals

with Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C.  1400 (2004)

Justice, L.M., Mashburn, A.J., Hamre, B.K., & Pianta, R.C. (2008).

Quality of language and literacy instruction in preschool

classrooms serving at-risk pupils. Early Childhood Research

Quarterly, 23, 51-68.

Karmiloff, K., & Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2001). Pathways to

language: From fetus to adolescent. The developing child

series. Harvard University Press.

Koester, L. S., & Lahti-Harper, E. (2010). Mother-infant hearing

status and intuitive parenting behaviors during the first 18

months. American Annals of the Deaf, 155(1), 5-18.

https://doi.org/10.1353/aad.0.0134

Kuhl, P. K., Conboy, B. T., Padden, D., Nelson, T., & Pruitt, J. (2005).

Early speech perception and later language development:

Implications for the "critical period." Language Learning and

Development, 1(3-4), 237-264. https://doi.org/10.1207/

s15473341lld0103&4_2

Lipkind, D., Bemis, D. K., Marcus, G. F., & Tchernichovski, O.

(2013). Analysis of the development of phonetic syntax in

infant babbling. Protocol Exchange. https://doi.org/10.1038/

protex.2013.057

Lohmann, M. J., Hovey, K. A., Gauvreau, A. N., & Higgins, J. P.

(2019) Using assistive technology tools to support learning

in the inclusive preschool classroom. The Journal of Special

Education        Apprenticeship,    8(2),  Article        5.

https://scholarworks.lib.csusb.edu/josea/vol8/iss2/5

Marco, E.J., Hinkley, L.B, Hill, S.S., & Nagarajan, S.S. (2011).

Sensory processing in autism: A review of neurophysiologic

findings. Pediatric Research, 69(5 Pt 2), 48R-54R.

https://doi:10.1203/PDR.0b013e3182130c54

Maenner M.J., Daniels, J., Shaw, K.A., Baio, J., Washington, A.,

Patrick, M., DiRienzo, M., Christenson, D.L., Wiggins, L.D.,

                                    Language Development | 289
   Pettygrove, S., Andrews, J.G., Lopez, M., Hudson, A., Baroud,
   T., Schwenk, Y., White, T., Robinson Rosenberg, C., Lee, L.,
   Harrington, R.A., Huston, M., Hewitt, A., Esler, A., Hall-Lande,
   J., Poynter, J., Hallas-Muchow, L., Constantino, J.N., Fitzgerald,
   R.T., Zahorodny, W., Shenouda, J., Daniels, J.L., Warren, Z.,
   Vehorn, A., Salinas, A., Durkin, M.S., & Dietz, P.M.
   (2016).Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among
   Children Aged 8 Years -- Autism and Developmental
   Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2014.
   Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Surveillance
   Summary 2020, 69(No. SS-4):1-12. https://doi.org/10.15585/
   mmwr.ss6706a1
Marno, H., Guellai, B., Vidal, Y., Franzoi, J., Nespor, M., & Mehler,
   J. (2016). Infants' selectively pay attention to the information
   they receive from a native speaker of their language.
   Frontiers in Psychology, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/
   f psyg.2016.01150
Marschark, M. & Knoors, H. (2012). Educating deaf children:
   Language, cognition, and learning. Deafness and Education
   International, 14(3), 136-160.
Marschark, M.. & Wauters. L. (2008). Language comprehension
   and learning by deaf students. In M. Manschark & P C. Huser
   (Eds.), Deaf Cognition: Foundations and Outcomes (pp.
   309-350). Oxford University Press.
Masataka, N. (1998). Perception of motherese in Japanese sign
   language by 6-month-old hearing infants. Developmental
   Psychology, 34(2), 241-246. https://doi.org/10.1037/
   0012-1649.34.2.241
McManis, L. (2012). TeachSmart ELL Spanish by Hatch.
   Research Basis Whitepaper. Accessed online:
   https://www.hatchearlylearning.com/documents/
   teachsmart_ell_spanish_white.pdf
Menn, L., & Stoel-Gammon, C. (2005). Phonological
   development: Learning sounds and sound patterns. In J. B.

290 | Language Development
Gleason (Ed)., The development of language (6th ed., pp.

39-61). Pearson.

Minai, U., Gustafson, K., Fiorentino, R., Jongman, A., & Sereno,

J. (2017). Fetal rhythm-based language discrimination: A

biomagnetometry study. Neuroreport, 28(10), 561-564.

https://doi:10.1097/WNR.0000000000000794

Mitchell S., Brian J., Zwaigenbaum L, et al. (2006). Early

language and communication development of infants later

diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of

Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics 27, 69-78.

Petersen, J. (1988). Word-internal code-switching constraints in

a bilingual child's grammar. Linguistics, 26(1), 479.

Peterson, N. R., Pisoni, D. B., & Miyamoto, R. T. (2010). Cochlear

implants and spoken language processing abilities: Review

and assessment of the literature. Restorative Neurology and

Neuroscience, 28(2), 237-250. https://doi.org/10.3233/

rnn-2010-0535

Pianta, R. C., Hamre, B. K., & Allen, J. P. (2012). Teacher-student

relationships and engagement: Conceptualizing, measuring,

and improving the capacity of classroom interactions. In S.

L. Christenson, A. L. Reschly, & C. Wylie (Eds.), Handbook of

research on student engagement (pp. 365-386). Springer

Science  Business     Media.  https://doi.org/10.1007/

978-1-4614-2018-7_17

Prosi-Santovac, D. (2015). Making the match: Traditional

nursery rhymes and teaching English to modern children.

Children's Literature in English Language Education, 3(1),

25-48. http://clelejournal.org/article-2-3/

Reinhartsen, D. B., Tapia, A. L., Watson, L., Crais, E., Bradley,

C., Fairchild, J., Herring, A. H., & Daniels, J. (2019). Expressive

dominant versus receptive dominant language patterns in

young children: Findings from the study to explore early

development. Journal of Autism & Developmental Disorders,

49(6), 2447-2460.

Schlesinger, H. S. (1978). The acquisition of bimodal language.

                              Language Development | 291
   In I.M. Schlesinger (Ed.) Sign Language of the deaf:
   Psychological, linguistic, and sociological perspectives (pp.
   57-93). Academic Press.
Schlesinger, H. S., & Meadow, K. P., (1972). Sound and sign:
   Childhood deafness and mental health. University of
   California Press.
Siraj, I., & Asani, R. (2015). The role of sustained shared thinking,
   play and metacognition in young children's learning. In S.
   Robson & S. Quinn (Eds.), The Routledge international
   handbook of young children's thinking and understanding
   (pp. 407-415). Routledge.
Siraj-Blatchford, I. (2015, November 5). Quality interactions in
   the early years [Keynote address]. TACTYC Annual
   Conference, Cardiff , U.K. http://www.tactyc.org.uk/pdfs/
   2005conf_siraj.pdf
Skau, L., & Cascella, P. W. (2006). Using assistive technology to
   foster speech and language skills at home and in preschool.
   Teaching Exceptional Children, 38(6), 12-17. https://doi.org/
   10.1177/004005990603800602
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Stark R. E. (1986). Prespeech segmental feature development.
   In P. Fletcher & M. Garman (Eds.) Studies in Language
   Acquisi-tion (149-173). Cambridge University Press.
Toppelberg, C. O., & Shapiro, T. (2000). Language disorders: A
   10-year research update review. Journal of the American
   Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39(2), 143-152.
   https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200002000-00011
Vihman, M. M., & Greenlee, M. (1987). Individual differences in
   phonological development. Journal of Speech, Language,
   and Hearing Research, 30(4), 503-521. https://doi.org/10.1044/
   jshr.3004.503
Volterra, V. , Iverson, J. M., & Castrataro, M. (2005). The
   development of gesture in hearing and deaf children. In B.
   Schick, M. Marschark & P. Spencer (Eds.), Advances in the sign

292 | Language Development
   language development of deaf children (pp. 46-70). Oxford
   University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of
   higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. MIT Press.
Yoshinaga-Itano, C., Snyder, L. S., & Day, D. (1998). The
   relationship of language and symbolic play in children with
   hearing loss. Volta Review, 100(3),135.
Yoshinaga-Itano, C., Sedey, A. L., Mason, C. A., Wiggin, M., &
   Chung, W. (2020). Early intervention, parent talk, and
   pragmatic language in children with hearing loss. Pediatrics,
   146, S270-S277.
Virginia Board of Education. (2021). Virginia's early learning &
   development standards (ELDS): Birth-five learning
   guidelines. https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
   curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf
Zajc, M., Istenic Starcic, A., Lebenicnik, M., & Gacnik, M. (2018).
   Tablet game-supported speech therapy embedded in
   children's popular practices. Behaviour & Information
   Technology, 37(7), 693-702. https://doi-org.proxy-
   um.researchport.umd.edu/10.1080/0144929X.2018.1474253
Zwaigenbaum L., Bryson S., Rogers T., et al. (2005). Behavioral
   manifestations of autism in the first year of life. International
   Journal of Developmental Neuroscience, 143-152.

                          Image Credits

Figure 7.1: Christine Schull and Kalyca Schultz. "Nested Literacy
   Model." CC BY 2.0.
   Additional Images
   Image, Section 7.2a & 7.2b: Lucy La Croix. [Bird] CC BY 2.0.

Image, Section 7.2c: Longwood University. [Language Through
   Social Interaction] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 7.2c: Lucy La Croix. [Nest] CC BY 2.0.

                                                            Language Development | 293
   Image, Section 7.2c: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.
Image, Section 7.2d: Kalyca Schultz. [Reflection or Tool?] CC BY

   2.0.
Image, Section 7.4a: Longwood University. [Receptive

   Language] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 7.5a: Kalyca Schultz. "Bilingual Child." CC BY-

   SA 2.0, derivative image using Untitled Photograph
   (https://pxhere.com/en/photo/679270) by pxhere, CC0.
Image, Section 7.5b2: Longwood University. [Sign Language]
   CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 7.6: Longwood University. [Attunement] CC BY-
   NC-SA 2.0.
Image, Section 7.6b : Longwood University. [Dramatic Play] CC
   BY-NC-SA 2.0.

294 | Language Development
8. Reading
Development:
Engaging Emergent
Readers

"The fire of literacy is created by the emotional sparks between
a child, a book, and the person reading. It isn't achieved by
the book alone, nor by the child alone, nor by the adult who's
reading aloud--it's the relationship winding between all three,
bringing them together in easy harmony."

   -Mem Fox, from Reading Magic: Why Reading Aloud to Our
                                 Children Will Change Their Lives Forever.

   8.1 Introduction
   8.2 Reading is Making Meaning
   8.3 How Emergent Readers Progress
   8.4 Fostering Emergent Readers

     Opening Vignette: The Favorite Book

        One morning a young 2-year-old named Adelyn was
     sitting with a favorite book from home, "Dora and the
     Rainy Day." Ms. Faith, Adelyn's home care provider,
     watched on as Adelyn flipped back and forth between
     the pages of the well-loved boardbook. She repeatedly

                                                               Reading Development | 295
     came back to a page in the beginning and pointed to
     the words and the pictures and said, "It's time to come
     inside now. It's raining." Then she would flip to the
     middle of the book and stop. Clearly mimicking the
     intonation of an adult who had read the book before,
     she said, "We are making hot chocolate...need to wait
     for the cookies to bake!" Then she moved to a page at
     the end of the book and pointed to the characters in
     the picture saying, "That's the mom...there's the
     dad....it's raining." Then she closed the book and
     announced, "THE END!"

        Ms. Faith walked over to the child and commented
     on what a good job she did reading the book. Ms. Faith
     also asked Adelyn to show her some of the parts of the
     book, noting that this child was clearly showing signs of
     print awareness. For instance, she observed that Adelyn
     was holding the book right side up, she turned the
     pages from right to left (even though she skipped
     some), and she was able to use known words and
     concepts from the story in her retelling. It was clear to
     Ms. Faith that Adelyn was developing a sense for story
     structure and how to use pictures and words to
     understand text. And best of all, Adelyn was finding
     great joy and pleasure in rereading this book on her
     own.

8.1 Introduction

Watching a young child, like Adelyn in the opening vignette,
begin to understand how reading works is such an exciting
time for both families and early childhood educators. As has

296 | Reading Development
been discussed in previous chapters of this textbook, there are
many interwoven elements that create proficient readers and
many things adults can do to support reading development.
Through continuous exposure to a variety of text, repeated
readings of favorite books, and conversations between adults
and children about text, children like Adelyn learn that reading
is ultimately about making meaning and communicating a
message. Even though this particular child has not yet learned
to read in the formal sense, she knows a lot about print and
how books work. These emergent reading skills are critical to
future reading success and an ability to ultimately "crack the
code" and recognize that letters and symbols connect to
sounds and meanings (Scarborough, 2002). Knowing that text
conveys a message supports children's developing abilities to
understand and eventually decode that message
independently.

            For some children, it might seem that reading starts to
happen "like magic" but learning to read is not intuitive. This
differs from how children acquire language. The human brain
is wired for language and children naturally gain language
skills as they develop (Chomsky, 1968; Geary, 1995; Snow, 1983).
Some researchers refer to language as "biologically primary"
because it is found across cultures and needed to help people
survive (Geary, 1995). However, this is not the case for reading
the printed word because what we read--our alphabetic
script--is an invention, only available to humankind for the last
3,800 years (Dehaene, 2009). As a result, our brains have had to
accommodate new pathways for translating the squiggles that
are letters into the sounds of the spoken words they symbolize.

            The seemingly simple task of reading is, in actuality,
a complex feat. Reading skills require a complex interplay of
various regions of the brain working together simultaneously
(Wolf, 2007). Reading skills are considered "biologically
secondary" because they do not develop without specific
experiences and instruction (Snchal et al., 2001). Children

                                                               Reading Development | 297
need intentional and explicit opportunities to learn skills and
strategies to become proficient readers. In this chapter, we will
use a Framework for Developing Emergent Literacy (Puranik
& Lonigan, 2014), including conceptual knowledge, procedural
knowledge, and generative knowledge, to unpack the complex
elements of reading.

     Figure 8.1 "Framework for Developing Emergent Literacy"

            This framework was designed to explain the
dimensions of emergent writing. But in this textbook, we will
use the framework to parallel both the reading and writing
processes. The first dimension, conceptual knowledge, will
focus on the functions of reading, such as learning new
298 | Reading Development
information, completing a task, or reading for enjoyment. The
second dimension, procedural knowledge, will focus on the
mechanics of reading, such as decoding, print orientation, and
story structure. Lastly, the third dimension, generative
knowledge, will focus on application of skills, such as
understanding the author's meaning and applying
information or ideas in the real world. Using the Framework
for Developing Emergent Literacy, this chapter will answer the
following questions:

                          How do young children develop an
understanding that reading is about making meaning?

                          How do emergent readers progress on a
continuum of development?

                          What can early childhood educators do to
support emergent readers using effective instructional
strategies and literacy assessments?

8.2 Reading is Making Meaning

            Children at a very young age begin connecting print
and other symbols to meaningful ideas. Anyone who has seen
a child "read" a sign on the side of the road for their favorite
restaurant or store has witnessed this process of making
meaning. Children know that when they see the familiar sign,
it is marking something meaningful and letting people know
what they can find inside. The processes of "learning to read"

                                                               Reading Development | 299
and "reading to learn" develop concurrently in an incremental
and symbiotic fashion. A 3-year-old looking intently at a picture
book with characters wearing hats is reading to learn about
hats. At the same time, that toddler is hearing sounds /hat/
that match the symbols on the page. They are seeing and
hearing it as a whole word, which helps build a foundation
for learning to read. Conceptual knowledge about reading can
and should happen well before formal reading instruction or
the process of "learning to read" begins. Before children can
independently read words on a page, they need to know that
print conveys a message. This conceptual knowledge about
the basic functions of reading is fostered by experiencing print
in a variety of meaningful contexts.

            Text and text features (e.g., charts, headings, and
captions) in books work similarly to signs on the road. When
children have guided and supportive experiences in text, they
begin to make connections between elements of print and its
meaning. Adelyn, in the opening vignette, could not read the
words "cookies," "hot chocolate," and "raining" but she could
point to the text and indicate that she understood that the
words on the page talked about important elements of the
story she had heard before. Likewise, children also understand
that they can learn from print well before they can formally
extract a message themselves. It is not uncommon to see
young children locate resources that they know contain
information they want or need. In early childhood classrooms,
children will often bring a book to their teacher and ask them
to read the part about their favorite animal. At home, children
may ask a caregiver to read the next step of the recipe so they
know what to add to the cake batter. These are all early markers
that children are connecting reading with making meaning.
There is no arbitrary line when children learn to read and then
can learn from reading. When exposed to print and text
messages, children are in a continual process of both learning

300 | Reading Development
the skills needed to read and learning new information from
text.

            In this textbook, we are positioning early childhood
teachers' first, and arguably primary, responsibility around
reading instruction to be fostering meaning-making
experiences to ensure that children see reading not just as
isolated skills, but as a process that ultimately shares a
message. Early childhood educators support students'
conceptual knowledge about reading and help children
understand the purpose of text when they (a) connect spoken
words to print, (b) share various types of text, and (c) guide
comprehension of text. Later in this chapter, we will discuss a
variety of instructional strategies and assessments educators
can use to build specific emergent literacy skills, but here we
will discuss how to develop a conceptual understanding about
print.

8.2a Connecting Speaking to Print

            In Chapter 7, we discussed the critical role that oral
language and vocabulary play in literacy development. Early
childhood educators can build an understanding about
reading by connecting children's language skills to print. This
can be as simple as stating a student's name and then pointing
to the name on a chart or having children say or echo read
the letters that make up the special friend's name. Educators
also show children how oral words are represented in print
when children dictate captions that go with their illustrations
or create collaborative morning messages about the day's
events. Even if the children can't read all of the words being
written, the educator is reinforcing that their words can be
marked using symbols. Educators can also ask students to
orally share their background knowledge on a topic and then
turn to a written text to see what the author has to say about
the topic. Ultimately, we want children to know that what we

                                                               Reading Development | 301
think and say can be written down and what we write can later
be read and discussed.

Adults can use words to note the child's description of their artwork to
promote literacy.

8.2b Sharing Various Types of Text

            Helping children see that text is part of our world and
all around us is a big piece of the early childhood educator's
role in reading development. Using environmental print,
familiar signs, logos, and brands to show children examples
of text they know can be a powerful learning experience.
Educators can also intentionally choose a variety of books to
share with children. Ensuring that children have access to
various types of books and text, such as board books, cloth
books, pop-up books, magazines, posters, labels, etc., helps
children see the various forms that print can take. It is also
critical that educators read daily to children from books of
varying genres. Finding picture books that share engaging
fictional stories is just as important as finding non-fiction
302 | Reading Development
books about topics of interest. Reading poems and comic
books as well as recipes, directions, and lists shows children
that text shows up in a plethora of ways for different purposes.

8.2c Guiding Comprehension of Books

Children learn about text features when they share books with
educators.

               Children learn about text features when they share
                              books with educators.

            Once children have been immersed in text and see
its prevalence all around them, they are ready to have guided
discussions about understanding various types of books. Early
childhood educators can begin thinking aloud about what they
notice as a story unfolds and what they are wondering as new
events and details emerge. Helping children develop an
awareness of basic story structure (e.g., problem and solution;
beginning, middle, and ending; setting and characters) primes

                                                               Reading Development | 303
them for future independent reading and unlocks some of the
mystery around storytelling. These opportunities for guiding
comprehension and understanding of books support
children's developing knowledge that reading is an active
process. In order to understand the message, they need to
engage with print in various ways. Similarly, educators can
point out various text features of non-fiction text (such as
photographs, captions, headings, charts, etc.) to show children
that important information can be found in many places.
Comprehending text is a continuous skill that deepens and
matures throughout the reader's life, but the initial keys to
understanding text can be nurtured from the earliest years.

8.3 How Emergent Readers Progress

            Emergent literacy (defined in Chapter 1) acknowledges
that literacy development is an emerging process that begins
well before children demonstrate proficient reading abilities.
When a child sees a sign for a favorite restaurant along the
road, looks at a box of cereal while eating breakfast, or flips
through a magazine looking at the pictures while waiting at
the doctor's office, they are benefiting from ongoing exposure
to print materials. Similarly, when hearing proficient readers
share stories, like when a family member reads before bed or
an educator shares a picture book at circle time, children are
learning about reading. These everyday experiences support
children's emergent literacy skills and contribute to their future
reading proficiency.

            Because of the emergent nature of literacy
development and its dependence on the experiences,
exposure, and environment of the child, reading skills progress
in an individual fashion. A child's chronological age will not
automatically tell us what a young reader will need; however,
young children's reading abilities typically develop in stages

304 | Reading Development
along a continuum. Having an understanding of these stages
of reading helps early childhood educators recognize where
children are in their development, regardless of age. The stages
of reading development give educators a road map to know
what children need to know next to continue on their literacy
journey. Stage criteria or indicators show educators the
procedural knowledge, or understanding of the mechanics of
reading, needed to effectively build upon young children's
reading abilities.

Children acquire knowledge about reading before they are able to
decipher individual words.

8.3a Emerging Readers

            Researchers use a variety of models to represent the
progressive skills and proficiencies children acquire over time
(Chall, 1996; Clay 1991; Whitehurst & Lonigan, 2002). As children
internalize specific reading skills they use the skills in an
integrated manner to interpret and respond to text. There is
an age range that can be considered "typical" or expected for

                                                               Reading Development | 305
each of the stages. For instance, we typically see children in the
preschool years developing emergent reader skills. However,
these stages are not always age specific and sometimes
children move more slowly or quickly than would be expected.
Some children under age 5 begin showing signs of early
reading skills while some kindergarten students are still
developing emergent skills. It is important that early childhood
educators use appropriate assessment techniques to observe
children's current stage and level of functioning.

            There are a number of descriptors within each of the
stages of reading. These literacy behaviors give early childhood
educators information that describe a student's current literacy
abilities as well as identify what they need to learn next. This
textbook is focused on the first stage, emergent reading, but
the final chapter delves into the changes you will see as
children begin moving into the early literacy stage. If we think
about Adelyn, from the opening vignette, it is clear that she is
demonstrating many emergent reader behaviors.

8.3b Emergent Literacy Continuum

            When examining what is happening during the
emergent reading stage, it is helpful to recognize the elements
of procedural knowledge that emergent readers need.
Emergent reading elements can be identified as either a
constrained skill or a continuous component (Snow &
Matthews, 2016). Constrained skills include phonological
awareness, alphabetic principle, and concepts of print (Snow
& Matthews, 2016). Continuous components include
comprehension, vocabulary, and fluency. Constrained skills are
considered finite, meaning that once a child has acquired the
specific understanding it does not need to be relearned.
Examples of constrained skills include knowing the names of
the 26 letters of the alphabet and recognizing common sight
words. Continuous components include knowledge that is

306 | Reading Development
acquired over time, such as vocabulary. Both constrained skills
and continuous components are important emergent literacy
qualities of the first 5 years of life. The figures in each section
span from birth to age 5 and are separated into six stages,
including early infancy, later infancy, early toddler, later toddler,
early preschool, and later preschool. These stages are used to
highlight typical developmental time frames and demonstrate
complexity as children progress. The Continuum of Emergent
Reading Development is part of the Virginia Unified Early
Learning and Development Standards for All Children Ages
Birth-5 (Virginia Department of Education, 2021) and serves as
a resource to help early childhood educators more effectively
support student learning. To view all of the Virginia Unified
Early Learning and Development Standards for All Children
Ages Birth-5, go to the resource section below.

            8.3b1 Phonological awareness. Phonological
awareness is a constrained set of skills, but critical to the
developing reader's ability to understand language and
eventually print. Phonological awareness is a broad term
encompassing an awareness of various-sized units of sounds
in spoken words such as rhymes (whole words), syllables (large
parts of words), and phonemes (individual sounds). Sometimes
referred to as a metalinguistic skill (Goswami, 2002),
phonological awareness involves the ability to hear and
distinguish the auditory components of spoken language. In
Table 8.1, the indicators for phonological development are
listed under each of the six age bands. You will see that children
move from listening to familiar words to imitating sounds.
Eventually children begin playing with language in ways that
demonstrate an understanding of rhyming words, segmenting
individual sounds, and blending sounds in words. For instance,
we may hear a young child playing with language and saying,
"bad, fad, cad, sad, mad, wad" as they are starting to recognize
that some words rhyme, or end with that same sound.

            Rhyming is usually the easiest and earliest form of

                                                               Reading Development | 307
phonological awareness that children acquire. Being able to
break the spoken word "teacher" into two syllables is a form
of phonological awareness that is more sophisticated.
Additionally, we may hear another child say, "Cat sounds like
my name, Caroline!" This child was able to recognize that the
word "cat" starts with the same sound, or phoneme, as her
name. Phonemes are the smallest individual units of sound in
a spoken word. Phonemic awareness, the ability to hear and
register phonemes, is the most advanced level of phonological
awareness. Upon hearing the word "sleigh," children with
phonemic awareness will recognize that there are three
separate speech sounds--/s/ /l/ //--despite the fact that they
may have no idea what the word looks like in its printed form
and despite the fact that they would likely have difficulty
reading it. It is important to understand that all of these
phonological skills are focused on auditory and verbal feedback
and are not connected to visual symbols or letters.

    Table 8.1 A Continuum of Emergent Reading Development:
                            Phonological Awareness

308 | Reading Development
   A Continuum of Emergent Reading
Development: Phonological Awareness

                                                     Reading Development | 309
Developmental CLLD 2.3. Learning Spoken Language is

Progression      Composed of Smaller Segments of Sound

Early Infancy     Listens and attends to culturally and
   0-8 months       linguistically familiar words (including
                    rhymes and songs) (CLLD2.3a)

                  Begins to create speech and non-speech like
                    sounds (e.g., babbling) (CLLD2.3b)

Later Infancy     Begins to imitate sounds they hear in their
   6-14 months      everyday environment (CLLD2.3c)

Early Toddler     Orally repeats a few words of culturally and
   12-24 Months     linguistically familiar rhymes and repetitive
                    refrains in stories or songs or directions/
                    requests from adults or peers (CLLD2.3d)

Later Toddler     Orally produces or reproduces simple
   22-36 Months     culturally and linguistically familiar rhymes or
                    sings favorite songs (CLLD2.3e)

                  Imitates most sounds of language using
                    familiar words (CLLD2.3f)

Early Preschool   Imitates and enjoys rhyme and alliteration
   34-48            (e.g., Jalisa jumped) (CLLD2.3g)

Months            With instructional support, distinguishes
                    when two words rhyme and when two words
                    begin with the same sound (e.g., boy/toy,
                    dog/dad) (CLLD2.3h)

310 | Reading Development
Later Preschool   Begins to rhyme and produce rhymes of
   44-60            simple words (CLLD2.3i)

Months            Begins to orally segment and combine
                    compound words (e.g., lunchbox segmented
                    is lunch box; when combined it is lunchbox)
                    (CLLD2.3j)

                  Begins to segment and combine syllables
                    (e.g., purple segmented is pur-ple; when
                    combined it is purple) (CLLD2.3k)

                  Begins to identify the initial and final sound
                    in words (e.g., /b/ in bat) (CLLD2.3l)

                     Table 8.1 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.
            8.3b2 Alphabetic principle. The next constrained skill
is understanding the purpose of the alphabetic code, or the
alphabetic principle. The alphabetic principle is a knowledge of
the names of the alphabet letters and their associated sounds.
We know that a child has mastered the alphabetic principle
when they are able to name all of the letters automatically
when they see them in print and then say the sound that the
letter typically makes. You will notice in Table 8.2 that children
don't typically develop an awareness of alphabet letters and
the connection to their sounds until after 2 years of age. Once
this knowledge is developed, it will enable children to develop
a more complex understanding of the sounds that groups of
letters typically make in words. Students can then be taught
to decode, which means to blend the letter sounds together
to read words. Decoding is a deliberate act in which readers
must "consciously and deliberately apply their knowledge of
the mapping system to produce a plausible pronunciation of a
word they do not instantly recognize" (Beck & Juel, 1995, p. 9).
Once a word is accurately decoded a few times, it is likely to

                 Reading Development | 311
become recognized without conscious deliberation, leading to
efficient word recognition.

   Table 8.2 "A Continuum of Emergent Reading Development:
                               Alphabetic Principle"

312 | Reading Development
          A Continuum of Emergent Reading
          Development: Alphabetic Principle

Early       Begins to recognize a few upper or lowercase
Infancy       letters (if taught) (CLLD2.4a)

   0-8
months

Later
Infancy

   6-14
months

Early
Toddler

   12-24
Months

Later
Toddler

   22-36
Months

Early       Begins to recognize more upper, and lowercase
Preschool     letters if taught (CLLD2.4b)

   34-48    Identifies sounds and recognizes letters associated
Months        with beginning of first name and last name
              (CLLD2.4c)

            Begins to connect alphabet letters and
              corresponding sounds (e.g., connecting letters and
              sounds of common letters/words) (CLLD2.4d)

Later       For many, with instructional support, matches the
Preschool     sound with the corresponding letter (CLLD2.4f)

   44-60    For many, with instructional support, matches the
Months        letter with the corresponding sound (CLLD2.4g)

            Recognizes many upper and lowercase letters
              (CLLD2.4h)

            Will use a combination of letters and symbols to
              represent words (CLLD2.4i)

Table 8.2 is from Virginia's Early Learning & Development
                                                           Reading Development | 313
  Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines. It is used
with permission of the creators and is not an open education

         resource covered by a Creative Commons License.
            8.3b3 Concepts of print. The final category of

constrained skills are concepts of print, or print concepts (Snow
& Matthews, 2016). Concepts of print refers to an awareness that
print has an orientation (how to hold the book to see the text
and pictures) and directionality (text moves from left to right).
Concepts of print also include an awareness of the distinction
between pictures or photographs, sentences, words, and
letters. As young children are developing an awareness about
print they begin turning a book over until it is "right side up"
and can point to the pictures and words. Eventually, children
understand that words are made up of individual letters
grouped together and then groups of words form sentences.
They might not be able to read all the words independently,
but they can track the words left to right with a proficient
reader in familiar text.

   Table 8.3 "A Continuum of Emergent Reading Development:
                                 Concepts of Print"

314 | Reading Development
A Continuum of Emergent Reading
  Development: Concepts of Print

                                                  Reading Development | 315
Developmental CLLD 2.1. Paying attention to print as

Progression      meaningful

Early Infancy     Explores a book by touching it, patting it, or
   0-8 months       putting it in mouth (CLLD2.1a)

Later Infancy     Holds books, turns pages, looks at the
   6-14 months      pictures and uses sounds, signs, or words to
                    identify actions or objects in a book or other
                    written material (CLLD2.1b)

Early Toddler     Recognizes and engages with print and
   12-24 Months     pictures, or braille in their environment (e.g.,
                    points to words and images; touches with
                    fingers) (CLLD2.1c)

                  Demonstrates interest in written forms of
                    language, such as print in books or signs on
                    building (CLLD2.1d)

                  Distinguishes print from pictures (CLLD2.1e)

Later Toddler     Attributes meaning to some symbols, such as
   22-36 Months     a familiar logo or design (CLLD2.3f)

                  Identifies common words in the environment
                    (e.g., name, exit, stop) (CLLD2.1g)

                  Points to and names some letters or
                    characters in their names when seen in other
                    words (CLLD2.1g)

Early Preschool   Begins to select books for reading enjoyment
   34-48            and reading related activities including
                    pretending to read to self or others (CLLD2.1i)
Months
                  Demonstrates an understanding of the
                    conventions of print (e.g., directionality of
                    print and texts) (CLLD2.1j)

                  Understands that the print communicates
                    the message in stories or other texts
                    (CLLD2.1k)

316 | Reading Development
Later Preschool   Distinguishes among a variety of texts and
   44-60            their purposes (e.g., books, shopping lists,
                    etc.) (CLLD2.3l)
Months
                  Begins to track individual words in text by
                    pointing or touching (CLLD2.1m)

   Table 8.3 is from Virginia's Early Learning & Development
  Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines. It is used
with permission of the creators and is not an open education

         resource covered by a Creative Commons License.
            8.3b4 Comprehension, vocabulary, and fluency. The

continuous components of comprehension, vocabulary, and
fluency are all in the beginning stages of development during
this time period. Comprehension is the capacity to extract and
obtain meaning from spoken and written language. Meaning
is constructed and involves the reader not just obtaining
information, but drawing upon prior knowledge and
experiences. Rich language experiences support children's
developing vocabularies and comprehension. These
experiences occur long before a child is given formal reading
instruction and is based upon interactions with others and
involvement with print.

            Vocabulary is the use and knowledge of words and
word meanings in a variety of modes and contexts. The
development of a child's vocabulary begins at infancy, when
a baby starts hearing speech and babbling. Oral language
experiences, such as in-person conversations, dialogue heard
on TV, or language heard during the reading of children's books
are primary means for accumulating vocabulary. By the age
of 2, children usually speak about 200 to 300 words and
understand many more. Once children enter school, they learn
approximately 3,000 words per year and can comprehend
many more than they can read (Nagy, 2009). Developing a
rich vocabulary is an important element of proficient reading.
Studies have shown that a child's vocabulary knowledge is a

                                                               Reading Development | 317
strong predictor of reading comprehension (Duncan et al.,
2007).

            The third component of fluency is also an important
factor of reading proficiency. Fluency is the ability to read text
smoothly and easily using appropriate intonation and patterns
of stress (called prosody), making reading sound like speaking
(Shanahan, 2006). Anyone who has read with an early reader
knows that their reading is choppy and often spoken word
by word. This is because developing readers have to spend a
good deal of energy attending to decoding each word. Once
readers develop more proficiency or automaticity, their reading
mimics speech and their fluency is greatly improved. At the
emergent stage readers are not able to read words fluently
(or often read words at all), but they are able to imitate fluent
sounding reading when they retell stories and repeat elements
of text they have heard and memorized.

Morning message is an opportunity for children to practice reading.

            Comprehension, vocabulary, and fluency work in

318 | Reading Development
tandem to help readers make meaning of text. Because these
components continue to develop and expand as readers
become more proficient, we see them change drastically as
children's literacy skills evolve. In the emergent stage, we
expect to see that children are learning new words from text,
beginning to understand story structure, and developing the
ability to retell familiar text including key vocabulary and
relevant details. Young children will not show mastery in these
areas but are developing the foundational understandings
about how reading works. For instance, young children will
often retell key events from a favorite text starting at the end
and moving backward to the beginning (often only including
parts they found particularly interesting). This is a
developmentally appropriate expectation and shows a
blossoming understanding of how to talk about text.
Additionally, we may find children relying heavily on picture
clues to talk about text, but using appropriate "reading"
prosody when repeating parts of the story that they have heard
before (e.g., changing the intonation of their voice to make
the sentence end in a question because they have heard a
proficient reader read the text in this way before). These
beginning glimmers of fluent reading behavior are important
experiences for young readers. The indicators in Table 8.4
elaborate on the types of behaviors we usually see in young
children related to these continuous components.

   Table 8.4 "A Continuum of Emergent Reading Development:
               Comprehension, Vocabulary, and Fluency"

                                                               Reading Development | 319
         A Continuum of Emergent Reading
Development: Comprehension, Vocabulary, and

                               Fluency

320 | Reading Development
Developmental CLLD 2.2. Understanding Ideas, Vocabulary, and

Progression      Information in Stories and Texts

Early Infancy     Looks at picture books and listens to an adult
   0-8 months       talk about pictures in a book (CLLD2.2a)

Later Infancy     Touches or points to pictures in response to
   6-14 months      adult's prompt (CLLD2.2b)

Early Toddler     Begins to show specific interest in being read
   12-24 Months     to (e.g., brings a book to an adult or points to
                    pictures in the environment or a book)
                    (CLLD2.2c)

                  Engages in familiar stories verbally (e.g., fills
                    in a word when the reader pauses) or with
                    motions (e.g., imitates actions with an adult)
                    (CLLD2.2d)

                  Listens to explanations of words or repeats
                    words adults explain or emphasize
                    (CLLD2.2e)

Later Toddler     Identifies the feelings of characters in a book
   22-36 Months     or story (CLLD2.2f)

                  Asks to be read to or asks the meaning of
                    written text (CLLD2.2g)

                  Makes connections to the story through
                    talking about characters and events
                    (CLLD2.2h)

                  Expresses empathy for characters and
                    problems in text and stories with adult
                    guidance and support (CLLD2.2i)

                  Repeats words heard during story reading
                    (CLLD2.2j)

                 Reading Development | 321
Early Preschool   Asks or answers questions about what is
   34-48            happening in a book or story (CLLD2.2k)

Months            Retells 1-2 key events from a story (CLLD2.2l)
                  Narrates a story using pictures as a guide

                    (CLLD2.2m)
                  Recites from memory words, phrases, and

                    parts of favorite stories (CLLD2.2n)
                  Recognizes nouns as the person, place, or

                    thing in a sentence (CLLD2.2o)

Later Preschool   Listens and responds to a variety of texts and
   44-60            media (e.g., audio book, music and
                    movement) (CLLD2.2p)
Months
                  Tells fictional or personal stories sequentially
                    and with 3 or more details (CLLD2.2q)

                  Begins to understand cause and effect
                    relationships in fiction and nonfiction texts
                    (CLLD2.2r)

                  Predicts what will happen next in an
                    unfamiliar story (CLLD2.2s)

                  Uses new words learned through listening to
                    stories (CLLD2.2t)

   Table 8.4 is from Virginia's Early Learning & Development
  Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines. It is used
with permission of the creators and is not an open education

         resource covered by a Creative Commons License.

8.3c Factors Impacting Reading Development

            Although many children develop along the emergent
literacy continuum in a similar timeline or age range, there
are a number of factors that can impact the typical trajectory
of an individual child. For instance, English language learners,
children with vision or hearing impairments, or other
developmental delays may follow different learning
trajectories. Individual children may acquire literacy skills on
an adjusted timetable, but this doesn't mean that our overall
goal or expectation for them should be lowered. Educators'

322 | Reading Development
knowledge of literacy progressions and intentional actions will
support learners' literacy development. The National
Consortium on Deaf-Blindness (NCDB) Literacy Practice
Partnership states on their website, All Children Can Read, that,
"Regardless of age or ability acquiring literacy skills is a
question of `how' rather than `if' or `when'" (Shifting the
Perspective, 2020).

            This same expectation is true for students with a
developmental disability. According to the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC, 2013), developmental disabilities
"are a group of conditions due to an impairment in physical,
learning, language, or behavior areas. These conditions begin
during the developmental period, may impact day-to-day
functioning, and usually last throughout a person's lifetime"
(para. 1). The first step in helping a child with developmental
disabilities, or other limiting factors, to become literate is to
presume competence in their abilities to gain such knowledge
and skills (Biklen & Burke, 2006). This means to put aside
doubts and preconceived notions about what a student may
be able to accomplish based on a student's disability label,
estimates of IQ, or assumed limitations. To presume
competence in students is to act on the belief "that all
individuals can acquire valued skills if given appropriate
structures and supports" (Copeland & Keefe, 2007, p. 2).
Effective educators teach knowing that children can learn.

     Pause and Consider: Steven's Books

        Notice how an educator describes how Steven, a boy
     with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and an

                                                               Reading Development | 323
     intellectual disability, reads for information. "He had
     with him, as always, several different public library
     books, all related to butterflies and insects. He laid
     three of the books, opened, on the floor, then centered
     himself among them, glancing at each of the exposed
     pages. He then flipped to the next page of each book
     and repeated the process" (Kliewer & Biklen, 2001, p. 5).

        What does the educator's explanation tell you about
     Steven's interactions with text?

            While many students with developmental delays
interact with texts in traditional ways, some students with
disabilities may interact with texts in ways that seem unusual
or different from how students without disabilities interact
with texts. For example, some students, particularly those with
autism, may be interested in a book's texture or fascinated by
how a book looks when it is spun around. Other students may
be interested in and insist on reading books on one specific
topic for a substantial period of time. Students, like Steven,
are sometimes dismissed as emergent readers because their
teachers misinterpret their unique ways of interacting with
texts as indications that they are not attending to and/or are
not ready for instruction. Others feel compelled to restrict
students' access to texts that they worry might be topics of
overfocus, insisting that the student read something other
than books about their favorite subjects. However, students'
interactions with texts should be welcomed despite
differences. A child's spinning of a book or investigation of the
book's texture should never be taken as a sign that the child
is not ready for literacy instruction. Through modeling and
ongoing interactions with text, educators can expand
children's explorations by continuing to invite children to use

324 | Reading Development
texts in more conventional ways. Students will benefit from
learning to use texts in the intended fashion, even when they
are still experimenting with texts in unusual ways. As long as a
child is demonstrating interest, teachers should use the child's
interactions as a starting point for further invitations to literacy
growth, and also encourage the child to interact with texts in
ways that are pleasing to them.

Shared reading experiences allow students to interact with text and
each other.

8.4 Fostering Emergent Readers

The early childhood educator has an important role to play
in the conceptual, procedural, and generative knowledge
development of young readers. The previous sections of this
chapter discussed how to help students understand what
reading is all about (conceptual knowledge) and what specific
skills and concepts children need to build their emergent
reading capacity (procedural knowledge). This section will

                                                               Reading Development | 325
address instructional strategies and assessment options to
support conceptual and procedural knowledge development.
It will also extend to generative knowledge, or the application
of these skills and concepts in real world settings.

8.4a Instructional Strategies for Emergent Readers

Once early childhood educators understand the skills and
components of emergent reading development, they can be
intentional about the instructional strategies they utilize in the
classroom. Using targeted instructional strategies helps
maximize student learning and creates the environment for
children's literacy to thrive. Intentional literacy practices also
allow educators to provide instructional modifications and
supports to scaffold students' learning as well as create
inclusive literacy experiences. There are an infinite number of
ways that educators can create intentional, inclusive literacy
experiences. However, this section will discuss four categories
of instructional practices that all early childhood educators
should strive to incorporate: developing print-rich
environments, playing with language, creating play-based text
experiences, and providing diverse reading experiences. Figure
8.5 includes instructional practices for promoting emergent
reading development in each of these four areas.

            8.4a1 Developing print-rich environments. Chapter
Five of this textbook talks extensively about the importance of
attending to the environment and how it can support literacy
learning. Looking specifically at emergent reading
development, it is critical that children see text used in
meaningful ways in their learning environment. Regular
exposure to common words, names, and items in their
classroom can have a significant impact on students'
emergent reading abilities. Showing children how text works
in meaningful contexts also further promotes children's
understanding that reading is about making meaning. For

326 | Reading Development
instance, many teachers label parts of the classroom and
frequently-used items (e.g., cubbies with children's names,
centers, the sink). Educators can also intentionally focus on
diversifying the types of print in the classroom as well as how
children notice and use the available print materials.

            8.4a2 Playing with language. In addition to
surrounding students with meaningful print, educators can
foster a playful stance towards language. This intentional
posture shows children that learning about reading can be
fun, and reduces the stress that can come with learning about
a new language system. Playing with language is a way to
help students investigate how words and sounds can be
manipulated. Having a focus on language play also frees us
to immerse children in repeated readings as well as repeated
engagement with songs, rhymes, and games that children
love. It is not uncommon for children under five to find a book
or song that they love and want to hear over and over.
Encouraging these repeated exposures while also continuing
to provide new text-based language play is the key to
developing strong emergent reading skills. Chapter Seven of
this textbook discusses the important role language plays in
children's broader literacy development.

            8.4a3 Creating play-based text interactions. Because
play is the primary vehicle for young children's learning, early
childhood educators have the opportunity to work from this
area of strength and comfort. Finding logical extensions to
children's play that incorporate text interactions requires the
educator to pay attention to children's interests and match the
work they are doing in their play with authentic materials. This
could include strategically placing certain materials in a center
(e.g., restaurant menus in the dramatic play center) or inquiring
if children would like to incorporate text into an activity (e.g.,
asking children if they would like to bring some of the materials
from the writing center over to make signs for the road they
are building in blocks). Maintaining an intentional and inclusive

                                                               Reading Development | 327
focus on embedding developmentally appropriate text allows
students to use play to act out proficient reader behaviors.

            8.4a4 Providing diverse reading experiences. One of
the most important actions that early childhood educators can
take is regularly providing children with diverse reading
experiences. In order to get good at reading, we need to see
and hear proficient readers in action. Reading a variety of texts
aloud exposes children to the many purposes of reading. It
also builds children's vocabulary knowledge, develops their
understanding of how print works, and helps them know what
to expect from certain types of text. For instance, the more
fiction stories that adults share with students, the more quickly
they begin to understand the elements of narrative text (e.g.,
characters, setting, problem/solution) and use them to aid
comprehension. Young children who have been exposed to a
variety of texts will quickly see how the elements of a narrative
story are different from their favorite non-fiction dinosaur
book, which uses photographs, captions, and labels to share
factual information. While children are not actually reading in
most of these experiences (decoding and understanding the
words independently), they are developing foundational
understandings about print that will support their
development from an emergent to an early, beginning reader.

328 | Reading Development
Giving children the opportunity to interact with books is a valuable
part of supporting emergent literacy.

    Table 8.5 "Instructional Practices That Support Reading "

                   Developing A Print-Rich Environment
   Label classroom spaces and objects using words
   Use names of children throughout the room
   Find meaningful symbols and pictures to support

                                                               Reading Development | 329
      children's access to materials
   Infuse familiar text into centers
   Create print materials designed by the students
   Supply nonfiction and fiction texts
   Display student work with documentation (adult dictates

      student's ideas and posts next to their artwork)
   Diversify print materials (magazines, travel brochures,

      menus, etc.)

                               Playing with Language

   Share nursery rhymes and poems
   Sing songs throughout the day (transition times, good

      morning greeting)
   Read and revisit rhyming books encouraging children to

      say common refrains
   Select a word of the day/week (have children use, draw,

      find, etc. the word)
   Teach children idioms, alliterations, and other fun ways to

      play with words
   Use children's names to examine letter names, sounds,

      and shapes
   Build on students' interest in letters and words

                   Creating Play-Based Text Experiences

   Use felt boards and options for children to create their
      own story or retell a familiar story

   Provide puppets and a space for a "theater" to allow

330 | Reading Development
      children to develop puppet shows
   Develop a space for drawing and writing with various tools
   Design a dramatic play area with familiar items from

      home (including text-based items)
   Observe children's play and find ways to bring in text

      materials to enhance their experiences
   Develop signs or labels that children can use in their play
   Dictate words for students to record experiences

                  Providing Diverse Reading Experiences

   Engage in daily read alouds of age-appropriate texts
   Build in independent reading time where students can

      select their own books to "read" and retell using pictures
      and background experience
   Develop small group and buddy reading moments
   Regularly engage in shared reading where the teacher
      models their thinking about a text
   Reread familiar and loved stories
   Allow children to participate in interactive reading where
      they help the teacher "read" parts of the book
   Use print referencing techniques to point out elements of
      the text (e.g., page numbers, title, where to start reading,
      the direction of the text, author and illustrator)
   Examine text features of non-fiction books (e.g., table of
      contents, glossary, maps, charts, labels)

8.4b Literacy Assessments for Emergent Readers

            There are a number of assessment options to
understand what students know about the constrained skills of

                                                                Reading Development | 331
phonological awareness, alphabetic principle, and concepts of
print as well as the continuous components of comprehension,
vocabulary, and fluency. Chapter 6 of this textbook discusses
many purposes, types, and uses of both formal and informal
assessment options for literacy. Because young children, birth
to age five, are typically showing emergent reading abilities
but are not yet proficient readers, observation is the early
childhood educator's most important tool. Carefully watching
children as they interact in whole groups, small groups, and
individual settings can tell us a lot about what children know
about reading and what they are ready to learn. Additionally,
it is critical that educators develop methods of documenting
these observations over time.

            Educators can use assessment options such as
anecdotal notes, observational checklists, and artifacts (see
Chapter 6 for further explanation) to document children's
emergent reading behaviors. For instance, we may observe an
older four-year old child showing signs that they have
mastered the alphabetic code (e.g., the child can name all the
letters easily) and are ready to start a more focused look at
the connection between letters and sounds as well as familiar
words in their environment. However, we may also observe
significant lags in development (e.g., the child demonstrates
indicators of early and later infancy at 3 years of age).
Observational assessment options can be just as important
to document these concerns. Using well-constructed
assessments can open up discussions with families and
caretakers about factors impacting the child's reading
development and serve as a guidepost for what supports the
child needs to continue building their reading foundation.
Intentionally selecting emergent literacy assessment routines
and practices ensures that our instructional strategies will
match students' needs.

332 | Reading Development
Pause and Consider: Round is a Tortilla

   Moira, Angela, and Jos have been spending a good
deal of time in the art center recently. The teacher, Mrs.
Peters, has watched as they used construction paper,
stencils, and markers to design new pieces of artwork.
The children have been especially interested in the
shape stencils after the class read the book, Round is a
Tortilla (Thong, 2015). Mrs. Peters asked the children if
they would like to find the words to label their shape
artwork. They eagerly agreed that this was a good idea
and ran to grab the book from the classroom library.
Mrs. Peters helped them locate the words: circle,
triangle, rectangle, square, oval, and star. She then
wrote the shape words on index cards and left the
children to decide how to incorporate these words into
their work. After some discussion, the children decided
that they should divide up the words so each child gets
two shapes. Then they spread out the shape pictures
they had done and took turns adding shape words to
each picture. Mrs. Peters walked by the center a few
times during their play and noted how Moira and Jos
were easily naming each shape word as they labeled
the pictures and were saying the name of each letter as
they wrote on the artwork, but Angela kept looking up
for confirmation from her peers about which word
matched each shape and was having difficulty saying
the letter names as she labeled the pictures.

   Identify the instructional practices Mrs. Peters
incorporated to support the students' literacy

                                                          Reading Development | 333
     development. How should Mrs. Peters utilize
     assessment tools to document the students'
     knowledge and abilities?

     Key Take-Aways

        The expectation that all children can and should
     become literate is an important orientation of early
     childhood educators. Literacy development is a right of
     all children. The goal of engaging emergent readers
     requires early childhood educators to understand how
     to identify emergent literacy skills and build on the
     child's previous experiences and abilities. Emergent
     literacy includes constrained skills (phonological
     awareness, alphabetic principle, and print concept) and
     continuous components (comprehension, vocabulary,
     and fluency). Children need to develop conceptual
     knowledge about reading alongside procedural and
     generative knowledge so they can use literacy in
     authentic ways. Familiarity with common benchmarks
     and strategies helps educators support children in their
     literacy growth and development. Understanding
     typical trajectories guides educators in the planning of
     rich reading experiences for all children.

     Additional Resources

334 | Reading Development
        Center for Early Literacy Learning
     http://www.earlyliteracylearning.org/index.php

        Literacy for Children with Combined Vision and
     Hearing Loss http://literacy.nationaldb.org/index.php/
     literacy-development-continuum/

        Virginia Unified Early Learning and Development
     Standards for All Children Ages Birth-5:
     https://tinyurl.com/3y9epzkw

                            References

Beck, I. L., & Juel, C. (1995). The role of decoding in learning to
   read. American Educator, 19, 8-25.

Chall, J. S. (1996). Stages of reading development (2nd ed.).
   Harcourt Brace College Publishers.

Clay, M. M. (1991). Becoming literate: The construction of inner
   control. Heinemann.

Copeland, S.R., & Keefe, E.B. (2007). Effective literacy instruction
   for students with moderate

or severe disabilities. Paul. H. Brookes Publishing Co.
Dehaene, S. (2009). Reading in the brain. Penguin Books.
Duncan, G. J., Claessens, A., Huston, A. C., Pagani, L. S., Engel,

   M., Feinstein, L., Engel, M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Sexton, H.,
   Duckworth, K., & Japel, C. (2007). School readiness and later
   achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1428-1446.
   https://doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.6.1428
Geary, D. C. (1995). Reflections of evolution and culture in
   children's cognition. American Psychologist, 50, 24-37.

                                                               Reading Development | 335
Goswami, U. (2002). Early phonological development and the
   acquisition of literacy. In. S.B. Neuman & D.K. Dickinson (Eds.),
   Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 111- 125). Guilford
   Press.

Lonigan, C. J., Burgess, S. R., & Anthony, J. L. (2000).
   Development of emergent literacy and early reading skills
   in preschool children: Evidence from a latent-variable
   longitudinal study. Developmental Psychology, 36, 596-613.

Nagy, W. (2009). Understanding words and word learning:
   Putting research on vocabulary into classroom practice. In
   S. Rosenfield & V. Berninger (Eds.), Implementing evidence-
   based academic interventions in school settings (pp.
   479-500). Oxford University Press.

National Center for Deaf Blindness. (2020). Shifting the
   perspective. Retrieved April 8, 2021 from
   http://literacy.nationaldb.org/index.php/welcome/

Puranik, C.S., & Lonigan, C.J. (2014). Emergent writing in
   preschoolers: Preliminary evidence for a theoretical
   framework. Reading Research Quarterly, 49(4), 453-67.

Scarborough, H. S. (2002). Connecting early language and
   literacy to later reading (dis)abilities: Evidence, theory, and
   practice. In. S.B. Neuman & D.K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook
   of early literacy research (pp. 97- 110). Guilford Press.

Snchal, M., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B. L., & Colton, K. V.
   (2001). On refining theoretical models of emergent literacy:
   The role of empirical evidence. Journal of School Psychology,
   39, 439-460.

Shanahan, T. (2006). Fluency in the context of literacy
   instruction. In T. Raskinski, C. Blachowicz & K. Lems (Eds.),
   Fluency instruction: Research-based best practices (pp.
   21-38). Guilford Press.

Snow, C. E. (1983). Literacy and language: Relationships during
   the preschool years. Harvard Educational Review, 53, 165-189.

Snow, C. E. (1983). Literacy and language: Relationships during
   the preschool years. Harvard Educational Review, 53, 165-189

336 | Reading Development
Thong, R. (2015). Round is a tortilla. Chronicle Books.
Virginia Board of Education. (2021). Virginia's early learning &

   development standards (ELDS): Birth-five learning
   guidelines. https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
   curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf
Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (2002). Emergent literacy:
   Development from prereaders to readers. In S. Neuman &
   D. Dickinson, Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 11-29).
   Guilford Press.
Wolf, M. (2007). Proust and the squid: The story and science of
   the reading brain.

                          Image Credits

Figure 8.1: Leslie La Croix and Kalyca Schultz. "Framework for
Developing Emergent Literacy." CC BY 2.0.

   Additional Images
   Image, Section 8.2a: Kalyca Schultz. "A Child's Drawing With
Captions Written By An Adult." CC BY-NC 2.0, derivative image
using untitled image, (https://pixabay.com/photos/sun-
children-drawing-image-drawing-451441/) by joduma, Pixabay
License.
   Image, Section 8.2c: U.S. Department of Education. "Teacher
Reading With Child." CC BY 2.0. (retrieved from https://bit.ly/
3tHPtfH)
   Image, Section 8.3: Longwood University. [Teacher and Child
Reading] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 8.3b4: Longwood University. [Child Reading
Morning Message] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 8.3c: Longwood University. [Children Reading
Together] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 8.4a4: Longwood University. [Children
Reading] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.

                                                               Reading Development | 337
9. Writing
Development:
Nurturing Emergent
Writers

                            With Christopher K. Kidd
     "The writer is an explorer. Every step is an advance into a

                                       new land."
                                                                                                             -

                                                                                                R
                                                                                                a
                                                                                                l
                                                                                                p
                                                                                                h
                                                                                                W
                                                                                                a
                                                                                                l
                                                                                                d
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                E
                                                                                                m
                                                                                                e
                                                                                                r
                                                                                                s
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                n
   9.1 Introduction
   9.2 Writing is Communicating
   9.3 How Emergent Writers Progress
   9.4 Nurturing Emergent Writers

338 | Writing Development
Opening Vignette: Young Writers

   Mr. Jenbere and Ms. Daryl combine classes for most
of the school day. Mr. Jenbere's class is a federally
funded prekindergarten classroom with 18 students.
Two of Mr. Jenbere's students have Individual
Education Programs (IEPs) and one of them uses a
wheelchair. Ms. Daryl's preschool class is for children
who are identified as deaf and hard of hearing. All six of
her students have IEPs. The students in these classes
range in age from 2- to 5-years-old. Mr. Jenbere and Ms.
Daryl believe that their co-teaching and inclusive
practices strengthen the school experience of the
children in both classes. Each of these classes has a
paraprofessional and support from a variety of
specialists, which gives these children a team of
dedicated educators working towards their healthy
development.

   Mr. Jenbere and Ms. Daryl provide meaningful
opportunities for writing throughout the day, including
a specific time designated for writing instruction. They
make an effort to connect writing instruction with all
aspects of the curriculum in authentic ways. Today, the
children are writing thank you notes to the assistant
principal, who read them a story this morning. The
children are gathered around tables with educators
who are considering each child's strengths and needs
as they support and guide children during their writing

                                                           Writing Development | 339
     time. They know that the unique abilities of individual
     learners must be considered in addition to the goals
     that they have for all of their children.

        At Mr. Jenbere's table, six children are engaged in
     writing using a variety of materials, including white
     unlined paper, colored construction paper, cardstock,
     markers, and crayons. Three children are using markers
     to draw pictures of the story the assistant principal
     read. They are talking to each other about the story as
     they draw. Arzu is using a crayon to scribble and is
     talking to herself as she writes. Mr. Jenbere helps Hasan
     identify the sounds in a word and then turns his
     attention to Richelle who reads her thank you note
     aloud. After listening to Richelle, he jots down an
     anecdotal note that documents not only the writing
     skills she used but also insights related to her
     comprehension of the story. Later, Mr. Jenbere and Ms.
     Daryl compare their anecdotal notes as they make
     plans for tomorrow's writing instruction. They
     understand that assessment during writing instruction
     provides a window into the children's learning and
     development.

9.1 Introduction

Like emergent reading, emergent writing provides a critical
foundation for future literacy development (NELP, 2008). When
young children, like the children in Mr. Jenbere's and Ms.
Daryl's classes, are provided opportunities to draw, scribble,
and write, they gain understandings of the role print plays in
their lives and the way writing is used to communicate ideas

340 | Writing Development
(Kidd et al., 2014). Through these experiences, young children
learn they can write to express their thoughts, share stories,
communicate information, and convey opinions. Like Richelle,
they begin to view writing, including their drawings and
scribblings, as symbolic representations that enable them to
communicate with their classmates, family members, teachers,
and others. They also develop an understanding that writing
can be used to make notes for themselves, such as play plans
and reminders. As they write, they gain insights into writing as
a process and develop a sense of ownership of their writing.
In addition, like Hasan, they start to develop understandings
of written conventions, including sentence structure, spelling,
grammar, and mechanics. At the same time, children's fine
motor and handwriting skills also begin to develop.

            Literacy processes are reciprocal and symbiotic in
nature. When young children are engaged in activities that
foster their emergent literacy skills, they begin to see the
interrelationship among language, reading, and writing and
are able to draw upon their emerging knowledge to enhance
their literacy development (Goodman & Goodman, 1983).
Conceptually, children at a young age begin to understand
that reading and writing are communication processes. When
children write, these processes are integrated as they read and
reread their written message (Sulzby & Teale, 1985). This is seen
with a child, like Richelle, as she listens to a story, writes a thank
you note, and reads the thank you note to her teacher. At the
same time, children are developing emergent literacy skills,
such as phonological awareness, alphabetic principle, and
concepts of print. These emergent reading skills influence skill
development in writing and vice versa. For example, a child
like Hasan, who is writing letters and words by listening to
the sounds in a word and writing down the corresponding
letter, is using his emerging understanding of letter-sound
correspondence. As he strengthens his skills in letter-sound
correspondence in writing, he enhances his ability to apply

                                                                 Writing Development | 341
these skills when reading. Similarly, as he reads and develops
his abilities to decode (read) words, he will develop his abilities
to encode (write) words. By engaging in activities that develop
these skills, he will become more proficient at generating text
as he writes and generating meaning from text as he reads.

            Discussions that situate emergent writing within the
broader context of literacy development and acknowledge the
interrelationship between reading and writing are important to
understanding children's literacy development. However, too
often, writing is not given the time and attention that is needed
in early childhood education classrooms (Pelatti et al., 2014).
Therefore, in this chapter, we will focus specifically on
understanding children's writing development and how to use
this knowledge to assess, plan, and implement meaningful
writing experiences throughout the school day and at home.
We will also examine factors that influence children's emergent
writing development. Developing these understandings is
critical to ensuring that writing instruction is an integral part of
the instructional day and multiple opportunities for writing are
provided across the school day as well as at home.

                 Figure 9.1 Framework for Developing Emergent
                                         Literacy

342 | Writing Development
            In this chapter, we will use the Framework for
Developing Emergent Literacy (see Figure 9.1) introduced in
the previous chapter to explain the dimensions of emergent
writing (Puranik & Lonigan, 2014). The first dimension,
conceptual knowledge, focuses on the conventions and
functions of writing, including children's understandings of
how print works and that print conveys meaning. The second
dimension, procedural knowledge, focuses on the mechanics
of writing, such as knowledge of the alphabet, name writing,
letter writing, spelling, and handwriting. Lastly, the third
dimension, generative knowledge, focuses on composing
phrases and sentences that communicate meaning. For very

                                                                Writing Development | 343
young children, generative knowledge includes the emerging
ability to communicate intentionally with others using
drawings, scribblings, and symbolic representations. Using the
Framework for Developing Emergent Literacy, this chapter will
answer the following questions:

                           How do young children develop an
understanding that writing conveys meaning and they can
write to communicate their thoughts and ideas?

                           How do emergent writers progress on a
continuum of development?

                         What can early childhood educators do to
support emergent writers using effective instructional
strategies and literacy assessments?

                           9.2 Writing is

Communicating

            Children learn at a young age that people use writing
to express their thoughts, share stories, communicate

344 | Writing Development
information, and convey opinions. Within their homes and in
the community, young children have opportunities to observe
the functions of writing in their day-to-day lives. For example,
children might see family members write a grocery list and
then observe their dad read the list and cross off items while
walking down the aisles of the grocery store. Or perhaps, they
notice their mom write a note for an older sibling and then
watch as the sibling later reads the note and takes fruit out of
the refrigerator for a snack. Likewise, they may witness their
sibling's efforts to lobby for a new game by posting notes at
strategic places around the home. As they sit on the couch
next to an uncle, they could have an opportunity to watch him
take out his phone, type in a text, and send the message to
a friend. Out in the community, they might notice the server
writing down their family's order and then bringing the items
requested to their table. Likewise, they could observe an auto
mechanic writing down their family's phone number and
promising to give a call when the car is ready. These types of
interactions in the home and community develop children's
conceptual knowledge of writing and their understanding of
writing as a way to communicate.

            Learning about writing continues to take place as
children engage in writing activities not only in the home, but
also in the classroom. For example, the children in Mr. Jenbere's
and Ms. Daryl's classroom in the vignette above are developing
their writing abilities and practicing their writing skills as they
write their thank you notes. This activity provides an
opportunity for children to draw pictures and talk about the
story the assistant principal read as they write their thank you
notes. Through their pictures, they record thoughts that are
important to them with the understanding that these ideas
can then be shared with others. At the same time, an activity
like this allows children, like Arzu, to capture their thoughts
through scribbles. Likewise, children, like Hasan, use their
growing knowledge of letters and sounds to add words to their

                                                                Writing Development | 345
notes. This type of activity also enables children, like Richelle, to
develop their understanding of the permanency of writing and
to see themselves as writers with an audience. The children's
emerging understandings of writing are apparent in these
efforts.

            The Framework for Developing Emergent Literacy
presented above provides educators with a way to think about
children's writing development. This framework recognizes the
interrelationship between reading and writing and organizes
emergent writing into three dimensions: conceptual,
procedural, and generative knowledge (Puranik & Lonigan,
2014). These dimensions are important to consider when
assessing children's writing and planning and implementing
instruction.

            As writing is utilized in children's everyday lives, their
conceptual knowledge of writing develops and they gain
insights into how print works. Puranik and Lonigan (2014)
define conceptual knowledge as skills that "represent
knowledge about the conventions and functions of writing" (p.
465). At a young age, children learn that writing is a means for
communicating thoughts. They gain insights into the purposes
or functions of writing and recognize that they can write to
express ideas and feelings, tell a story, share information, and
present an opinion or point of view. They also develop concepts
of print specific to writing, such as writing in English occurs
from left to right. In addition, they begin to understand writing
as a symbolic representation of ideas as they recognize and
assign meaning to logos, markings, and symbols they
encounter (Byington & Kim, 2017).

            At the same time, young children develop procedural
knowledge of print. Puranik and Lonigan (2014) define
procedural knowledge as "knowledge of the specific symbols
and conventions involved in the production of writing" (p. 456).
These skills are important to children's future ability to use
predictable letter-sound relationships to read and write

346 | Writing Development
fluently. As children develop procedural knowledge, they gain
understandings of the alphabetic principle. As noted in
Chapter 8, the alphabetic principle involves learning letter
names and the sounds associated with them. Young children
apply these principles as they begin to write letters and words,
including names. As children gain an understanding of letter-
sound relationships, they use this knowledge to help them
spell words. Developing children's fine motor skills and
handwriting is also important in the early years (Byington &
Kim, 2017).

            Children's generative knowledge of writing develops
as they apply their conceptual and procedural knowledge of
writing. Puranik and Lonigan (2014) define generative
knowledge as "children's emerging ability to compose phrases
and sentences in their writing" (p. 456). Initially, young children
use inventive markings to express ideas and convey important
messages. Often, when we ask children to "tell us what you
wrote," they will hold up their drawing and point to the
markings and orally state the phrases and sometimes
sentences they composed. Even though these children may
not be able to form letters yet, they are still applying their
understanding about how writing communicates a message
that can be shared. Over time, children begin to use letters
as symbolic representations that are organized to signify
meaning (Bialystok, 1992). Experiences during the early years
provide a foundation for children's later ability to use particular
strings of letters to represent specific words and to use these
words to compose phrases and sentences that communicate
meaning (Puranik & Lonigan, 2014). In the early years, a
foundation for generating meaningful text is laid as children
use oral language and writing, including drawing and
scribbling, to communicate (Byington & Kim, 2017).

            Understanding how conceptual, procedural, and
generative knowledge of writing develops in young children
helps educators assess children's writing and plan for

                                                                Writing Development | 347
differentiated instructional experiences that develop children's
emerging writing abilities. In the next section, we describe how
emergent writers progress. Educators use this knowledge of
writing progressions to inform the decisions they make when
planning and implementing assessment and instruction.

          9.3 How Emergent Writers

Progress

As children interact with the world around them, their writing
abilities develop along a continuum from emergent to more
conventional writing. This pathway is not exactly the same for
each child because children develop differently due to a variety
of factors that will be discussed below. This was apparent in
Mr. Jenbere's and Ms. Daryl's classroom with Arzu who was
scribbling and Hasan who was using his knowledge of letters
and sounds to write. Both were 4-year-olds writing a thank you
note. However, procedurally, they were at different places along
the continuum in terms of the writing they produced.

            Although children's developmental pathways vary by
individual child, understanding children's writing progressions
can help educators as they assess children's writing abilities,
plan instruction, and provide a variety of learning experiences.
In this section, we use the framework from Virginia's Early
Learning and Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five
Learning Guidelines to frame our discussion (see Table 9.1).
In this framework, emergent writing skills are organized into
three categories: writing to communicate, developing writing
habits and skills, and handling writing tools. In each of these

348 | Writing Development
categories, the development of specific skills is broadly
organized by age ranges. These age ranges are intended to
provide a general understanding of typical progressions and
are not to suggest that there is a simple linear progression
of writing abilities. In actuality, children's writing progresses as
they increase their use of more advanced writing strategies
and decrease their use of less advanced writing skills (Rowe
& Wilson, 2015). For example, as children begin to use
conventional letters, they may continue to scribble and use
letter-like forms. Over time, they will decrease their use of
scribbles and letter-like forms and will increase their use of
conventional letters. For this reason, it is important to keep in
mind that, although writing is a sequenced progression, there
will be variability among children, as well as within children,
as they are progressing along the continuum (Rowe & Wilson,
2015).

9.3a Writing to Communicate

As was evident in Mr. Jenbere's and Ms. Daryl's classroom,
young children begin to understand that writing is a means
to communicate thoughts, stories, information, and opinions.
At an early age, children realize they can create drawings and
make scribbles that they can then read to others (Bruyere,
2020). They come to understand that writing is intentional and
is used to convey meaning (Rowe & Wilson, 2015). As their
writing becomes more intentional, they begin to write for a
variety of purposes and audiences and become more aware
of the need to write so others can read their writing (Bruyere,
2020; Rowe & Wilson, 2015). They also become more cognizant
of how the content of their writing varies depending on social
expectations (Rowe & Wilson, 2015). For example, they learn
what to include when they write a birthday card for a classmate
or a story about a walk their family took in the park. Young
children also develop a sense of ownership over their writing

                                                                Writing Development | 349
and begin to develop their identity as a writer (Bruyere, 2020;
Kissel & Miller, 2015; Rowe, 2018).

     Table 9.1 "Continuum of Emergent Writing Development:
                            Writing to Communicate"

350 | Writing Development
Continuum of Emergent Writing Development:
                 Writing to Communicate

                                                                Writing Development | 351
Developmental CLLD3.1 Drawing, scribbling, and writing to

Progression      communicate

Early Infancy
   0-8 months

Later Infancy     Makes scribbles or marks on writing
   6-14 months      materials (CLLD3.1a)

                  Understands that marks on a page can
                    communicate meaning (CLLD3.1b)

                  Uses writing instruments to make distinct
                    marks (CLLD3.1c)

Early Toddler     Begins to use controlled marks like swoops,
   12-24 Months     circles, and waves to represent their ideas
                    (CLLD3.1d)

                  Writes in a linear fashion and connects marks
                    with repetitive up/down or looping motions
                    (CLLD3.1e)

                  Begins to use scribbles or intentional marks
                    to represent objects (CLLD3.1f)

                  Attempts to "read" their writing or drawing to
                    others, including their name (CLLD3.1g)

Later Toddler     Begins to use distinct letter-like symbols and
   22-36 Months     letter formations with curves, lines, circles,
                    and dots to represent words, ideas, phrases,
                    sentences, and stories or events with or
                    without drawing (CLLD3.1h)

                  Begins to draw/write for a variety of
                    audiences (e.g., family members and
                    teachers) (CLLD3.1i)

                  Begins to draw/write for a variety of purposes
                    (e.g., grocery lists, invitations, birthday cards)
                    (CLLD3.1j)

352 | Writing Development
Early Preschool   Begins to use letter strings or a group of
   34-48            letters to represent words, ideas, phrases,
                    sentences, and stories or events (CLLD3.1k)
Months
                  Begins to use print in the environment as
                    part of their writing (e.g., attempts to copy a
                    sign or poster in room) (CLLD3.1l)

                  Begins to copy or write letters or numbers
                    (CLLD3.1m)

                  Begins to represent all letters in their name
                    (CLLD3.1n)

                  Begins to recognize name as separate from
                    other pictures or writing produced (CLLD3.1o)

                  Begins to distinguish print from images or
                    illustrations (CLLD3.1p)

Later Preschool   Begins to use initial letter sounds to
   44-60            represent a whole word (e.g., /f/ for fish)
                    (CLLD3.1q)
Months
                  Begins to represent the initial and final
                    sounds to represent a word (e.g., `dg' for dog)
                    (CLLD3.1r)

                  Retells or reads their writing to others
                    (CLLD3.1s)

                  Represents all letters in their own name, with
                    sequencing, positioning, and reversals still
                    evidenced (CLLD3.1t)

                  Begins to produce a correct representation of
                    their name using capital letters, lowercase
                    letters, or a combination of both moving
                    from left to right (CLLD3.1u)

                  Begins to copy names of familiar people and
                    objects (CLLD3.1v)

                     Table 9.1 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.
            9.3a1 Initial markings. Young children's journey as
writers begins at an early age when they move from making
accidental markings with little to no motor control to moving
their forearm to make large intentional scribbles (Rowe &
Wilson, 2015). As children's fine motor skills develop, they use

                                                                Writing Development | 353
their hand and wrist movements to make more refined
scribbles (see Figure 9.2). These scribbles initially represent
objects and then begin to represent ideas, words, and phrases.
As children's writing progresses, they scribble in a more linear
manner using spaces between their scribbles, up-and-down
looping motions, circles, waves, swoops, and zig zags. Over
time, they add letters, which may be written backwards or
upside down, to their scribbles and letter-like forms. Scribbles
are eventually replaced with conventional capital and lower-
case letters; however, there is no correspondence between
letters and sounds (Rowe & Wilson, 2015).

     Pause and Consider: Scribbles, Letter-Like Symbols, and
     Letter Formations

        In Figure 9.2, there are three preschool writing
     samples. Use the writing continuum above to analyze
     the children's writing. Consider the following questions:

         What do you notice about these writing samples?
         What aspects of the descriptions about scribbling
     and letters do you see in these samples?
         What do you notice about the drawings?
         What does their writing show about what they
     know?

        Figure 9.2 Scribbles, Letter-Like Symbols, and Letter
                                      Formations

354 | Writing Development
Butterfly  The big red monster said, "I will chase
            said, "You can't get me because I run

            9.3a2 Moving toward using letters. Children also start
to write their name and other words or phrases they have
memorized (Rowe & Wilson, 2015). They learn to write their
full name in English, for example, using capital and lowercase
letters written from left to right. They also recognize their name
as separate from their writing and that their name indicates
ownership of what they produced. In addition, they begin to
use conventional letters to write words and phrases they have
memorized, like family members' names, and phrases, such
as, "I like cake." They also begin to copy numbers, letters, and
words from the environment into their writing.

            Eventually, children start to write letters and groups
of specific letters to represent their ideas as they use their
growing knowledge of letters and sounds to write words,
phrases, and sentences (Rowe & Wilson, 2015). This practice is
often referred to as invented spelling. Initially, children tend
to represent words using the initial letter sound (see Figure
9.3). For example, they might use "k" to represent "car" or "b"

           Writing Development | 355
to represent "ball." As children progress, they may write the
initial and the final sounds (e.g., bk for bike) and eventually
add middle consonant sounds (e.g, ktn for kitten). They add
vowels (e.g., babe for baby) and begin to use correct spelling of
some words (e.g., sat) as they move toward more conventional
spelling.

            Children are also developing understandings about
directionality as their writing progresses (Rowe & Wilson, 2015).
During the early years, children are learning how print is
positioned on a page and the direction that print is written and
read. For example, in English, children learn to write from left
to right, move to the next line, and begin on the left again.
Initially, children may place marks and scribbles anywhere on
the paper. As they start to develop an understanding that
writing is presented in a linear format, they may write from
right to left horizontally or from top to bottom vertically. As
children gain writing experience, they will begin to show more
conventional directional patterns as they write.

     Pause and Consider: Letter-Sound Correspondence

        In Figure 9.3, there are three prekindergarten writing
     samples. Use the writing continuum above to analyze
     the children's writing. Consider the following questions:

         What do you notice about these writing samples?
         What aspects of the descriptions about letters and
     words do you see in these samples?
         What do you notice about the drawings?

356 | Writing Development
    What does their writing show about what they
know?

           Figure 9.3 Letter-Sound Correspondence

My brother and me                                  A butterfly

9.3b Developing Writing Habits and Skills

As children develop their ability to communicate through
writing, they also develop writing habits and skills (see Table
9.2). These writing habits and skills initially include showing
interest in writing and experimenting with writing tools, such
as crayons, markers, and touchscreen tablets. In addition,
children begin to share drawings and writings with others as
they become more aware of their audience and begin to see
writing as a socially negotiated act between the writer and
the audience (Kissel, 2018). They also develop their identity and

                                                                Writing Development | 357
voice as writers and gain greater insights into the power of
writing (Kissel & Miller, 2015). Initially, they may orally label or
explain the objects they draw. Over time, they begin to use
their writing to represent and communicate ideas, stories,
information, and opinions.

     Table 9.2 "Continuum of Emergent Writing Development:
                   Developing Writing Habits and Skills"

358 | Writing Development
Continuum of Emergent Writing Development:
        Developing Writing Habits and Skills

                                                               Writing Development | 359
Developmental Progression CLLD3.2 Developing Writing Habits and Skill

Early Infancy
   0-8 months

Later Infancy     Shows interest in exploring writing by
   6-14 months      watching others write and experimenting
                    with writing tools (e.g., tries using crayons,
                    markers, etc. to make marks) (CLLD3.2a)

Early Toddler     Begins to share drawings/writing and
   12-24 Months     explains the meaning of the illustrations/text
                    (e.g., says circle is a ball) (CLLD3.2b)

Later Toddler     Shares writing with others as a way to
   22-36 Months     represent their understandings and ideas
                    (CLLD3.2c)

Early Preschool   Begins to revise writing in the moment
   34-48            based on interactions with peers and adults
                    (CLLD3.2d)
Months
                  Begins to modify and expand their drawings/
                    writing to meet personal ideas and include
                    others' ideas (e.g., several children begin
                    drawing rainbows and unicorns after one
                    child narrates their work) (CLLD3.2e)

Later Preschool   Continues to revise writing in the moment
   44-60            based on interactions with peers and adults
                    (CLLD3.2f)
Months
                  Begins to revise by adding details to
                    drawings/writings to express their ideas
                    (CLLD3.2g)

                  Begins to make a plan for the writing they
                    will produce (e.g., creates picture to tell story
                    and then writes) (CLLD3.2h)

360 | Writing Development
                    Table 9.2 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.
            As children represent their ideas in writing, they
develop an understanding of writing as a process (Kissel et
al., 2011). They become aware that they can plan, draft, revise,
edit, and share their writing (Kidd et al., 2014). They learn that
planning involves selecting a topic and generating ideas. As
children talk, listen, and observe, they gather topics and ideas
for writing. Children also plan what they want to write through
their drawings. As children draw and add details to their
drawings, they generate ideas that they can convey orally as
well as through scribbles, letter-like forms, letters, words,
phrases, and sentences.
            Young children gather ideas for their drawings and
writing from their own lives. They draw and write about their
everyday and special activities, family and friends, stories that
have been read to them and/or that they have seen on media,
and content they are learning at home and in school (e.g.,
plants, weather, recycling, etc.). They are also influenced by
the thoughts and interests of their peers. As they see their
friends draw and write about trucks, they, too, might become
interested in drawing and writing about trucks. In addition,
adults may have an effect on what children draw and write.
For example, children whose family members write letters or
emails to friends might decide to write their own letter or
email. Likewise, children whose teachers model writing about
the plants growing in the classroom might develop an interest
in writing about the plants.
            As they write and share, interactions with their peers
may prompt children to revise their plans. For example, one
day, Richelle decided she was going to write about swimming
and had started to draw a picture of a swimming pool. As she

                                                                 Writing Development | 361
drew, she noticed Arzu was busy writing invitations to a party.
This new idea intrigued her. After a brief conversation with
Arzu, Richelle decided to revise her writing plans to include
writing an invitation for Arzu to go swimming with her.

            Young children also revise and edit as they write (Kidd
et al., 2014). Revisions can occur while writing or can be details
that are added, deleted, or changed at a later time. For
example, a child might add more details to a story as he looks
at his picture and realizes there is more to say or might decide
to take his sister out of the story because he remembered
he was mad at her. A child could also change her mind and
decide that the ball is blue rather than red or that there are two
balls rather than one. Children's revisions are often influenced
by their peers and adults as they interact with the writing.
For example, once Richelle decided to write an invitation, she
added Arzu to the picture of the pool. Using letter-like forms
and some letters, she wrote, "Will you go with me?" After
looking at her picture, she added additional writing to include
"to the pool." As she read her invitation aloud, Hasan interjected
that he wanted to go, too. He then said that she needed to
say which day or they would not know when to go. Richelle
added "on Saturday" to her writing and added a picture of
Hasan in the pool with them. After she shared the invitation,
Ms. Daryl mentioned that an invitation usually includes what
time she wants her friends to meet her. Richelle added a time
to her invitation. Through these interactions, Richelle gained
important insights into revising her writing.

            Young children also learn about editing as they write
and interact with others. Edits occur as children make
corrections to their writing. This might happen when a child
notices that he drew two cars and then adds an s to the label
"car" to convey that there is more than one car. Editing also
occurs when a child, like Arzu, remembers that her name
begins with a capital letter and changes the lowercase a to a
capital A. Interactions with peers and adults can also prompt

362 | Writing Development
children to edit their writing. For example, a child who is
applying his knowledge of letter-sound relationships to sound
out words might notice one of the words in his writing is
posted on the wall. When he realizes that he is missing a letter
in one of his words, he might add the missing letter to the
word or may cross out or erase the word and copy the correct
spelling. As children make edits to their writing, they gain
understandings about the conventions of writing as well as
come to understand editing as an important process in writing.

                                                                Writing Development | 363
9.3c Handling Writing Tools

Using writing tools helps children develop writing proficiency.
364 | Writing Development
            As young children interact with their literate world,
they begin to explore a variety of writing tools, including paper,
crayons, markers, pens, and digital writing tools such as phones
and touchscreen tablets (Rowe, 2018). Their handling of writing
tools becomes more proficient as their fine motor skills
develop. Initially, young children have limited motor strength
and control and, therefore, tend to grasp writing tools with
their whole hand to make marks (see Table 9.3). As their motor
skills develop, they may use their whole arm in an effort to
control and direct their markings, scribbles, and drawings.
Eventually, they use their fingertips to grasp the writing tool
but their grip may be too high or too low. Likewise, it might
be too loose or too tight. As they show increased fine motor
strength and control, they are able to use three fingers to grip
their writing tools to produce letters, words with invented
spelling, and memorized words.

     Table 9.3 Continuum of Emergent Reading Development:
                              Handling Writing Tools

                                                                Writing Development | 365
                 Handling Writing Tools

Developmental Progression CLLD3.3 Handling Writing Tools

Early Infancy
   0-8 months

Later Infancy     Begins to grasp writing tools to make
   6-14 months      random marks on a paper with limited
                    control over results (CLLD3.3a)

                  Begins to use a whole hand grip to
                    manipulate the writing tool (CLLD3.3b)

Early Toddler     Uses the whole arm to control and direct the
   12-24 Months     scribbles, marks, drawing, and writing
                    intentions (CLLD3.3c)

Later Toddler     Attempts to use their fingertips to grip
   22-36 Months     writing tools, finger grip may be loose or too
                    tight and finger positioning may be too high
                    or too close to the tip (CLLD3.3d)

Early Preschool   Begins to show increased fine motor
   34-48            strength in writing (CLLD3.3e)

Months            Becomes more skillful with a variety of
                    writing tools (e.g., markers, pens, pencils,
                    crayons, chalk) (CLLD3.3f)

Later Preschool   Begins to use a comfortable and efficient
   44-60            three-finger grip to control a variety of
                    writing tools (CLLD3.3g)
Months
                  Uses a variety of digital tools to write or draw
                    (CLLD3.3h)

                    Table 9.3 is from Virginia's Early Learning &
366 | Writing Development
       Development Standards (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning
Guidelines. It is used with permission of the creators and is not
an open education resource covered by a Creative Commons

                                         License.
            Similarly, many children are able to point and use their
forefingers to make marks, draw, and scribble when using a
touchscreen tablet (Crescenzi et al., 2014). As their fine motor
skills develop, children use their fingers or a stylus on a
touchscreen tablet to write letters, words with invented
spelling, and words that are memorized (Rowe & Miller, 2015).
Young children also learn to produce typewritten text,
including their names, repeated letters, and words with
invented spelling (Rowe & Miller, 2015). Digital tools also allow
children to draw, use photographs and imagery, and record
oral stories as they write (Eutsler et al., 2020).
            As children experiment with and use a variety of
writing tools and engage in daily opportunities to write and
interact with peers and adults, they gain valuable insights into
writing as a way to communicate ideas, stories, information,
and opinions. At the same time, they develop important
writing skills as they progress from making marks to using
invented spelling and memorized or copied words to writing
words, phrases, and sentences. As can be seen by the children
in Mr. Jenbere's and Ms. Daryl's classroom, development along
the continuum is individual. Accordingly, educators play an
essential role in shaping an environment that promotes young
children's writing.

9.3d Factors That Influence Writing Development

Although developmental trajectories like those presented in
the three tables representing the continuum of emergent
writing development (Tables 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3) help educators
understand how children develop their writing knowledge and
skills, there are a number of factors that influence a child's

                                                                Writing Development | 367
specific developmental pathway that must also be considered.
As noted in previous chapters, children's literacy development
is shaped by (a) their home, community, and school
environments; (b) the experiences children have with oral and
written language within these contexts, including the
languages they hear and speak; and (c) individual differences
influenced by their unique abilities, developmental delays, and
disabilities. The multiple influences on children's development,
including their literacy development, are important to keep
in mind when examining individual children's writing
development and planning for appropriate assessment and
instruction.

   Similar to previous discussions about children's language
and emergent reading development, children's prior
knowledge, experiences, and interests contribute to variances
in children's writing development (Burns & Kidd, 2016). Children
learn a lot about how print works as they interact with their
world. Therefore, children's experiences at home, in the
community, and at school influence their writing knowledge
and skills. Children interacting with a language- and print-rich
environment will have different experiences with print than
children who have limited access to print in their everyday lives.
For example, children immersed in an environment with rich
traditions of oral storytelling and/or daily storybook reading
may have well-developed vocabularies in one or more
languages and valuable understandings of story structures
that they can apply to their own writing. Likewise, children who
observe and take part in written communications at home,
in their community, and at school develop insights into the
functions of writing that help them understand that there are
different purposes and types of writing as well as different
audiences for their writing. In addition, children who are
provided opportunities to explore writing tools and are
encouraged to integrate writing into their play may develop

368 | Writing Development
an interest in writing and may be motivated to use writing
throughout their day.

   Children's writing development is also influenced by the
language or languages used in their home, community, and
school. Children who are monolingual and those who are
acquiring two or more languages may progress in different
ways (Soltero-Gonzlez & Butvilofsky, 2020). Young children
who are acquiring two or more languages develop
understandings about how print works as they encounter print
in more than one language. For example, children who are
simultaneous bilinguals are acquiring two languages at the
same time and are learning about print in both languages. As
their understandings of print emerge, they use what they know
about print in one language to inform their understanding of
print in the other language. This means that, when they begin
to write, their understandings of print across both languages
inform their writing in both languages (Soltero-Gonzlez &
Butvilofsky, 2020). Because patterns of development may differ
by language or languages spoken, it is important to recognize
there may be differences in writing trajectories among children
who are monolingual, bilingual, and multilingual. Differences
among languages and children who speak one, two, or more
languages are especially important for educators to recognize
when children begin to use their vocabularies and knowledge
of letters and sounds to write.

            Educators must also be aware of the effect that
children's abilities, developmental delays, and disabilities may
have on children's emergent writing development. Differences
in how young children interact with and explore the world can
affect the experiences they have to develop writing knowledge
and skills. For example, young children with developmental
delays and disabilities often have numerous doctors' visits,
therapy appointments, and other routines that take the
family's time and energy. The challenges and stress families
may face as they navigate their child's care and appointments

                                                                Writing Development | 369
may affect the opportunities children have to engage in
literacy experiences (Hanser, 2010). Similarly, the nature of the
developmental delay or disability may have an effect on how
the child is able to engage in literacy-rich opportunities. For
example, children who are sensitive to touch may not want to
experiment with writing tools or children with short attention
spans may not sit long during storybook reading (Hanser, 2010).
In addition, children who use a wheelchair might be limited by
what is in their line of sight and might not see environmental
print that others might see (Hanser, 2010). Likewise, children
with visual impairments can also be affected by how easy or
challenging it is for them to access print in the environment
(Guerette, 2014).

            The type of developmental delay or disability may also
have an impact on children's emergent writing development.
Children with specific language impairments, developmental
delays, learning disabilities, or high-functioning autism might
develop writing skills at a different pace (Burns et al., 2010).
Children who are deaf and hard-of-hearing often begin school
with less fully developed emergent writing skills than children
who are hearing (Werfel, 2017). In addition, children with
specific writing disorders might have challenges performing
the motor activities required to hold a writing tool and write
(Burns et al., 2010).

            Because young children come to school with varied
backgrounds and experiences, it is important for educators to
recognize the writing knowledge and skills children bring with
them to school. They must understand that children's
experiences with oral and written print differ from child to
child. Many children come to school with rich experiences that
foster their emergent writing knowledge and skills. Other
children may come to school having had limited opportunities
to hear stories, observe writing, and explore writing in their
daily lives. In addition, children might have developmental
delays and disabilities that influence their access to oral and

370 | Writing Development
print language or affect the pace at which they develop and
learn. Recognizing the differing experiences and abilities
children bring to the classroom allows educators to build on
existing knowledge and skills to promote positive writing
outcomes.

         9.4 Nurturing Emergent

Writers

Educators play an important role in nurturing emergent
writers, especially when they work closely with family members
to engage children in meaningful and relevant writing
experiences. By getting to know children's cultural and
linguistic backgrounds and tapping into their prior knowledge
and experiences, educators can implement culturally
responsive assessment and instructional practices that
promote children's writing development. Therefore, educators
support young children's writing development by engaging
families, assessing and monitoring young children's writing,
and providing developmentally and culturally appropriate
writing instruction.

9.4a Engaging Families Through Writing

            Working with and learning from children's families
helps educators understand and capitalize on the diversity
children bring to the classroom. When educators have deep
understandings of their children's cultures, languages, and
abilities and disabilities, they are able to design inclusive

                                                                 Writing Development | 371
environments and engage children in culturally responsive
writing assessment and instruction (Kidd & Burns, in press).
By valuing each family's unique experience and each child's
interests and abilities, educators create equitable opportunities
for learning. Educational equity occurs when differences as well
as similarities among children and their families are celebrated
and children's lives are reflected in positive and authentic ways
in their learning experiences (NAEYC, 2019). Authentic writing
opportunities that encourage connections between home and
school and promote respect for children's unique experiences
foster a positive learning environment in which children's
development is optimized. When educators integrate
authentic writing into the classroom and encourage children
to write about their families and their everyday lives, they gain
deeper understandings of children's cultural and linguistic
experiences.

            Collaborating with families also ensures that the
learning experiences in the classroom build upon and connect
to children's prior knowledge, experiences, and interests (Burns
& Kidd, 2016). When educators tap into home writing practices,
children are able to connect new learning to what they already
know. For example, when educators know the types of writing
that occur at home (e.g., grocery lists, notes to other family
members, emails, text messages), they can incorporate
opportunities to engage children in similar types of writing
during instructional lessons and play experiences. Likewise,
when children and families share stories about their family
members, traditions, and their daily activities, the richness of
their family and cultural experiences emerges. Their stories
provide educators with insights that ensure children's families,
cultures, and languages are valued and recognized in the
classroom.

            In addition, by engaging families in writing activities
that bridge home and school, educators provide opportunities
for children to write about topics that are familiar to them.

372 | Writing Development
Young children are proud of their family and culture and love to
share their experiences through their writing. Educators build
on children's natural interest in their family by creating
opportunities to write about their families both at school and
at home. In the classroom, educators often prominently display
family photos taken during home visits or sent in by families.
These photos encourage children to talk and write about their
family. When the writings are taken home, they are shared with
family members. Likewise, children and families may engage
in writing projects at home and then bring their writing into
school to share with their classmates. These home-school
connections strengthen authentic bonds among children,
families, and educators, which contribute to an inclusive
learning environment and culturally responsive assessment
and instruction practices.

9.4b Assessing Emergent Writers

            Young children's writing is a window into their thinking
and understanding of the world. When educators take time
to observe children as they write, talk with them about their
writing, and examine the writings they produce, they gain
valuable insights into children's prior knowledge, experiences,
and interests as well as their emergent writing knowledge and
skills (Kidd et al., 2014). Educators use assessment data from
formal and informal assessments to inform instructional
decisions, evaluate their curriculum and instructional practices,
and access services and resources for children (Kidd et al., 2019;
National Research Council, 2008). For example, educators may
use formal assessments that include writing components, such
as the Transdisciplinary-Based Play Assessment (2nd ed.)
(Linder, 2008), to develop learning goals, make instructional
recommendations, monitor children's progress over time, and
determine eligibility for instructional services. They may also
use assessments specifically developed to evaluate emergent

                                                                Writing Development | 373
writing that can document growth over time. For example,
the Write Start! Writing Assessment can be used to document
children's writing forms, directionality, intentionality, and the
content of the message (Rowe & Wilson, 2015).

            As discussed in Chapter 6, assessing and monitoring
young children's literacy development is important to foster
positive learning outcomes for young children. Although
formal assessments can be helpful, most assessment practices
in the early years are ongoing, informal assessments used to
monitor progress and make decisions about curriculum and
instruction. The information educators gather as they observe
and intentionally interact with children as they write provides
an assessment of what children can do. It also sheds light on
the instructional supports and scaffolds needed to continue
developing their emergent writing knowledge and skills.
Assessing young children's emergent writing is especially
important for making instructional decisions that build on
children's interests, knowledge, and skills. Therefore, effective
assessment must be as open ended as possible to allow
children to express their ideas and demonstrate their
understanding. Authentic creative writing experiences guided
by children's interests spark the unique abilities in all
individuals. It is through open-ended and authentic
assessments that the effective educator guides development.

     Pause and Consider: Assessing Writing

        In the opening vignette, after Richelle shared her
     thank you note with Mr. Jenbere, he paused to jot
     down anecdotal notes based on what he observed. He

374 | Writing Development
noted that Richelle views herself as a writer and seems
to understand that writing has a purpose and an
audience. She understands that a thank you note is
written to show appreciation for something someone
did. He also noted that although she mostly used
letter-like forms, she was beginning to incorporate
some letters into her writing. However, the letters did
not correspond to the sounds in the words she read.

   Later in the day, Mr. Jenbere and Ms. Daryl met to go
over their notes. They both noticed that many of the
children enjoyed writing thank you notes and
understood their purpose. They decided to add folded
cardstock and envelopes to their writing center, so
children could make thank you notes or other cards on
their own. They planned to introduce the new materials
to the children the next day and invite those who wish
to make cards to visit the writing center in the next few
days. They also talked about what they noticed about
individual children's writing. For example, they
discussed how to capitalize on Richelle's new interest in
writing alphabet letters in addition to letter-like forms.
They decided to provide intentional opportunities for
Richelle to use letters in her writing during centers.
They checked to make sure there were writing pads
and writing tools in each center, so they could integrate
the activity into the context of Richelle's play.

    How did Mr. Jenbere and Ms. Daryl assess their
children's writing?

    How did they use what is known about children's
writing progressions in their assessments?

                                                          Writing Development | 375
         How did they use assessment data to plan
     instruction?

        Given the information provided, what types of
     instructional experiences might you consider providing
     for Richelle and her classmates?

9.4c Instructional Practices for Emergent Writers

            The early years are an important time for educators
and families to provide young children with experiences that
develop not only letter-sound correspondence and
handwriting skills, but also their understanding that print is
read and writing is a way to communicate their ideas (Gerde
et al., 2012). As discussed in previous chapters, there are many
ways adults can support children's literacy development, and
specifically, their writing development. Through intentional
and explicit opportunities to develop children's writing
knowledge and skills throughout the school day and at home,
families and educators support children as they become
proficient writers. These opportunities are provided when
educators (a) create an environment that supports writing; (b)
build on children's prior knowledge, experiences, and interests;
(c) integrate writing into play; (d) infuse writing across the
curriculum; and (e) provide diverse instructional writing
experiences (see Table 9.4).

       Table 9.4 "Instructional Practices That Support Writing"

376 | Writing Development
          Create an Environment That Supports Writing

 Create uncluttered places with plenty of room for children
   to write and move around, keeping in mind that children
   are learning to regulate their bodies and are developing
   motor skills.

 Have tables and chairs that are the appropriate size and
   include space for children in wheelchairs and other
   positioning equipment.

 Provide a variety of writing materials and tools, including
   paper, dry erase boards, chalkboards, markers, crayons,
   pencils, chalk, tempera paint, water colors, finger paints,
   touchscreen tablets, styluses, and computers.

 Place writing materials and tools in places that are easy to
   reach and easy to put away, such as carts, shelves, tables,
   bins, and cubbies at the children's level.

 Display meaningful print with pictures or braille around
   the room, including name strips, labels, posters, word
   cards, sentence strips, morning messages, and daily
   schedules.

 Position print and braille so it is visible and easy to reach.
 Include print and braille materials and writing tools in

   centers (e.g., children's literature and magazines in the
   library, menus and writing pads in the restaurant,
   envelopes and writing paper in the post office, paper and
   crayons in construction areas)
 Display children's drawings and writings.

                  Build on Children's Prior Knowledge,

                                                             Writing Development | 377
                           Experiences, and Interests

   Engage families in children's writing experiences.
   Encourage children to use their home languages and

      write about their home culture and family experiences.
   Ask children to draw and write about what they already

      know about topics of interest.
   Provide experiences that children can include in their

      writing, such as nature walks, field trips, hands-on
      experiments, class visitors, and experiences with
      community helpers (e.g., talking with firefighters and
      seeing a firetruck).
   Provide choice of writing tools and topics.

                            Integrate Writing Into Play

   Include accessible spaces for writing and writing materials
      and tools in each center.

   Model and explain how writing materials and tools may be
      used in the center.

   Remind children periodically to use writing materials and
      tools in the centers.

   Introduce new writing materials and tools into centers
      regularly.

   Include examples of different types of writing in the
      writing center, such as models of birthday cards or "I love
      you" notes to family members.

   Post theme-related and frequently used words in the
      writing center and around the room.

378 | Writing Development
 Encourage children to copy words posted around the
   room and words written on cards or sentence strips in the
   writing center into their writing.

 Encourage children to write play plans that not only
   indicate where they plan to play (e.g., the kitchen center)
   but also how they plan to play (e.g., how they plan to share
   toys and props with classmates or what toys, props, and
   materials they plan to use).

 Provide intentional, child-specific scaffolding and
   reinforcement of writing knowledge and skills when
   interacting with children in centers.

 Follow the child's lead when interacting with the child to
   provide scaffolding and instruction.

                 Infuse Writing Across the Curriculum

 Provide opportunities for children to write about what
   they are learning across the curriculum, including in
   mathematics, reading, science, and social studies.

 Incorporate writing activities that activate children's prior
   knowledge (e.g., asking them to write about a topic, such
   as spring or fall, before instruction).

 Encourage children to draw and write about curricular
   content to foster their learning (e.g., documenting the
   growth of a plant, writing about sharing, comparing
   concepts such as hot and cold).

 Use children's drawings and writing to assess their
   content knowledge (e.g., examining children's drawings to
   assess their understanding of shadows or their writing to
   assess what they know about recycling).

 Provide opportunities for children to share and talk about
   their drawings and writing with adults and peers.

                                                             Writing Development | 379
                    Provide Diverse instructional Writing
                                      Experiences

   Schedule time for writing instruction and provide
      opportunities throughout the day to write independently
      and with support.

   Encourage children to use a variety of writing materials
      and tools when writing, including digital tools such as
      touchscreen tablets and computers.

   Provide authentic writing experiences that develop
      children's understanding of writing as a means to
      communicate with an audience (e.g., a story to share with
      classmates, a card to share with a family member, a note
      to persuade a parent to not make cooked carrots for
      dinner, an invitation for a community helper to visit their
      classroom).

   Include opportunities for children to identify and write
      their name by signing in for attendance, signing off when
      completing a task like toothbrushing, or signing up for a
      responsibility on the jobs chart.

   Model writing by engaging in shared writing experiences.
   Scaffold children's writing through intentional interactions

      that develop their writing knowledge and abilities.
   Accept and encourage all forms of writing (e.g., scribbles,

      letter-like forms, letters, invented spelling).
   Encourage children to use letter-sound correspondence to

      write words with invented spelling.
   Ask children to read their writing or dictate their story and

      write down what they read.
   Promote children's interactions with peers as they write.
   Provide opportunities for children to share their writing

      with others.

380 | Writing Development
            When educators create environments and provide
instruction that foster young children's emergent writing,
children develop valuable knowledge and skills that prepare
them for future success in school as well as in their daily lives.
Assessment and instructional practices, like the ones listed in
Table 9.4, are examples of the types of experiences educators
provide to support young children's writing development. As
educators make decisions about curriculum, assessment, and
instruction, it is important that they consider each child's
unique culture, languages, interests, and abilities. By being
mindful of the diversity children bring to the classroom,
educators provide an inclusive environment where each child
feels valued and capable of learning.

     Key Take-Aways

        Young children develop understandings about
     writing as they experience the world. At home, they
     gain valuable insights into how writing is used to
     communicate. They also begin to develop writing
     habits and skills and learn to handle writing materials
     and tools. Young children bring these understandings
     and skills with them as they enter early care and
     education settings. When educators and family
     members work together, they use what they learn from
     each other to provide opportunities for children to
     continue to develop their writing knowledge and skills.
     This relationship between educators and families helps
     educators build on children's prior knowledge,
     experience, and interests as they provide culturally
     responsive and individually appropriate instructional

                                                                 Writing Development | 381
     writing experiences. As educators plan assessment and
     instruction, they recognize that understanding typical
     writing progressions is important, but are also mindful
     that children's development varies. Therefore,
     educators consider the diversities children bring to the
     classroom when they create an environment that
     fosters writing development and integrates writing
     opportunities across the school day. When writing is an
     important part of their everyday lives, children develop
     writing knowledge and skills that prepare them for
     future literacy experiences. These experiences also give
     children a voice as they engage in writing as a way to
     navigate their world.

     Additional Resources

        Promoting Preschoolers' Emergent Writing:
     https://www.naeyc.org/resources/pubs/yc/nov2017/
     emergent-writing

        Virginia's Early Learning & Development Standards
     (ELDS): Birth-Five Learning Guidelines.
     https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/
     curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

                                      References

382 | Writing Development
Bialystok, E. (1992). Symbolic representation of letters and
   numbers. Cognitive Development, 7, 301-316.

Bruyere, J., & Pendergrass, E. (2020). Are your students writing
   or authoring? Young author's milieux. Early Childhood
   Education Journal, 48, 561-571. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10643-020-01027-7

Burns, M. S., & Kidd, J. K. (2016). Play and early writing. In D.
   Couchenour & J. K. Chrisman (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
   contemporary early childhood education (pp. 1026-1028).
   SAGE. https://www.doi.org/10.4135/9781483340333.n305

Burns, M. S., Kidd, J. K., & Genarro, T. (2010). Writing:
   Underutilized for young children with disabilities? In T.
   Scruggs & M. Mastropieri (Eds.), Advances in learning and
   behavioral disabilities: Literacy and learning (Vol. 23, pp.
   175-204). Emerald Group.

Byington, T. A., & Kim, Y. (2017). Promoting preschoolers'
   emergent writing. YC Young Children, 72(5), 74-82.
   https://www.naeyc.org/resources/pubs/yc/nov2017/
   emergent-writing

Crescenzi, L., Jewitt, C., & Price. S. (2014). The role of touch in
   preschool children's play and learning using iPad versus
   paper interaction. Australian Journal of Language and
   Literacy, 37(2), 86-95.

Eutsler, L., Miller, C., Stamm, B., & Kogut, A. (2020). The influence
   of mobile technologies on preschool and elementary
   children's literacy achievement: A systematic review
   spanning 2007-2019. Educational Technology Research and
   Development, 68, 1739-1768. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s11423-020-09786-1

Gerde, H. K., Bingham, G. E., & Wasik, B. A. (2012). Writing in early
   childhood classrooms: Guidance for best practices. Early
   Childhood Education Journal, 40, 351-359. https://doi.or/
   10.1007/s10643-012-0531-z

Goodman, K., & Goodman, Y. (1983). Reading and writing

                                                                Writing Development | 383
   relationships: Pragmatic functions. Language Arts, 60(5),
   590-599.
Guerette, A. R. (2014). Compensatory access. In C. B. Allman &
   S. Lewis (Eds.), ECC essentials: Teaching the expanded core
   curriculum to students with visual impairments (pp. 61-108).
   AFB Press.
Hanser, G. (2010). Emergent literacy for children with
   disabilities. American Occupational Therapy Association.
   https://www.aota.org/-/media/Corporate/Files/Practice/
   Children/emergent-literacy-for-children-with-disabilities.pdf
Kidd, J. K., & Burns, M. S. (in press). Promoting writing with
   reading and learning. In S. B. Wepner & D. Quatroche (Eds.),
   The administration and supervision of reading programs
   (6th ed., pp. 382-406). Teachers College Press.
Kidd, J. K., Burns, M. S., La Croix, L., & Cossa, N. L. (2014).
   Prekindergarten and kindergarten teachers in high poverty
   schools speak about young children's authoring (and we
   need to listen). Literacy and Social Responsibility, 7(1), 50-71.
Kidd, J. K., Burns, M. S., & Nasser, I. (2019). Promoting intentional
   teaching: The LEARN professional development model for
   early childhood educators. Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Kissel, B. ( 2018). Listen, ask, and study: Reimagining how we
   interpret prekindergarten writing. Language Arts, 95(4),
   242-247.
Kissel, B., Hansen, J., Tower, H., & Lawrence, J. (2011). The
   influential interactions of prekindergarten writers. Journal of
   Early Childhood Literacy, 11(4), 425-452. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   1468798411416580
Kissel, B. T., & Miller, E. T. (2015). Reclaiming power in the writers'
   workshop: Defending curricula, countering narratives, and
   changing identities in prekindergarten classrooms. The
   Reading Teacher, 69(1), 77-86. https://doi.org/10.1002/trtr.1379
Linder, T. (2008). Transdisciplinary play-based assessment (2nd
   ed.). Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
National Early Literacy Panel (NELP). (2008). Developing early

384 | Writing Development
literacy: Report of the National Early Literacy Panel.

https://lincs.ed.gov/publications/pdf/NELPReport09.pdf

Pelatti, C. Y., Piasta, S. B., Justice, L. M., & O'Connell, A. (2014).

Language- and literacy-learning opportunities in early

childhood classrooms: Children's typical experiences and

within class variability. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,

29, 445-456. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2014.05.004

Puranik, C. S., & C. J. Lonigan. (2014). Emergent writing in

preschoolers: Preliminary evidence for a theoretical

framework. Reading Research Quarterly, 49(4), 453-67.

https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.79

Rowe, D. W., & Wilson, S. (2015). The development of a

descriptive measure of early childhood writing: Results from

the Write Start! Writing Assessment. Journal of Literacy

Research,  47(2),  245-292.            https://doi.org/10.1177/

1086296X15619723

Soltero-Gonzalez, L., & Butvilofsky, S. (2020). Emergent sound-

letter correspondence in the early bilterate writing

development of simultaneous bilingual children. Journal of

Research in Childhood Education, 34(3), 346-366.

https://doi.org/10.1080/02568543.2019.1703123

Sulzby, E., & Teale, W. H. (1985). Writing development in early

childhood. Educational Horizons, 64(1), 8-12.

https://www.jstor.org/stable/42925853

Virginia Board of Education. (2021). Virginia's early learning &

development standards (ELDS): Birth-five learning

guidelines. https://www.doe.virginia.gov/early-childhood/

curriculum/va-elds-birth-5.pdf

Werfel, K. L. (2017). Emergent literacy skills in preschool children

with hearing loss who use spoken language: Initial findings

from the early language and literacy acquisition (ELLA) study.

Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 48,

249-259. https://doi.org/10.1044/2017_LSHSS-17-0023

                                Writing Development | 385
                                    Image Credits

Figure 9.1: Kalyca Schultz and Leslie LaCroix. "Framework for
Developing Emergent Literacy." CC BY 2.0

   Figure 9.2: Julie Kidd. "Scribbles, Letter-Like Symbols, and
Letter Formations." CC BY 2.0.

   Figure 9.3: Julie Kidd. "Letter-Sound Correspondence." CC BY
2.0.

   Additional Images
   Image, Section 9.2: Lucy La Croix. [Nest] CC BY 2.0.
   Image, Section 9.3: Lucy La Croix. [Bird] CC BY 2.0.
   Image, Section 9.3c: Longwood University. [Child Using
Writing Tools] CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
   Image, Section 9.4: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.

386 | Writing Development
10. Planning for What's
Next as Emergent
Readers and Writers
Progress

                              With Christopher Kidd
                        "Literacy is a journey, not a race."

                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                             m
                                                                                                             p
                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                             l
   10.1 Introduction
   10.2 Language- and Literacy-Rich Environments
   10.3 Next Steps in Language and Literacy Development

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 387
   10.4 Language and Literacy Assessment and Instruction
Practices in the Primary Years

     Opening Vignette: What's Next for Nukilik

        Nukilik just turned 5-years-old in January and has
     started showing increased literacy proficiency. Ms. Ling
     reflects on her assessment data on Nukilik's language
     and literacy growth over the past 5 months and feels
     that he is moving out of the emergent phase of literacy
     development and is ready to learn new skills. Ms. Ling
     has noticed that Nukilik can write his name with ease,
     draw detailed stories, and write words using invented
     spelling and some conventional spelling. He writes
     sentences and will add a sentence when asked
     questions that help him think about additional details.
     He is beginning to write about a variety of topics and
     recently realized that he could entertain his classmates
     with his make-believe stories. He draws from the books
     that are read to him to get ideas for his stories.

        Ms. Ling has observed that Nukilik holds books
     correctly and is often seen with a book in the library
     area. When she reads with him, she has noticed an
     increase in the number of words he recognizes by sight
     and that he is attempting to decode some phonetically
     regular words. During read alouds, Nukilik is becoming
     more adept at predicting what comes next and is
     eager to answer questions that Ms. Ling poses to the

388 | Planning for What's Next
     class. Ms. Ling can also tell that he is becoming more
     proficient at retelling stories and sharing information
     from nonfiction texts. She often finds him engaged in
     dramatic play based on a book she recently read aloud.
     He has also become quite a conversationalist and
     enjoys talking with classmates. Ms. Ling has noted that
     he has started to use increasingly correct grammar
     when speaking English and is attempting to use
     vocabulary from the books she reads to the class in his
     conversations. He also continues to speak in his home
     language, especially during play, and incorporates
     words from his home language into his writing.

        Ms. Ling is excited about the way Nukilk is using
     language and how his reading and writing are
     developing. She recognizes that she can foster
     continued growth by providing challenging and
     engaging learning experiences for Nukilik. Based on
     her assessments of his language and literacy
     progressions, Ms. Ling realizes that Nukilik is
     transitioning from emergent to conventional literacy.
     She knows that she needs to prepare for what comes
     next for Nukilik to nurture his continued growth.

10.1 Introduction

            As children are provided opportunities at home, in the
community, and at school to engage in language- and literacy-
rich experiences, their literacy knowledge and skills continue
to develop. The literacy skills they develop from birth through
their prekindergarten years provide a foundation for the
development of the conventional literacy skills children need

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 389
as they become more proficient readers and writers (NELP,
2008). The National Early Literacy Panel (2008) identified
conventional literacy skills as "decoding, oral reading fluency,
reading comprehension, writing, and spelling" (p. vii). As
discussed throughout this textbook, educators play an
important role in developing young children's oral language,
emergent reading, and emergent writing development.
Educators are also instrumental in meeting children where
they are and ensuring that they continue to make positive
progress along the developmental continuum, including
children who may be progressing in advance of their peers.
Therefore, it is important for educators to understand what
is next as emergent readers and writers progress. When
educators know what is next, they are better able to plan and
implement assessment and instruction that promotes
children's oral language development and supports the
development of conventional literacy skills. Therefore, this final
chapter will explore the following ideas:

                             How do young children develop an
understanding of language and literacy during their later
prekindergarten and early primary years?

                           How do young children progress as they
become more proficient readers and writers?

                           What can early childhood educators do to
support young children as their language and literacy
knowledge and skills continue to develop?

390 | Planning for What's Next
                                  10.2 Language- and
Literacy-Rich Environments

Children continue to develop their literacy skills as they move into
school-age years.

            Language- and literacy-rich home, community, and
school environments continue to be important as children
transition from their prekindergarten years to their
kindergarten and early primary years. At home and in the
community, children continue to observe and engage in
language and literacy events that develop their oral language
and conventional literacy skills. As their language skills
progress, they become more active participants in the

                                                            Planning for What's Next | 391
conversations that surround them. This, in turn, supports the
further development of their vocabulary and conversational
skills, especially in the languages spoken at home and in the
community. Likewise, as children become increasingly more
capable of reading print in their environment, they might read
an "I love you" text from a grandparent, a birthday card from
a neighbor, or the title of a favorite television show or movie.
In addition, books and e-readers play an important role in their
language and literacy development as they listen to
increasingly more complex texts and begin to read books
independently. At the same time, children's writing skills
become more conventional, which enables them to use writing
as a means to make notes to themselves and communicate
with family and friends. For example, children might write a
reminder about the topic of books they want to check out from
the library (e.g., dinosaur books) or create a poster for their door
with their name showing ownership of their room (e.g., Clara's
room). They might also create lengthier compositions, such as
a story, like the make-believe stories Nukilik shares with his
classmates, or information about a topic of interest to share
with others.

            Similar to their younger years, children come to school
enriched by these home and community language and literacy
experiences. Educators build upon and add to these
experiences by creating a classroom environment that values
children's diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds and
provides meaningful opportunities to engage in language and
literacy activities. As children transition from prekindergarten
to kindergarten classroom contexts, exposure to rich language
and literacy environments continues to be important. Children
need opportunities throughout the day to express their ideas
orally and in writing and to interact with diverse texts. Print-rich
environments, access to a plethora of texts, and experiences
writing for a variety of purposes work in complementary ways
to support children's early literacy.

392 | Planning for What's Next
                             10.3 Next Steps in Language
and Literacy Development

As children transition from prekindergarten into kindergarten
and the early elementary years, their language and literacy
knowledge and skills continue to develop. Their
communications become more complex, and they become
increasingly more proficient at speaking, listening, reading,
and writing. It is important for early educators to have an
understanding of what the next steps are in language, reading,
and writing development as they assess children's progress
and plan instruction for young children who are beginning to
use conventional language and literacy skills.

10.3a Language Development

            Language development in the early years is full of big
headlines. Children begin with only the barest ability to
communicate their needs by way of their reflexes, unconscious
responses, crying, and expressing contentment. As they move
through the earliest months and years, they develop greater
motor ability in holding up their head, eye gaze, articulation,
and using their body to communicate. They make leaps and
bounds in their capacities in the early months and years
whether verbal or non-verbal. They learn that they have a voice
and can use it to share their thoughts or solve their problems.
They engage in storytelling, sign language, and non-verbal
language. These skills and abilities create and enhance their
ability to engage socially in their world.

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 393
            As children move into the school-age years, they begin
to further refine their language development. Each of the parts
of language becomes more fluid and adult-like. Their
phonology is enhanced and children begin to pronounce their
words with greater ease as their motor abilities progress.
Children further learn grammar rules through self-correction,
direct instruction, and supportive recasting. Their
understanding of semantics grows over time as they start to
distinguish between a teasing tone or the different meaning
of a word in a different context. Children refine their ability to
understand pragmatic rules of language as their social world
expands, and they learn how to communicate differently in
a variety of circumstances. Sebastian, who was introduced in
Chapter 7 as crying out "Cabasasa" when he sees a pumpkin,
will enhance his abilities in the preschool years and beyond. He
eventually learns to say "calabaza" as his articulation (an area
of phonology) improves. He will also expand his vocabulary and
pronunciation as he learns the meaning and pronunciation
of the word, "pumpkin." By the end of preschool, he can use
calabaza and pumpkin interchangeably as his pragmatic
understanding allows him to switch between languages.
Moreover, he can use either word in grammatically correct
sentences. Finally, Sebastian will be able to use either pumpkin
or calabaza in a joke or in other ways that reflect greater
maturity in his understanding of semantics.

            The primary school years are focused on creating
opportunities for children to practice skills they have already
learned about productive and expressive language and to
expand on these concepts. It is expected that children can
communicate when they enter kindergarten. In their primary
years, their informal conversational skills continue to grow as
they interact with adults and peers (VBOE, 2017). They become
more adept at initiating conversations, listening to others,
taking conversational turns, staying on topic, and following the
rules of conversation. They become more collaborative

394 | Planning for What's Next
conversationalists and talk about a variety of topics and texts
as they converse and work with others. They use complete
sentences as they talk and learn to use appropriate phrasing,
intonation, and voice levels for the situation. They become
more proficient at using direct requests to express their needs
and at asking why and how questions to get and clarify
information as well as to ask for help. In addition, they are
better able to follow one- and two-step directions.

            Educators also expect that children will possess a wider
and deeper vocabulary at the end of that year. They become
more fluid in expressing themselves and more adept at
interpreting the messages of others. These increased
understandings are fundamental to allowing children to know
that they have a voice that can be shared orally or through
their writing. This is also essential to helping children receive
language through other people's thoughts, whether expressed
by reading or by communicating through speech or other
forms of communication, such as gestures and sign language.

            Throughout their early years, children have made leaps
and bounds in using symbolic thinking to learn how to
communicate, whether verbal or non-verbal. They have learned
to express themselves as they interact with books, media, and
other print materials and engage in storytelling, dramatic play,
choral and echo recitation, and other forms of verbal and non-
verbal expression. They have learned they have a voice and can
share those thoughts and understand those thoughts via oral
literacy, sign language, and non-verbal language. These skills
and abilities create and enhance their ability to engage socially
in their world.

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 395
10.3b Reading Development

Children become more confident with their reading skills as they
continue to learn and practice.

            The transition from emergent reading to more
conventional reading is an exciting time for young children,
families, and educators. During this transition, children, like
Nukilik, begin to use their knowledge of letter-sound
correspondence to pronounce words more consistently. This is
an important progression because being able to decode words
contributes to children's oral reading fluency and their
comprehension of the text. When children read fluently, they
are able to read with speed and accuracy as well as with
expression. Becoming proficient at decoding and more fluent
when reading orally supports children's reading
comprehension because they are able to focus their attention
on constructing meaning rather than on the task of
396 | Planning for What's Next
recognizing words. Children comprehend text when they
construct meaning as they read and make connections to their
prior knowledge. They draw upon their existing vocabulary to
understand what they read and develop new vocabulary as
they encounter new words and concepts. Children's
developing vocabulary, decoding skills, and oral reading
fluency support their comprehension of text, which is the goal
of reading (NELP, 2008).

            As children read and write in prekindergarten, code-
related instruction (i.e., decoding words when reading and
encoding words when writing) emphasizes letter-sound
relationships (Foorman et al., 2016). For example, children learn
that if they see a "b," they should use a /b/ sound when reading.
Likewise, when they hear a /b/ sound, they should write a "b."
During the transition from emergent to conventional reading,
educators place an increased focus on word parts and patterns
in words instead of individual letters and sounds (i.e., onset/
rhyme and digraphs). In other words, children learn to apply
what they know about a word pattern to another word. For
example, a child might think, "I know the word `hat' and this
word starts with a `c' so that says `cat'." Instruction also begins
to focus on sight words (i.e., words with irregular spelling
patterns) and high-frequency words that are often found in
text. In addition, children begin to develop understandings of
the role of punctuation as they read and get better at tracking
text (i.e., following down to the second line). In this phase,
fluency is slow and reading is often word-by-word. As children
begin to recognize words automatically and their sight word
vocabulary increases, they become more fluent readers and are
able to read with increased speed, accuracy, and expression.

            Children begin to read simple, predictable text that
includes picture supports and words they know. They begin
using initial sounds in words when reading and use cross-
checking strategies to confirm or disconfirm accuracy. For
example, a child reads a word as "bear" but then looks at the

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 397
picture and says, "Oh wait...that says bird." Children also begin
to use their decoding skills as they read text with words they
are able to decode. And they use their sight word vocabulary
to further assist their reading. Initially, children may read
hesitantly. However, with practice, children become more
confident in their skills and begin to believe, "I can read this
book!"

             During their transition to conventional reading,
children begin to apply a variety of comprehension strategies
that support their understanding of fiction and nonfiction text
(VBOE, 2017). They learn to relate what they are reading to their
prior knowledge and previous experiences in order to link their
new learning to what they already know. Like Nukilik, they use
their prior knowledge, pictures, and text to make predictions
about what is going to happen. They also ask and answer
questions about the text. In addition, they retell the beginning,
middle, and end of familiar stories using story elements, such
as the setting, characters, and events. They use the text and
pictures to talk about what happens in the story, the
characters' feelings, and the problem of the story. In nonfiction
text, they use text features, including pictures, the title, and
headings, to get information when reading. As they read, they
are able to identify information that is new to them and talk
about what they read. In addition, they create mental images
of what they read using words and pictures and share their
visualizations with others.

           The early primary years are crucial in the development
of children's reading as they transition from emergent reading
to more conventional reading. During this time, they are
developing important decoding, oral reading fluency, and
comprehension strategies and skills. They have learned to use
decoding skills and sight words to recognize words as they
read. They have developed their oral reading fluency as their
word recognition becomes more automatic and they learn to
read with speed, accuracy, and expression. Most importantly,

398 | Planning for What's Next
they are developing essential comprehension strategies that
enable them to construct meaning as they read and apply the
information in a variety of situations.

10.3c Writing Development

                  Figure 10.1 Example From a Developing Writer

            Children's understanding of writing as a way to
communicate continues to develop as children engage in a
variety of language and literacy experiences. As they talk and
listen, their vocabularies expand and they learn about the
grammar and pragmatics of language. As they read, they gain
greater insights into how text works and how authors
communicate their ideas through printed text. Children draw
upon their expanding vocabulary and their more nuanced
knowledge of how print works as they write for a variety of

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 399
purposes and a range of audiences. A rich vocabulary helps
them find just the right words as they write to express ideas, tell
stories, share information, and convey opinions. When given
opportunities to make decisions about what to write and how
to write, they expand their conceptions of authorship and
further develop their voice as well as their identity as writers
(Kidd et al., 2014).

            While writing, children, like Nukilik, use their
knowledge of the relationship between letters and sounds to
write (encode) words using invented spelling (See Figure 10.1).
As their writing progresses, children use more conventional
spelling, including phonetically spelled words and sight words
(VBOE, 2017). Eventually, they begin to spell most words
correctly. At the same time, children become more adept at
following the conventions of writing (i.e., capitalization,
punctuation, and grammar). They begin to compose simple
sentences, including statements, questions, and exclamations,
that begin with a capital letter and end with a punctuation
mark. They also begin to use capital letters for names.
Children's handwriting becomes more proficient as their fine
motor skills develop. They print capital and lower-case letters
of the alphabet. When they write in English, they write from
left to right and from top to bottom. In addition, they begin to
use appropriate spacing between words and sentences. Their
writing becomes longer and more complex as they become
more proficient writers.

            Children also gain a deeper understanding of writing
as a process and become more skillful at planning, drafting,
revising, editing, and sharing their writing (VBOE, 2017). They
begin to differentiate drawing and writing and use their
drawing and other planning strategies to intentionally plan
their writing. For example, children often draw a picture at the
top of the paper to generate ideas for their writing and then
use what they drew to write words, phrases, and sentences
underneath. They continue to generate ideas as they write and

400 | Planning for What's Next
talk about their writing. As they become more proficient, they
revise their writing by adding descriptive words or additional
sentences. For example, Nukilik drew a detailed picture of the
playground that included him swinging on a swing set. He
wrote, "I played on the swing." When he shared his story with
Ms. Ling, she asked, "What was it like to swing on the swing?"
Nukilik thought about it and said, "It was fun." Ms. Ling
encouraged him to add that detail to his writing. He revised his
story by adding, "It was fun. I liked feeling the wind." Children
also begin to edit their writing to correct spelling and to
conform to writing conventions. For example, a child might
change a period to a question mark after remembering a
question needs a question mark. At this time, sharing their
writing with others is an important part of the process.

            Children begin to expand their writing as they become
more proficient writers. During the primary years, they
continue to write about their family experiences, but also begin
to write more make-believe stories modeled after the books
adults are reading to them or they are reading themselves. For
example, a child might write about a story about a magical
pony or a superhero adventure. Opportunities to write across
the curriculum also increase as children write to share
information in language arts, mathematics, science, and social
studies. For example, children might engage in recording plans
for a science experiment, documenting the growth of plants in
their classroom, sharing facts about animals, explaining why it
is important to take turns, or convincing others to recycle. They
also use writing to show their understanding of what they have
read and learned across the curriculum. For instance, when
children write about the difference between hot and cold, they
are showing their understanding or misconceptions of what
they are learning about temperature (see Figure 10.2).

                               Figure 10.2 Today is a Hot Day

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 401
            As children transition to more conventional writing,
writing becomes a vehicle for communicating their ideas with
others. During the primary years, children gain a greater
understanding of writing as a powerful tool for
communicating. They develop their identity and voice as
writers. Children understand that, as authors, they have
ownership of their writing and can write for a range of purposes
and a variety of audiences. In addition, they become more
proficient at engaging in writing processes, conforming to
written conventions, and using conventional spelling. Their
handwriting and use of digital tools, such as touch tablets and
computers, also develop considerably during this time. When
given meaningful, authentic opportunities to write during the
primary years, children can not only develop their writing
proficiency, but also their enjoyment of and motivation to write
(Graham et al., 2018).

402 | Planning for What's Next
                             10.4 Language and Literacy
Assessment and Instruction Practices in the
Primary Years

            Early educators in kindergarten and the early primary
grades continue to integrate the ongoing assessment
practices described in Chapter 6 and the instructional practices
described in Chapters 7, 8, and 9. As children progress, they
build upon these practices by integrating additional
assessments that help them capture and document children's
growing knowledge and skills. They use what they learn from
these assessments to adapt their instructional practices to
move children toward conventional reading and writing.

            Informal assessment practices remain essential in
documenting the children's early literacy expressions.
Educators also begin incorporating additional literacy
assessments into their instructional routines. Formal
assessments like the Developmental Reading Assessment
(Beaver & Carter, 2019) and PALS (Invernezzi et al., 2004)
continue to offer insight into children's progressing literacy
skills, including specific information regarding children's
increasing language expressions, phonological awareness,
vocabulary knowledge, comprehension, linguistic fluency, and
writing. Educators continue to use formal and informal
assessments in complementary ways to create holistic
understandings of children's literacy growth. In turn,
assessment remains an important practice shaping early
educators' curricular decisions and the literacy opportunities
children experience

   As children's language and conventional literacy skills

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 403
develop, educators and families continue to play an important
role in providing children with learning experiences that
promote their language and literacy development. To enhance
development, educators assess their children and learn more
about their strengths and needs. They then use the
information they gather to plan and implement instruction
intentionally designed to develop children's language and
literacy knowledge and skills throughout the school day and
at home. By providing instruction that supports individual
children's language and literacy progressions, educators
ensure that each child has opportunities to continue to
develop their language and literacy knowledge and skills.
These opportunities are provided when educators (a) create
an environment that supports reading and writing; (b) build
on children's prior knowledge, experiences, and interests; (c)
integrate reading and writing into play; (d) infuse reading and
writing across the curriculum; and (e) provide diverse
instructional reading and writing experiences (see Table 10.1).

    Table 10.1 "Language and Literacy Instructional Practices in
                                 the Primary Years"

           Create an Environment That Supports Language
                                     and Literacy

404 | Planning for What's Next
 Create inviting and accessible spaces for children to read,
   write, and communicate with each other.

 Provide a variety of reading and writing materials that
   reflect children's diversities and encourage curious
   exploration.

 Display children's writings and expressions prominently.
 Provide children access to nonfiction and fiction text

   materials.

                  Build on Children's Prior Knowledge,
                        Experiences, and Interests

 Engage families in children's literacy experiences.
 Encourage children to use their home languages and

   integrate their home culture and family experiences into
   the classroom.
 Access children's funds of knowledge by incorporating
   activities that activate children's prior knowledge.
 Provide experiences that promote conversation and
   provide authentic reasons to communicate, read, and
   write.

            Provide Diverse instructional Language and
           Literacy Experiences Across the Curriculum

 Schedule time for reading and writing instruction and
   provide opportunities throughout the day for children to
   read and write independently and with support.

 Provide opportunities for children to talk, read, and write

                                                        Planning for What's Next | 405
      with others.
   Model language, reading, and writing by engaging in

      shared literacy experiences, including read alouds, shared
      reading, shared writing, and conversations.
   Create authentic purposes for children to read,write, and
      communicate for a variety of purposes.
   Provide explicit instruction as well as opportunities for
      children to explore language, reading, and writing.
   Scaffold children's language and literacy development
      through intentional interactions that develop their
      language and literacy knowledge and skills.
   Provide opportunities for children to use listening,
      speaking, reading, and writing to learn content across the
      curriculum, including in mathematics, reading, science,
      and social studies.
   Use children's conversations and writing to assess their
      content knowledge.

     Key Take-Aways

        Children's capacity to communicate, read, and write
     develops over time. Enriched environments, intentional
     instructional practices, ongoing assessment, and
     collaborations with families and other educators
     ensure children's continued growth. Educators
     continue to play an essential role in nurturing learners'
     literacy expressions throughout the primary years.

406 | Planning for What's Next
     Additional Resources

        Improving Reading Comprehension in Kindergarten
     Through 3rd Grade: A Practice Guide (NCEE 2010-4038):
     https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/PracticeGuide/
     readingcomp_pg_092810.pdf

        Teaching Elementary School Students to be Effective
     Writers: A Practice Guide (NCEE 2012- 4058):
     https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/PracticeGuide/
     WWC_Elem_Writing_PG_Dec182018.pdf

                            References

Beaver, J., & Carter, M. (2019). Developmental reading
   assessment (3rd ed.). Pearson.

Commonwealth of Virginia Board of Education (VBOE). (2017).
   English standards of learning for Virginia Public Schools.
   https://www.doe.virginia.gov/testing/sol/standards_docs/
   english/index.shtml

Foorman, B., Beyler, N., Borradaile, K., Coyne, M., Denton, C.
   A., Dimino, J., Furgeson, J., Hayes, L., Henke, J., Justice, L.,
   Keating, B., Lewis, W., Sattar, S., Streke, A., Wagner, R., &
   Wissel, S. (2016). Foundational skills to support reading for
   understanding in kindergarten through 3rd grade (NCEE
   2016-4008). National Center for Education Evaluation and
   Regional Assistance (NCEE), Institute of Education Sciences,
   U.S. Department of Education. http://whatworks.ed.gov

Graham, S., Bollinger, A., Booth Olson, C., D'Aoust, C.,
   MacArthur, C., McCutchen, D., & Olinghouse, N. (2018).

                                                           Planning for What's Next | 407
   Teaching elementary school students to be effective writers:
   A practice guide (NCEE 2012- 4058). National Center for
   Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of
   Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
   https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/PracticeGuide/
   WWC_Elem_Writing_PG_Dec182018.pdf
Invernizzi, M., Sullivan, A., Swank, L., & Meier, J. (2004). PALS
   pre-K: Phonological awareness literacy screening for
   preschoolers (2nd ed.). University Printing Services.
Kidd, J. K., Burns, M. S., La Croix, L., & Cossa, N. L. (2014).
   Prekindergarten and kindergarten teachers in high poverty
   schools speak about young children's authoring (and we
   need to listen). Literacy and Social Responsibility, 7(1), 50-71.
National Early Literacy Panel (NELP). (2008). Developing early
   literacy: Report of the National Early Literacy Panel.
   https://lincs.ed.gov/publications/pdf/NELPReport09.pdf
Beaver, J., & Carter, M. (2019). Developmental reading
   assessment (3rd ed.). Pearson.

                               Image Credits

Figure 10.1: Julie Kidd. "Example From a Developing Writer." CC
   BY 2.0.

Figure 10.2: Julie Kidd. "Today is a Hot Day." CC BY 2.0.
Additional Images
Image, Section 10.2: The New School AR. "DSC_0026." CC BY-

   NC-SA 2.0. (Retrieved from https://bit.ly/3u4pmja)
   Image, Section 10.2: Lucy La Croix. [Nest] CC BY 2.0.
   Image, Section 10.3: Lucy La Croix. [Bird] CC BY 2.0.
Image, Section 10.3b: Kathy Cassidy. "Reading to the
   Kindergarten Students." CC BY-NC-SA 2.0. (Retrieved from
   https://bit.ly/3xBhMyq)
   Image, Section 10.4: Lucy La Croix. [Branch] CC BY 2.0.

408 | Planning for What's Next
